
Don't assume that an employer will immediately understand how your degree is 
useful â€” especially if there's no obvious link between what you studied and the 
bottom-line impact on a business.

Having a degree won't necessarily make you stand out. If you lack professional 
experience, spell out the relevance of your qualification to an employer. 
Here's how:

Close the gap

Think about what makes your degree commercially valuable. A degree in modern 
languages will allow you to deal with a firm's foreign customers or to 
translate or interpret in meetings, negotiations and correspondence, for 
example. A degree in marketing or business studies may have given you the 
skills or theory a company needs to compete more effectively or gain market 
share. Highlight projects or real-world case studies that are directly 
applicable to your target roles and companies, and relate them to the 
requirements of the role. For example: "Trained to spot and adapt winning 
marketing strategies in the (food) industry" or "Learned to analyse the 
characteristics of successful product spin-offs".

Highlight skills

If your degree was not business or industry-orientated, focus on skills you 
acquired. Beyond time-management and ability to work under pressure, critical 
and independent thinking skills are key areas for recruiters. Demonstrate these 
by emphasising dissertation or coursework research, using terminology such as 
"investigated", "evaluated" or "assessed" to illustrate the depth or extent of 
your research. Include any positive comments from your supervisor.

You may have developed other strengths which give you an edge. Social media or 
technology skills are increasingly in demand. Suzanne Kavanagh, publishing 
sector manager for Skillset, says: "If you know how to use social media and 
have examples of how you have built awareness, conversation and followers 
online with successful calls to action (make a donation, advocacy or 
peer-to-peer promotion of a particular issue) they will be of interest." 
Include any experience you have of creating a blog, Facebook fan page (for your 
department, for example) or social media campaign.

Emphasise relevant extra-curricular activities

Employers like to see initiative, leadership, and commercial savvy. If you set 
up or ran a society, managed an event, or demonstrated problem-solving ability, 
then you'll have gained valuable skills, regardless of the results of your 
efforts. Highlight activities that demonstrate teamwork or communication 
skills, or which prove your ability to see through a project to completion.

This article on what employers look for 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/what-recruiters-want-from-graduate-candidates> 
has more advice on what to emphasise.

Tips

Although some graduate schemes insist on a 2:1 and above, don't feel you need 
to include your degree result if you think it undersells you. Instead, give 
your degree title and then emphasise other qualities and achievements. List 
modules or coursework that have practical relevance and include any 
specialisations that show you've gained deeper insight or experience.

Make the most of your education section if you have little professional 
experience. Consider including a subheading "Academic highlights" or "Academic 
achievements" for any awards, scholarships, special projects or notable 
extra-curricular activities. As with everything on your CV, choose 
strategically: include something only if it helps build a favourable image of 
you, or is relevant to the employer.

Include internships, or any relevant work experience gained during your time 
at university, or as part of your degree.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly Careers update and 
free careers ebook <https://register.guardian.co.uk/careers/>.
