
Last week saw the publication of Alan Wood’s review of local safeguarding 
children boards 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/wood-review-of-local-safeguarding-children-boards>
 (LSCBs), which also looked at the purpose and function of serious case 
reviews. I have been leading serious case reviews since 2008 and so, like many 
others, was intrigued to see what his conclusions would be. But while I accept 
the system was ripe for change, I am not sure how his recommendations will 
achieve what he set out to.

The Department for Education (DfE) has accepted there needs to be fundamental 
change and that serious case reviews, in their current form, will be scrapped. 
They will be replaced by local learning inquiries, which will have to be 
completed quickly and published, and national reviews, which will investigate 
the most serious and complex cases. A new panel will be responsible for 
commissioning and publishing these national reviews, and a What Works centre 
for children’s social care will analyse and disseminate learning.

Related: Ayeeshia Jane Smith's murder must not be used to score points 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/apr/19/ayeesha-jane-smith-murder-blame-politics>

Since 2013, when the statutory guidance Working Together to Safeguard Children 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/417669/Archived-Working_together_to_safeguard_children.pdf>
 (pdf) was revised, LSCBs have been able to use any methodology they chose to 
conduct serious case reviews, as long as it was consistent with the guidance. 
And so the system has been in a muddle. A hotch-potch of different models 
sprung up. At one end of the spectrum was thelearning together model 
<http://www.scie.org.uk/children/learningtogether/>, from the Social Care 
Institute for Excellence (Scie), which the DfE piloted from 2010. At the other, 
some LSCBs stuck with the old style of review. And in between, we have seen a 
wide range of different styles, including some designed by independent lead 
reviewers or LCSBs.

Clarity and consistency are much needed. But it is important that as we go 
forward the DfE does not waste its considerable investment in the Scie model 
and all that learning goes out of the window. And at what cost is all this 
change, particularly at a time when there is no money?

It is generally accepted that serious case reviews are time consuming, costly 
and repetitive. The trouble is they are repetitive for a reason. Our greatest 
challenges in children’s services lie in our ability to work effectively with 
other agencies, share information effectively, keep the child at the centre of 
what we do and to recognise the impact of neglect. These are themes that emerge 
in almost every single serious case review.

Related: Does child protection need a rethink? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/jan/13/child-protection-local-safeguarding-children-boards-review>

So we know where our weaknesses and challenges lie, where the flaws in our 
systems are. But we struggle to find a way to work more effectively, 
particularly at a time when budgets are being slashed and many public services 
are on their knees. Having a new framework for reviews is not going to change 
that.

Both types of reviews – local and national – will have to be published. If, as 
the DfE says, serious case reviews are really about learning not blaming, the 
first thing we need is a change in ministerial response to the publication of a 
serious case review. At the moment, ministers can be quick to criticise social 
workers, in some cases even before the review has been published.

So yes, the system needs to change. But if this is to really be an improvement 
then we need to see drastic changes in the four elements involved: we need 
responsible ministers who really care and stop drastic cuts to agencies and are 
not as quick to apportion blame; a national panel made up of experienced 
professionals who understand this field; LSCBs that actually implement 
effective changes; and responsible reporting by journalists.

If this government genuinely wants to improve our learning from serious case 
reviews then it must invest in that process. Otherwise this opportunity will be 
yet another example of change for change’s sake.

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
