
When Alan Duncan was sentenced last week 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2009/sep/08/george-young-shadow-leader-commons>
 to a spell as shadow prisons minister, as punishment for suggesting MPs 
stripped of expenses wereliving "on rations" 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2009/sep/07/alan-duncan-conservative-shadow-cabinet>
, it was easy to expect an end to the liberal approach endorsed by the previous 
inmate, Edward Garnier. But maybe not.

Reformers have been cheered by re-reading Duncan's tome Saturn's Children 
<http://www.alanduncan.org.uk/about-alan/publications>, written jointly with 
Dominic Hobson back in the 1990s, in which they argue it is "pointless to 
persist with the conventional responses to the increase in crime. More police, 
more prisons and more effective judicial procedures are clearly not working, 
except in so far as they satisfy a patent public thirst for retribution."

They add that "deterrence is an increasingly empty threat, and nobody 
seriously believes that a spell in prison is capable of reforming or 
rehabilitating the criminal character. A criminal record only makes it harder 
to re-enter normal civilian life, turning a significant minority of people into 
career criminals and so making crime an even more intractable problem".

The sensible solution, they say, is not to treat the symptoms of crime but the 
causes, including the "demoralised condition of young people in many inner 
cities today" and - perhaps to the relief of rightwingers worried where all 
this is heading - "the lack of any culture of ... self-improvement in those 
parts of society where the majority of people are dependent on state handouts".

The chapter on all this was in the hardback version, but mysteriously 
disappeared from the paperback version. However, there is a link to iton his 
website <http://www.alanduncan.org.uk/about-alan/publications> if you want to 
read more.

In the same book, Duncan famously argued for the legalisation - or at least 
the decriminalisation - of drugs 
<http://transform-drugs.blogspot.com/2008/02/alan-duncans-drug-problem.html>, 
which isn't Tory policy. The assumption that prison doesn't work and only makes 
crime worse isn't likely to be in the Tory manifesto either. It's a long time 
since the Conservatives have wanted us to hug hoodies, but it's interesting to 
know where Duncan's sympathies really lie, nonetheless.
