
This column doesn't often get round to looking at food books but, every now 
and then, into my ken swims one that tweaks my curiosity. In the case of Black 
Pudding & Foie Gras, perhaps it was the title. It has a certain resonance, and 
suggests an individual approach to the business of cooking. It may have been 
the size, which is considerable, or the cover, which is suede-ish, or the 
photography, by Antonio Olmos and Sam Bailey, which is generous, stylish and 
evocative. But it was the name, Andrew Pern, chef/proprietor of the Star Inn at 
Harome in Yorkshire, that most made me sit up and take notice.

I can still remember a pudding of baked ginger parkin with rhubarb ripple 
ice-cream and hot, spiced treacle I ate in the Star many summers ago. It 
managed to be warm and cool and spicy and soothing and sophisticated and 
stonking and of its place all at the same time. I was reminded of all these 
qualities as I leafed through the book (and indeed found the recipe for the 
above pudding) because Andrew Pern is nothing if not a champion of food from 
his region. For him, it isn't a matter of any old asparagus, but Sand Hutton 
asparagus; not a plain Gloucester Old Spot suckling pig, but Charles 
Ashbridge's Gloucester Old Spot suckling pig with Ampleforth apples for good 
measure. Then there's Hartlepool-landed halibut with steamed marsh samphire, 
Whitby crab and lemon verbena hollandaise, and North Sea brown shrimp fritters.

"I was born in Whitby, I grew up round here and I'm a proud Yorkshireman," 
Andrew says. "When we came here I knew we could draw on really great raw 
materials. It's like having a brilliant pantry on our doorstep. And it's common 
sense to use it."

The recipes in the book don't celebrate provenance and producer in name only: 
there are pictures and profiles of them, too. There's Paul Talling, who 
supplies the Star's poultry, Richard and Ronda Morritt, the growers behind Sand 
Hutton asparagus (not to mention Sand Hutton strawberries), and Father Rainer 
Verbourg of Ampleforth College, once a chef, now a monk in charge of the 
college's orchard. There's Jo Campbell from Mount St John, who supplies fruit 
and veg, and Alan Hodgson of Hodgson of Hartlepool, responsible for the halibut 
and the Star's other fish. The whole book is a hymn to local produce and local 
producers, and a testament to the vision and energy of Andrew and Jacquie Pern.

"I was inspired by the likes of Paul Heathcote at Longridge and Nigel Haworth 
at Northcote Manor," says Andrew. "They were the first chefs in the north 
really to make a point about using local ingredients."

Black Pudding & Foie Gras is unconstrained by the narrow imagination of the 
commissioning editor. Pern is his own publisher and, alongside recipes that 
provide a record of the dishes served at the Star, the book is part 
autobiography, part statement of Pern's personal credo, part summary of the 12 
years he and Jacquie have spent building up the inn and its surrounding 
businesses. For the Perns are to Harome what Rick Stein is to Padstow. As well 
as the inn, there's the herb garden, corner shop, loft, Pern's of Helmsley 
butcher's and deli, accommodation and cooking courses. No wonder the area's 
known as Pernshire. And that's before we get to the four Pern children.

"Jacquie and I love the way of life, and the children are very much a part of 
the place. They've grown up with it, and there'll be plenty for them to do when 
they're ready."

So there will. The Perns are in the middle of a project to extend the covers 
to 60, which means a new kitchen, complete with chef's table. "Well," says 
Jacquie, "you've got to keep life interesting, haven't you?"

Where to get it

Star Inn High Street, Harome, Yorkshire, 01439 770397, thestaratharome.co.uk 
<http://thestaratharome.co.uk>

Black Pudding & Foie Gras by Andrew Pern is available from the Star Inn at Â£36 
plus p&p
