
The new shadow business secretary, Angela Eagle 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/angela-eagle>, was given an title of first 
secretary of state after one of Jeremy Corbyn’s staff had said they were 
“taking a fair amount of shit” about the lack of women in top jobs in his team.

Eagle was initially appointed as shadow business secretary in an email sent to 
the media byLabour <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> headquarters at 
10.35pm on Sunday. A second email announcing her extra title as first shadow 
secretary of state – a title once held in government by Peter Mandelson – was 
sent at 12.19am on Monday.


A conversation overhead by Sky News and BBC News reporters also confirmed that 
this extra title was an afterthought after it emerged that Corbyn was being 
criticised for handing the top three positions to men, with John McDonnell as 
the shadow chancellor, Andy Burnham as the shadow home secretary and Hilary 
Benn in the foreign secretary post.

Related: Jeremy Corbyn's shadow cabinet – older, more rebellious and less male 
<http://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2015/sep/14/jeremy-corbyn-labour-shadow-cabinet-statistical-breakdown>

With Tom Watson elected deputy leader, it meant that the five most senior 
people in the party are male.

According to a Sky News reporter 
<http://news.sky.com/story/1552307/corbyns-cabinet-chaos-the-inside-story>, 
whose account was confirmed by BBC journalists present, reporters overheard a 
male voice in the meeting between Corbyn and the chief whip, Rosie Winterton, 
who said: “We are taking a fair amount of shit out there about women. We need 
to do a Mandelson. Let’s make Angela shadow first minister of state. Like 
Mandelson was. She can cover PMQs. Tom [Watson] knows about this. Do the Angela 
bit now.”



A Labour source told the Guardian that the additional title was added after 
concerns about the gender balance of Corbyn’s top team.

However, with the appointments of shadow cabinet ministers confirmed during 
the course of Monday, Corbyn’s team stressed that more than half the shadow 
cabinet was female – in addition to Eagle’s dual role.

Related: Jeremy Corbyn's shadow cabinet in full 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/14/jeremy-corbyn-labour-shadow-cabinet-in-full>


 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cc96%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cc96%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62dff66010d274be7267c806109f7f4fa33490ed%2F3029_208_1058_1588%2F1058.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Angela%20Eagle's%20extra%20title%20due%20to%20Labour%20'women%20row'&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cc96%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Angela+Eagle%27s+extra+title+due+to+Labour+%27women+row%27&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cc96%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62dff66010d274be7267c806109f7f4fa33490ed%2F3029_208_1058_1588%2F1058.jpg>
 Gloria De Piero. Photograph: David Sillitoe for the Guardian 
There are now 31 people in Corbyn’s first shadow cabinet, 16 of whom are 
women. They include Heidi Alexander, MP for Lewisham in London, who is shadow 
health secretary, and Lucy Powell, who was Ed Miliband’s chief of staff, who 
becomes shadow education secretary. Seema Malhotra, 42, MP for Feltham and 
Heston since 2011, was named as shadow chief secretary to the Treasury.

Corbyn defended the appointments, telling reporters: “You’re living in the 
18th century. That’s when the great offices of state were decided. We have a 
shadow cabinet of a majority of women covering all areas of policy and public 
life and I think it’s a great team. And it reaches out to the entire party and 
I think that is a bit of an achievement, if I may say so.”

However, some of them are in more junior roles and have been invited to attend 
top table for the first time. They include Luciana Berger as shadow minister 
for mental health, working under the shadow health secretary, and Gloria De 
Piero as shadow minister for young people and voter registration.


Janet Royall, the leader of the House of Lords under Ed Miliband, said she was 
“concerned and dismayed at the lack of women at the top of my party”.

Lady Royall added: “I applaud … [that] there will be equal numbers of men and 
women in the shadow cabinet. And maybe Jeremy does believe the shadow 
international development portfolio is as improtant as the Treasury. But the 
thing is the outside world does not think that. Maybe we can change the culture 
of our party, parliament and the country, but they are not [thinking that] at 
the moment.”
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F14%2Fjeremy-corbyn-behind-scenes-labour-leadership-video&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F14%2Fjeremy-corbyn-behind-scenes-labour-leadership-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F14%2F1442240656346%2FKP_475445_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Exclusive%3A%20behind%20the%20scenes%20with%20Jeremy%20Corbyn%20as%20he%20wins%20the%20Labour%20leadership%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F14%2Fjeremy-corbyn-behind-scenes-labour-leadership-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Exclusive%3A+behind+the+scenes+with+Jeremy+Corbyn+as+he+wins+the+Labour+leadership+%E2%80%93+video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F14%2Fjeremy-corbyn-behind-scenes-labour-leadership-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F14%2F1442240656346%2FKP_475445_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Behind the scenes on the day Jeremy Corbyn won the Labour leadership. 
“The fact [is] that we’ve got Jeremy, Tom, Sadiq [Khan] in London, Marvin Rees 
in Bristol, and now all these other top jobs in the shadow cabinet have gone to 
men. Like many other people, I have always done whatever I could to make sure 
there were visible women at the top of the party and now they are not there. 
Visually, it is bad.”

Royall said it could be the time to look at changing the rules to make sure 
there was a gender balance at the top of the party, although she would have 
hoped any leader would have done this voluntarily.

She added: “It’s a retrograde step not to have women at the top of the party, 
although there are some fantastic women who have got jobs, like Angela Smith in 
the House of Lords. It is great that Angela Eagle is there to deputise for him, 
but that is still deputising. Great and all that, but not good enough.”

A female MP, who turned down the chance to be a shadow minister, said: “It’s 
self-evidently bad. People feel really connected with our achievements on 
making sure we have a balanced team, and for him to inexplicably overturn that 
in one reshuffle.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cc96%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cc96%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F165006631f229f98351f214188ce0dc2489f4181%2F481_767_2372_3558%2F2372.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Angela%20Eagle's%20extra%20title%20due%20to%20Labour%20'women%20row'&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cc96%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Angela+Eagle%27s+extra+title+due+to+Labour+%27women+row%27&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cc96%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F165006631f229f98351f214188ce0dc2489f4181%2F481_767_2372_3558%2F2372.jpg>
 Diana Johnson. Photograph: Josh Kearns/Rex 
She suggested there would be a lot of anger at the party’s women’s conference 
later this month and that the women’s parliamentary party could mobilise to 
force changes in the rules to ensure equality at the top. “There is only really 
one way to resolve it, which is to change the rules. But some of these people 
have got to have a long hard look at themselves and why their own sense of 
equality is not damaged or besmirched by the outcome of this.”

Diana Johnson, former shadow Home Office minister, said it was “so very 
disappointing – old-fashioned male-dominated Labour politics in the top 
positions in shadow cabinet”.

Melanie Onn, MP for Grimsby, said people should give Corbyn a chance but added 
he had been “rubbish on gender in top jobs”, whileJess Phillips 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/jess-phillips>, MP for Birmingham Yardley, 
said in a tweet that she felt sad about the situation.

She added that the shadow chancellor “should have been a woman … end of” and 
that “if this was Cameron, we would be apoplectic”.

After the full list was revealed, the Labour Women’s Network said it was glad 
the shadow cabinet comprised more than 50% women, but there were too few in top 
jobs. Its representatives are now hoping to meet Corbyn to discuss this further.

The gender makeup of the cabinet was strongly defended by Kate Green, the new 
shadow women and equalities minister, who echoed Corbyn’s argument that it was 
“old-fashioned” to view the four great offices of state as leader, chancellor, 
foreign affairs and home affairs.

“I’m always pleased to see more women in senior roles,” she said. “Obviously 
part of the makeup of the top team reflects the fact that our leader and deputy 
were elected by Labour party members and supporters. While I was keen we should 
have a mixed leadership, obviously the electorate delivered what they did. I 
think it’s great that Jeremy has gone on the deliver a shadow cabinet with more 
women than men in it overall. I’m really pleased to be part of it.

“My view is that, to be honest, it’s a bit old-fashioned to talk about great 
offices of state. If you are a party committed to social justice and equality, 
which is very much what Labour and Jeremy are about, then there are lot of big 
jobs that really matter like Heidi [Alexander] at health, Lucy [Powell] in 
education and Lisa [Nandy] in energy. I don’t think we should assume the 
traditional big jobs of the past are all of our priorities for the future.”
