
The lightbulb moment that took Brett Smith back to his seaside home town after 
an 11-year absence happened close to where we are both sitting. On a break from 
his Manchester-based job in commercial recruitment, he set off one morning for 
a run along Cleethorpes’ Blue Flag beach – a beach so clean he says it’s as if 
“somebody’s gone out and hoovered the carpet”. Braced by the refreshing sea air 
and early sunshine, he made a decision: “It’s time to come home.”

Smith sits proudly in People Bar and Kitchen <http://www.peoplebar.co.uk/> (20 
Cambridge Street), the restaurant that was the product of his beach epiphany. 
Housed in a terraced former dairy, it has a cosy ski-chalet feel and is the 
sort of gem any city would be pleased to have, let alone a small seaside resort 
on the Lincolnshire coast. People Bar specialises in antipasti and sharing 
platters made from locally sourced ingredients, with wines and craft beers to 
wash them down. Its draught lager, Batemans Prohibition, could for some time be 
found nowhere else in the UK. Marston’s Shipyard pale ale on the tap next to it 
had a similar exclusivity until JD Wetherspoon took it on. “You win some, you 
lose some,” says Smith. “I can’t fight a Wetherspoon yet, but we’ll see what 
happens.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jgz5%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jgz5%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c607650728a668cff88a34c2ed7e55843ce9b2f%2F0_54_1597_958%2F1597.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Off%20to%20Cleethorpes%2C%20for%20sea%2C%20sand%20and%20style&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jgz5%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Off+to+Cleethorpes%2C+for+sea%2C+sand+and+style&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jgz5%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c607650728a668cff88a34c2ed7e55843ce9b2f%2F0_54_1597_958%2F1597.jpg>
 A sharing platter at People Bar and Kitchen 
Cleethorpes, like many British seaside towns 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/may/14/once-more-on-to-the-beach-how-britains-seaside-towns-bounced-back>
, is witnessing a revival. What Smith calls the Seaview quarter, the Victorian 
streets behind the Central Promenade and Pier Gardens, is thriving and now 
boasts several alluring shopping, eating and drinking spots. A short walk from 
People Bar isGrants 1856 <https://grants1856.co.uk/> (78 St Peter’s Avenue) 
selling contemporary clothing brands such as Norse Projects and Folk, while a 
stroll in the other direction takes you to Daniella Draper’s handcrafted 
jewellery shop (14a Sea View Street). Daniella’s journey from Lincolnshire to 
London’s Central St Martins and back is testament to the town’s revival, and 
her jewellery is worn by Kate Moss, Ed Sheeran and Chloe Grace Moretz.

A short walk north is the 2016 pier of the year – as voted by the National 
Piers Society <https://www.piers.org.uk/pier-of-the-year/>. The Victorian 
structure was one of the homes of Northern Soul in the 1970s, but was sold by 
the council in 1981 and after years of strife finally closed in 2011. Restored 
to splendour last August, it houses a fine-dining restaurant, tearoom and bar.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jgz5%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jgz5%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ac9a0dceefd1e4274d196cc759bec4b3ee25f40%2F0_34_1920_1152%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Off%20to%20Cleethorpes%2C%20for%20sea%2C%20sand%20and%20style&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jgz5%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Off+to+Cleethorpes%2C+for+sea%2C+sand+and+style&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jgz5%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ac9a0dceefd1e4274d196cc759bec4b3ee25f40%2F0_34_1920_1152%2F1920.jpg>
 The Burlington Hotel, Cleethorpes 
As Smith says, at the centre of the town’s revival is choice. The Burlington 
Hotel <http://www.theburlingtonhotel.co.uk/> (doubles from £65) is a boutique 
alternative to the classic B&B. The recently opened 0° North (14 High Street), 
with its gourmet burgers, is a popular alternative to fish and chips institution
Steels Corner House <http://steelscornerhouse.co.uk/> (10 Market Street). Don’t 
Fight It, Feel It <https://www.facebook.com/dontfightitfeelit/> is a new live 
music platform, run by a member of cult band Orphan Boy in theFiddler 
<http://www.fiddlercleethorpes.co.uk/> pub, that showcases local talent plus 
buzz bands from nearby 2017 Capital of Culture Hull.

Backstreet exploring that would have proved fruitless four or five years ago 
now leads to exciting new discoveries. Family-run beer shopMessage In A Bottle 
<http://www.miabcleethorpes.co.uk/> (91-97 Cambridge Street) is one of the 
best. Owner Charles Lumley’s biggest seller is Cleethorpes Pale Ale, from 
Lincolnshire’s Axholme Brewing Company and exclusive to the shop. The ale’s 
secret ingredient is buckthorn berries, foraged from the nearby beach.

People underestimate what it’s like around here. People see the Sacha Baron 
Cohen image
Charles Lumley, owner Message In A Bottle 
A great beach picnic of local fare could include Columbus Stout (from 
nano-breweryRowett <http://rowettbrewing.com/>), Captain Cobbler Sweet Scrumpy 
fromSkidbrooke <http://www.skidbrookecyder.com/#/Our%20products> of Louth, HBB 
1874 Ale <http://www.blackhorsebrewing.co.uk/> from Black Horse Brewing, and a 
packet ofScrubby’s Vegetable Crisps  <http://scrubbys.co.uk/about-us>(made in 
Grimsby). Before Lumley set up shop, his dad warned him he’d never sell a 
bottle of beer for £3 in Cleethorpes. Turns out his dad was wrong.

“People underestimate what it’s like around here,” Lumley says. “People see 
the Sacha Baron Cohen image of the area [in his poorly received spy comedy
Grimsby] 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/14/sacha-baron-cohens-grimsby-flops-in-us-as-punters-flock-to-cloverfield-lane>
, and make assumptions.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jgz5%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jgz5%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f37891d3a2481fc3a7edfd1910dee888d2a9f18%2F24_0_900_540%2F900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Off%20to%20Cleethorpes%2C%20for%20sea%2C%20sand%20and%20style&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jgz5%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Off+to+Cleethorpes%2C+for+sea%2C+sand+and+style&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jgz5%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f37891d3a2481fc3a7edfd1910dee888d2a9f18%2F24_0_900_540%2F900.jpg>
 Message In A Bottle, Cleethorpe 
He is right. Cleethorpes is cleaner, prettier and wealthier than stigma 
suggests. In the snug terraces of the Sea View Quarter, the message is the 
same: the town is booming and choice remains key.

As Smith puts it: “Not everyone wants to drink Carling and Stella. Take a 
gamble – give them something else.” For him and the rest of Cleethorpes, the 
gamble appears to be paying off.
