
One thing that is clear about the impending Teaching Excellence Framework 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/nov/02/teaching-excellence-framework-university-tef-student-data-higher-education>
 is that results from the National Students Survey will assume increasing 
importance for universities. Indeed, it is being considered akey metric 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201516/cmselect/cmbis/572/572.pdf#page=10>
 of teaching success.

It has been proposed that Tef results will determine which universities are 
allowed toraise their fees 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/nov/06/government-plan-to-allow-better-universities-to-raise-fees>
 in line with inflation. It would make sense, then, for universities to focus 
on a staff member’s ability to bring in high NSS scores when considering hiring 
and promotion.


What could be wrong with that, you might think? Well, lots of things. As many 
have argued, student satisfaction scores are apoor guide 
<http://www.npr.org/sections/ed/2014/09/26/345515451/student-course-%20evaluations-get-an-f>
 to teaching quality. A recent study showed respondents making patently false 
claims (“the instructor took roll at the beginning, middle, and end of every 
class meeting”) and has even shown that some students don’tread the forms 
<http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/02602938.2015.1119801> properly. 

Related: University reform is coming – get ready for another numbers game 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/nov/05/the-green-paper-is-coming-get-ready-for-another-numbers-game>

So it seems that NSS scores cannot accurately track the quality of teaching. 
But there is another problem: they are biased towards men.

How do we know this? It can be difficult to draw firm conclusions about bias 
from the actual evaluation scores, since there are so many confounding factors 
such as subject matter, institution type, career stage of the lecturer. And the 
data is gathered without the sorts of controls that robust empirical 
investigations would use. Fortunately, there are studies that control for other 
dimensions of difference, allowing us to see the difference that gender makes.

Several recent studies 
<https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2016/01/11/new-analysis-offers-more-evidence-against-student-evaluations-teaching)>
 have shown that male lecturers consistently receive higher student evaluation 
scores than female lecturers, even though there is no evidence that they are 
more effective teachers (teaching effectiveness is generally measured here by 
subsequent student performance). This holds true even when something objective 
is measured like promptness of feedback.

One study <http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10755-014-9313-4> 
compared student reactions to the very same online teacher, who posed as male 
for some students and female for others. They received substantially better 
scores when “male”. Anothershowed that  
<http://psp.sagepub.com/content/26/11/1329.abstract>women were especially 
likely to be negatively evaluated if they did not give high marks, or if they 
communicated negative feedback. The latter is particularly troubling, since 
communicating constructive criticism is a crucial part of students’ academic 
development. A furtherstudy found 
<http://%28http//psycnet.apa.org/psycinfo/1999-01257-001)> a similar effect for 
race , so it would not be surprising if teaching evaluations also encoded race 
bias. This would be very worrying when black women are alreadyvastly 
under-represented <http://www.runnymedetrust.org/uploads/Aiming%20Higher.pdf> 
in academia.

Related: Female academics face huge sexist bias – no wonder there are so few 
of them 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/womens-blog/2015/feb/13/female-academics-huge-sexist-bias-students>

Are students deliberately discriminating on the basis of race or gender? 
Almost certainly not. Psychological research over the last two decades has 
brought to light the disturbing phenomenon ofimplicit bias  
<http://kirwaninstitute.osu.edu/research/understanding-implicit-bias/>. 
Research on implicit bias has shown us that we are often, outside of our 
awareness and against our better judgment, influenced by the biases that are 
prevalent in our culture.

This can happen even if we are genuinely committed egalitarians, and even if 
we are members of the group in question, for example, women students have shown 
bias against women lecturers. Thesebiases 
<http://paid.uci.edu/chairs%20retreat%20files/ArrwhdMtrls2008/Z%20Gender%20Schemas%20Dr%20Valian.pdf>
 lead people to take women less seriously as authority figures, to judge women 
more harshly if they are not nurturing, and to generally see men as more 
competent. It is easy to see how this could lead to lower teaching evaluation 
scores for women, especially women who give low marks or critical feedback.

If the Tef takes the form currently anticipated, one that gives a leading role 
to NSS scores, then we can expect to such scores rise in prominence.Student 
evaluation scores would become an ever-more important part of performance 
evaluations and promotion decisions. And this may hinder the career progress of 
women who are excellent teachers. Giving heavy weight to such a defective 
measure, rather than grappling with thecomplexities of teaching excellence 
<https://www.heacademy.ac.uk/sites/default/files/resources/telr_final_acknowledgements.pdf>
, could have damaging consequences.

In short there is potential here for the Tef to create a situation where 
universities favour those likely to get high NSS scores. And if current 
research is right, that will be men. That’s not a recipe for good teaching. 
It’s a recipe for discrimination.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
