
As the financial crisis mounts and performance deteriorates, renowned American 
healthcare expert Don Berwick says he has a “high and growing” confidence in 
the ability of theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> to find a way 
through, with staff determined to change the way they deliver care – but 
central interference could wreck ambitions.

Berwick built an international reputation as president and chief executive of 
the US-basedInstitute for Healthcare Improvement 
<http://www.ihi.org/Pages/default.aspx>, bringing a scientific approach to the 
quality, safety and cost of healthcare systems.

His latest role is working with NHS England and the King’s Fund to support the 
“vanguard sites” developing the new care models outlined in theFive Year 
Forward View 
<https://www.england.nhs.uk/wp-content/uploads/2014/10/5yfv-web.pdf>.

Instinctively optimistic, Berwick describes the vanguard progress as 
“stunning”. His upbeat assessment is based on the determination he sees in the 
workforce: “You might expect local staff to say ‘leave me alone, I’m trying to 
get through the day, how can I possibly reinvent care at the same time?’. But 
exactly the opposite is going on. The spirit, the determination, the 
soulfulness, is really deep. I’m sure internally they are meeting some 
resistance – not everyone wants to change – but it’s real.”

Related: Hospital transformation plans could break deadlock on restructuring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/may/27/nhs-hospital-transformation-break-deadlock-restructuring>

He was appointed by the NHS in October 2015 to coach vanguard teams on how to 
test their ideas, so they can understand their weak points and work on them: 
“Are we able to get in before someone deteriorates, are we able to strengthen 
rehabilitation of the frail elderly so they don’t fall and end up in a home?” 
says Berwick.

Berwick emphasises that although everyone talks about care models being 
different, they are essentially trying to achieve the same thing: “Integrated, 
coordinated, community based, patient empowered, preventive, proactive, 
technologically supported care.”

He is particularly animated by the vanguards 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/mar/13/nhs-vanguard-areas-new-models-care>
 working to improve the health of care home residents, describing the six of 
them as “just wonderful”.

“I’m pretty excited by them. They have – more quickly than some of the others 
– arrived at a comprehensive view of a total system of care for frail elders, 
and they are getting a handle on costs. They have innovations which are 
reducing transfers from care homes to hospitals – double digits we’re talking 
here; by doing better care, people aren’t ending up in hospital beds.”

It's important to be realistic – you can't make an organic process go faster 
than nature
Don Berwick 
The north-east Hampshire and Farnham vanguard is delivering similarly 
spectacular improvements in mental health. By setting up high street support 
cafes run by professionals and patients, they have drastically reduced the 
number of psychiatric admissions to A&E.

“So now, the question is: how many communities, how many high streets could 
use that idea – and how will it change from place to place?” he says.

But this is where the vanguard scheme could unravel. Lessons from the 
vanguards could take too long to spread to other parts of the country, leading 
to political pressure to impose change from the centre – precisely the flawed 
way of implementing change that the NHS is trying to escape.

Change will be delivered “at the pace of human learning, and the pace at which 
government and NHS England are willing to remove obstacles. It is important to 
be realistic about that, because you can’t make an organic process go faster 
than nature,” says Berwick.

“That is a question on the table for the NHS: will government, the executive 
and the scrutiny bodies have the patience? Too much control will produce a 
reaction as opposed to traction. It’s a leadership skill.”

Related: Back-office staff have a role to play in improving NHS care too 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/may/24/back-office-staff-improving-nhs-care>

His message to the health secretary, Jeremy Hunt, is: “You have a wonderful 
workforce, and now you have created an opportunity for them to get fully 
engaged in creating the system you need. That process is a human process, it 
has its own native tempo. It’s an act of political leadership and service to 
create the space and time for that to play out.”

One barrier Berwick believes the NHS needs to remove is the tariff system, the 
complex regime which pays providers for delivering care. He wants it replaced 
with a population-based budget covering health and social care for a particular 
area. “No tariff can be smart enough to integrate care the way the clinicians 
know how to do it,” he says.

According to Berwick, social care cuts are another obstruction: “That is not 
very smart for overall expenditure on public health because failures in social 
services cascade to much higher costs.”

Whatever the political demands, the NHS does not yet have the skills to 
implement system-wide change. Good leadership skills would be necessary to 
redesign the way care is delivered, and new ways of working would have to be 
tested.

Berwick says: “There are some skills, but the skills to change are not 
genetic, they are not taught in schools. There is a very important investment 
to make in enough people. You need a few in every trust. A few thousand would 
do it.”

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
