
Heading out of inner-city Sydney in our enormous Apollo Euro camper, the roads 
narrow, the sweat forms on my brow and I ask myself what on earth I’m doing 
driving this 7.9-metre-long beast.


We – two adults and our two small children – are heading for the red dirt; 
specifically, the remote north-west of New South Wales, which travellers both 
Australian and foreign opt to pass on in favour of Uluru/Alice Springs or the 
Kimberley region of Western Australia when seeking an outback “experience”.

We’re reasonably keen campers but when the offer of a van materialises from 
Apollo campers, the thought of not having to put the tent up each night is 
quite exciting.

Inside, the Euro camper feels fairly roomy, at least before we unpack our 
bags. There are two table and chair areas, both of which become a double bed. 
There’s also a bed above the cabin, which, unsurprisingly, our five-year-old 
favours. The straps that need to be put up to stop kids (or adults) rolling out 
make it a bit of a pain when our two-year-old cries in the night, however, and 
we all switch beds a few times.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c7pz%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c7pz%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2084137d3f4aeb4cee1aa0ff6b458b186943ec69%2F576_195_3296_1979%2F3296.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20campervan%20trip%20in%20outback%20New%20South%20Wales%2C%20where%20dirt%20is%20red%20and%20stars%20blaze&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c7pz%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A+campervan+trip+in+outback+New+South+Wales%2C+where+dirt+is+red+and+stars+blaze&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c7pz%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2084137d3f4aeb4cee1aa0ff6b458b186943ec69%2F576_195_3296_1979%2F3296.jpg>
 The campervan parked at Gundabooka national park south of Bourke 
There’s a gas-stove equipped kitchen with the basic utensils, a TV-DVD player, 
and a shower and toilet. More on that later.

We arrive in Dubbo – home of the Western Plains zoo – a good eight hours later 
thanks to my cautious driving and the constant requirements of small children. 
I can’t really see anything behind me when I’m driving such a large van and 
it’s a little unnerving. There’s a reversing camera but, be warned, try to 
reverse this thing without a guide and you’re asking for trouble. I drive with 
the camera on when we’re in towns but it doesn’t help a great deal. It’s not 
designed for forward driving, even if it does reassure me a little.


In Dubbo we stay at the BIG4 campground, where a night on a powered site for a 
van like ours costs $57 for the family. In the morning the kids fall in love 
with the play equipment and bouncing pillow – think bouncy castle minus the 
walls. The setting is convenient, almost within shouting distance of the 
free-range zoo, even if the piped (and loud) commercial radio in the bathrooms, 
coupled with the replica suburban streets is, for the purposes of our city 
escape, not ideal.

Related: Your guide to campervan heaven 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2009/sep/12/road-trips-campervans> 

At the zoo, the kids have been sold on a drive-through safari in which lions 
claw at the car. In the end we rent bikes with trailers ($40 for a bike and a 
“bike-n-tow” on top of the two-day $131.40 family ticket) and make our way 
through the vast setting, catching the usual big favourites; an energetic 
tiger, giraffes and elephants standing out for the kids. Biking through the 
bush makes it a special day. It’s the most kid-friendly thing we have planned 
so it’s a relief when it gets the thumbs up from our five-year-old.

That afternoon we join a large group of “grey nomads” at the free 
Terramungamine campsite <http://www.findacamp.com.au/camp-site.php?camp=569> 
just outside Dubbo. Here, evidence of the clans that called – and still call – 
this land home is etched into the outcrops along the river in rocks used for 
tool sharpening. Dozens of deep grooves from ancient tools are visible.

As the light fades I sit on the riverbank, the kids flop out to some Dora the 
Explorer on the van’s TV (this is a grown-up’s holiday, too), and what seems 
like hundreds of sulphur-crested cockatoos, galahs and corellas make their way 
along the river, jostling for a roosting place high up in the sturdy red gums.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c7pz%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c7pz%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F229f853a11440214cd413506eaa1361df83a5544%2F203_389_3669_2203%2F3669.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20campervan%20trip%20in%20outback%20New%20South%20Wales%2C%20where%20dirt%20is%20red%20and%20stars%20blaze&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c7pz%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A+campervan+trip+in+outback+New+South+Wales%2C+where+dirt+is+red+and+stars+blaze&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c7pz%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F229f853a11440214cd413506eaa1361df83a5544%2F203_389_3669_2203%2F3669.jpg>
 Dinner time inside the van 
In the morning, black cockatoos soar high above the campsite. We follow the 
highway north, taking in the faded charm of towns including Gilgandra and 
Coonamble, the rugged beauty of the Warrumbungles, and the beginning of the 
great, flat plains of NSW’s north-west.

Pulling in at Walgett, we’re a world away from Sydney and we’re reminded of 
the diversity – physical, social and economic – of this state. We stock up on 
supplies at the supermarket, the tyranny of distance evident in the high prices 
locals must pay for staples.


Walgett is the first town where the toilet “cassette” needs emptying (in an 
approved dump spot, of course), and it must be said it’s a repulsive job. We’d 
been mulling an outright toilet ban owing to the unsavoury smell emanating from 
the little cupboard of yuck, pondering what it would be like in an outback 
summer. After Walgett we vow not to use the toilet again.

On the road again we note that the long-running drought in this country has 
eased and heavy rains have turned the land from shades of yellow and ochre – at 
Brewarrina, you start to get that sense of “outback” so often defined in the 
popular consciousness by the presence of the red soils – to the luscious greens 
of fresh grasses. The land is now in bloom with yellow flowers. With a dead 
straight road shimmering ahead, a deep blue sky and flashes of iron-rich earth, 
it’s a beautiful scene.

We stop to admire a flock of emus and the kids strain their necks – while it’s 
fun for them to sit at a table while we travel, the windows of the camper are 
too high and a bit small for little ones to get a good view. They unbuckle to 
check out the gangly birds at the side of the road.

Brewarrina, with a population just over a thousand, is not a typical holiday 
destination. It’s clear there are problems of crime, disadvantage, drug abuse 
and broken families (that’s what has brought me here before for work as a 
film-maker). But in remote Indigenous communities people face the same 
struggles. It’s something visitors to the outback must contend with and, 
hopefully, learn from. The people of Brewarrina and other places, after all, 
are guardians of a remarkable cultural heritage which enriches the whole 
nation. So what if there are a few dumped cars around.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c7pz%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c7pz%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F942dc89cd1a0d8e74ede6dea96e17316974331fb%2F0_232_3872_2325%2F3872.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20campervan%20trip%20in%20outback%20New%20South%20Wales%2C%20where%20dirt%20is%20red%20and%20stars%20blaze&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c7pz%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A+campervan+trip+in+outback+New+South+Wales%2C+where+dirt+is+red+and+stars+blaze&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c7pz%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F942dc89cd1a0d8e74ede6dea96e17316974331fb%2F0_232_3872_2325%2F3872.jpg>
 The sun rises over the Barwon river in Brewarrina 
Mass tourism is a long way off. But just outside of town the new Beds on the 
Barwon <http://www.bedsonthebarwon.com.au/> has the edge on competitors should 
the numbers of visitors seeking cabins and a lovely campsite pick up. It’s $30 
for a powered site ($20 unpowered) on the river, and there’s only one other 
couple camping here when we pull in. As the golden light of the sunset makes 
its way through the gums and another chorus of outback birdsong fills the air, 
we gather wood for a campfire, confident this is the most peaceful place in the 
world.

Related: The fish traps at Brewarrina are extraordinary and ancient 
structures. Why aren't they better protected? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/10/fish-traps-brewarrina-extraordinary-ancient-structures-protection>

Two-year-old Rosa throws a huge tantrum before bed, momentarily breaking the 
serenity. With two kids, the van is now a rubbish tip. There are quite a few 
cupboards but books colouring pencils and socks are strewn across the floor – 
so it’s a bit like home. The grown-ups are fraying at the edges but it’s easy 
to get some space by taking a breather outside. In wet weather I’m not sure 
this would be doable.

At night our son, Frankie, and I play with a smartphone app to make sense of 
the staggering numbers of stars above. Out here you see more than 
constellations; with the milky way tearing across the heavens, huge patches of 
both cloudy light and dark are visible: we make out the emu known to holders of 
Indigenous sky-knowledge.

Over breakfast a feral goat makes its way along the opposite side of the 
river, followed by a kayaker. He says the goat has been showing him the way for 
the past two kilometres. He’s paddling from Goondiwindi in Queensland to 
Wentworth, where the Darling river meets the Murray, a distance, he reckons, of 
2,000km. I pledge to do something similar, one day, but before that take a 
hard-earned doze by the river as the kids have their afternoon nap, spying an 
eagle, a kite (I think), pelicans and what look to be budgerigars.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c7pz%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c7pz%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5bcb400046c067b873c288459e9d982bf6faf15a%2F0_267_3872_2325%2F3872.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20campervan%20trip%20in%20outback%20New%20South%20Wales%2C%20where%20dirt%20is%20red%20and%20stars%20blaze&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c7pz%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A+campervan+trip+in+outback+New+South+Wales%2C+where+dirt+is+red+and+stars+blaze&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c7pz%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5bcb400046c067b873c288459e9d982bf6faf15a%2F0_267_3872_2325%2F3872.jpg>
 Reeds covering the ancient fishtraps in Brewarrina 
At dusk it’s time to visit the Brewarrina fish traps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/10/fish-traps-brewarrina-extraordinary-ancient-structures-protection>
. Created by the Ngemba people millennia ago, they are a solid reminder the 
area was an important cultural centre long before the arrival of Europeans. 
Neglect and downright destruction mean it’s hard to make out what is what 
alongside the modern weir and the clever fish “ladder” that has been built to 
let fish return upstream. But the river’s looking healthy and there are scores 
of reeds giving the place a nice feel. We chat to some friendly drinkers on the 
bank who try to help us make sense of it.

After a morning catching up with friends, we head for Gundabooka national 
park, via Bourke. We know we’ll have enough food, water and, hopefully, battery 
power for Dora the Explorer, but we get a rude awakening in Bre. The car won’t 
start. Two elders help us give the beast a push start, thank you very much. Our 
friends seem worried the city people don’t know what they’re doing. They’re 
probably right, but by the time we get to Bourke the battery appears to have 
been re-energised. We check out the port, a few old buildings, note the number 
of brand names and companies with “Back o’ Bourke” in the title, and get on our 
way. It’s worth a stop (in the outback, everywhere is worth a stop), but 
there’s not much to keep us in what has become a tight itinerary.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c7pz%2Fsfb%23img-6&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c7pz%2Fsfb%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c262edd07dc7d2fd2ccf9411982e2e551289f49%2F0_290_3719_2231%2F3719.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20campervan%20trip%20in%20outback%20New%20South%20Wales%2C%20where%20dirt%20is%20red%20and%20stars%20blaze&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c7pz%2Fstw%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A+campervan+trip+in+outback+New+South+Wales%2C+where+dirt+is+red+and+stars+blaze&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c7pz%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c262edd07dc7d2fd2ccf9411982e2e551289f49%2F0_290_3719_2231%2F3719.jpg>
 The entrance to a mulga ant nest near Mount Gundabooka. Some scientists 
believe the ants build levees to prevent the nests being flooded during heavy 
rain 
About 50km south of Bourke we put the pedal to the metal; despite the fear of 
battery trouble it’s time to veer off the highway and take on more than 20km of 
dirt track to one of the campsites at Mount Gundabooka. If we thought camping 
in Brewarrina was peaceful, this is ridiculous. I walk away from the fire at 
night, as far as I dare in the dark silence. It’s so quiet that the ringing in 
my ears is almost overwhelming. An owl is calling from what could be several 
kilometres away. The stars, again, are astounding.

In the morning we walk to the top of Little Mountain through the mulga scrub, 
a view of Mount Gundabooka and the surrounding flats the reward. I note with 
some relief there is Telstra coverage should the van not start. It does, and we 
head for one of the two Ngemba rock art sites in the park. It’s another long 
red-dirt track to get here, followed by a 15-minute walk into a rocky valley. 
There’s still water in the creek; large tadpoles are crowding each other out in 
the remaining waterholes. The art blows us all away; simple figures of people, 
emus and other patterns drawn in a different time.

Before the epic push back to Sydney, we pause in the historical mining town of 
Cobar to make the kids some dinner. After numerous stops to admire our 
country’s rich Indigenous heritage and long, long history, here’s a tourist 
attraction at the other end of the scale. We peer deep into the earth of the 
huge open-cut goldmine, a strange but intriguing sight.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c7pz%2Fsfb%23img-7&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c7pz%2Fsfb%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5d50edd0933e39ca889784678e1cb4c5b6317f2%2F0_157_3872_2325%2F3872.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20campervan%20trip%20in%20outback%20New%20South%20Wales%2C%20where%20dirt%20is%20red%20and%20stars%20blaze&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c7pz%2Fstw%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A+campervan+trip+in+outback+New+South+Wales%2C+where+dirt+is+red+and+stars+blaze&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c7pz%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5d50edd0933e39ca889784678e1cb4c5b6317f2%2F0_157_3872_2325%2F3872.jpg>
 Looking out over the deep open-cut goldmine on the edge of Cobar 
It’s all been a whirlwind; in just under a week we’ve seen a great deal and 
the changes in our surroundings have been immense, all within a single corner 
of this admittedly large state. We look down as a huge (but tiny) truck 
meanders up to the exit, laden with ore from which gold bullion will be 
produced.

Then there’s another beautiful golden sunset across the flat plains, still 
stretching as far as the eye can see.

• Guardian Australia travelled courtesy of Apollo campers 
<http://www.apollocamper.com/> and received a free night at Dubbo’s BIG4 
campsite
