
Is the “economy, stupid” political cliché about to be rewritten in Britain by 
substituting migration for economy?

Watching the daily development of the EU referendum 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> debate, along with the 
zig-zagging opinion polls, it is possible to detect that immigration has become 
the key issue.

The Brexiteers, short on realistic economic arguments to bolster their case, 
have concentrated instead on an anti-migrant agenda. It is now obvious that it 
is the only card they can play with any hope of building support.


Consider the main message of “the joint declaration”, as the Daily Telegraph 
referred to it 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/05/31/eu-referendum-boris-and-gove-pledge-tough-new-immigration-system/>
, by Boris Johnson and Michael Gove (playing down the female signatories, 
Gisela Stuart and Priti Patel).

They pledged to introduce an Australian-style points-based immigration system 
should British people vote to leave the EU.

Forget for a moment that they have no such power because it would require 
parliament to enact such legislation, and the Brexit crew do not command a 
Commons majority. This is all about winning the referendum vote.

The Johnson-Gove initiative, which generated national newspaper headlines, 
came against the background of two ICM polls (online and phone) showing leads 
for Leave.

The Guardian’s report on those polls noted that the result “is likely to alarm 
the Stronger In Europe campaign” 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/31/uk-voters-leaning-towards-brexit-guardian-poll-reveals>
. You bet it will. The withering away of a large lead for Remain is a surprise.


Of course, as ICM’s director, Martin Boon, generously conceded: “It is only 
one poll.” But it does suggest that the haphazard Brexit campaign might be 
having an effect.

The front page headline of i <http://www.theguardian.com/media/i> suggested it 
knew why there had been a switch in public opinion: “Migration fears give poll 
lead to Brexit.”

And the Independent noted that “public opinion appears to be shifting towards 
a vote for Brexit... after three polls in one week gave the official Leave 
campaign a narrow lead.”

Unsurprisingly, Eurosceptic national newspapers greeted both the Johnson-Gove 
statement and the poll results with glee. They are very happy to join the table 
in order to play the migration card.

“Migration factor boosts Brexit,” said a Daily Mail 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/dailymail> headlne across two pages. And the 
paper’s leading article praised the idea of a points-based system.

“Vote Leave in the lead”, said the Sun’s page 2 headline. It did give 
employment minister Priti Patel her due with an op-ed article, “Aussie migrants 
points system is a corking idea.”

The Daily Express <http://www.theguardian.com/media/dailyexpress> devoted six 
pages to the referendum. It welcomed the Johnson-Gove plan, “We must end 
open-door immigration”, but gave more space to concerns about migrants arriving 
on Britain’s coast after crossing the Channel.

It also carried a piece by Iain Duncan Smith 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/iain-duncan-smith> in which he was openly 
critical of David Cameron: “We were promised by the PM that we would limit 
freedom of movement and get back control of our borders, well we now know he 
failed. Our borders are wide open.”

The Times <http://www.theguardian.com/media/thetimes> gave page 1 billing to 
Johnson and Gove, but chose to attack the Labour party for running a poor 
campaign on behalf of Remain.

The Telegraph’s splash headline said: “Boris: Learn English if you want to 
move to UK”, and the article included a reference to the ICM poll results.

Its leading article was interesting. Why, it asked, are Albanians so keen to 
reach Britain from France? Its answer: “France does not offer the opportunities 
that the UK does.”

It is a miserable, moribund dysfunctional basket case, with strikes due to 
“repressive labour laws” and a “top-down approach to wealth creation [which] 
stifles innovation.”

The Telegraph also ran an op-ed article by Brexiteer Steve Hilton in which he 
took the opportunity to attack Andy Coulson, a newly-minted Remainer. “He used 
to hate the EU,” wrote Hilton, but he has now become “some kind of airy-fairy 
internationalist.”

And the Daily Mirror <http://www.theguardian.com/media/daily-mirror>. It kept 
its head down, a policy it has pursued after discovering a considerable strain 
of Euroscepticism among its readers. So it said nothing about migration or the 
polls.

But it did run an eminently sensible piece by TUC general secretary Frances 
O’Grady about the benefits enjoyed by workers due to EU membership. Whether 
Mirror readers, or anyone else, cares is another matter.
