
A new research study has confirmed what most people, including this 
commentator, knew: national press coverage ofEU referendum 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> campaign has been “heavily 
skewed in favour of Brexit.”

The bald figures produced by researchers at the Reuters Institute for the 
Study of Journalism 
<http://reutersinstitute.politics.ox.ac.uk/news/study-shows-majority-press-coverage-eu-referendum-campaign-was-heavily-skewed-favour-brexit>
 tell the story: 45% of 928 referendum articles it studied were in favour of 
leaving while 27% backed the remain case.

Some 19% were categorised as “mixed or undecided” and 9% were designated as 
adopting no position.

Related: Tory men dominate EU referendum coverage, study finds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/23/tory-men-eu-referendum-david-cameron-boris-johnson-media>

The findings were based on an assessment of coverage in nine national 
newspapers on two sample days each week during the two months that followed 
David Cameron’s post-summit cabinet meeting on 20 February.

They also reveal that newspapers were more likely to quote Conservative rather 
than Labour politicians (69% to just 14%) in the articles. This reflects the 
fact that the Tories are fighting each other over the issue while Labour is 
much more united.

Unsurprisingly, says the press release announcing the interim findings of the 
study,* positions vary greatly between newspaper titles.

The Daily Mail included the most pro-Brexit articles followed by the Daily 
Express, Daily Star, the Sun and theDaily Telegraph 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/dailytelegraph>.

By contrast, the papers with the most pro-remain articles were, in order, the 
Daily Mirror, the Guardian and theFinancial Times 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/financialtimes>.

As for the Times, its articles were “relatively evenly balanced between the 
two positions, with a slight preponderance of pro-leave articles.”

All newspapers, whatever their main position, included some articles from the 
other point of view, but the proportion of these was smallest in the Express 
and Mirror.

According to the preliminary findings, there were an average of 42 articles a 
day focused on the referendum across the nine titles with the Mail, Telegraph 
and Times having the highest number.The Sun 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/sun>, Mirror and Star had the fewest.

Researchers also tracked the topics and issues that formed the bulk of those 
articles. These were, in descending order: the economy/business (33%), 
sovereignty (29%), migration (18%), regulations (14%) and terrorism/security 
(6%).

As for the arguments advanced by papers, whether making a case for or against 
Brexit, the Sun and the Mirror both relied heavily on arguments around 
sovereignty. But the serious quartet - the FT, Guardian, Telegraph and Times - 
focused more on arguments around the economy.

In making their case for Britain to leave the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>, the Express, Star and Mail preferred to 
focus on migration.

*The analysis is based on the examination of coverage for the period from 20 
February to 26 April. The full report will extend to 21 June and be published 
in September. The Institute is working on the project withPrime Research 
<http://www.prime-research.com/>.

