
Covert Cabin, Dordogne, France

Off-grid hideaways in the woods don’t get much better than these three cabins 
in the Dordogne. They’re the sort that inspire dreams of downsizing and doing 
important things with your life – like fishing and baking bread. They have just 
the right mixture of hobbity idiosyncrasy and complete practicality. The most 
difficult decision is whether to swim in the lake or fall asleep on the raft. 
Diane, 50, and Bob Kirkwood, 53, bought a ruined house on mad impulse during a 
trip to France and started working on the property as a holiday project.

Related: Bordeaux reborn 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/mar/30/bordeaux-reborn-city> 

“I was a chef working crazy hours in Chelmsford,” says Diane. “Bob was 
self-employed doing joinery. We never meant to live here!”

Bob’s skills came in useful when they constructed a small off-grid cabin by a 
lake, meant to be a quiet retreat for fishing and swimming. “I wanted a job, 
though,” says Diane. “We decided to let the cabin so I could run it as a 
business.”

Bob built two others and is currently working on two more. “We feel lucky to 
live in a beautiful part of the world,” says Diane, “and although we’ll never 
get rich here, we have space and time to do our own thing – and that is worth 
much more to us than money.”
• Cabins for two from €95 a night, covertcabin.com 
<http://www.covertcabin.com/>

Atmosphere Resorts and Spa, Dumaguete, Philippines
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g695%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g695%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc8859e923d51806350471bd1cc7d2c114caf864e%2F0_72_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hospitality%20sweet%3A%20meet%20the%20Brits%20who%20escaped%20to%20run%20hotels%20abroad&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g695%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hospitality+sweet%3A+meet+the+Brits+who+escaped+to+run+hotels+abroad&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g695%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc8859e923d51806350471bd1cc7d2c114caf864e%2F0_72_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
In the south of Negros Oriental province, Atmosphere Resorts and Spa is the 
long-held dream of Brits Matthew Holder, an architect, and his wife, Gabrielle. 
Originally from Scarborough and Loughborough, the couple met in the 
Philippines, where Gabrielle taught Matthew to dive. (By a weird coincidence, 
Matthew’s mum had taught Gabrielle at school in the UK, but that’s another 
story.) After working as dive instructors together they plotted to open a 
boutique dive resort, scraped together a deposit for some land and sold some 
homes within the resort, to help finance the building. “We lived off cheese and 
crackers for a year,” says Matthew. The result is a laid-back, luxurious 
30-room resort with top-notch diving, spa and restaurant. They now have kids 
and have become part of the local community, running a daily soup kitchen for 
85 underprivileged children.
• Doubles from £170 B&B, atmosphereresorts.com <http://atmosphereresorts.com/>

The Weldborough Hotel, Tasmania, Australia
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g695%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g695%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa64f63c8590798137802615a8cd90b7fb42e87c%2F0_92_2464_1478%2F2464.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hospitality%20sweet%3A%20meet%20the%20Brits%20who%20escaped%20to%20run%20hotels%20abroad&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g695%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hospitality+sweet%3A+meet+the+Brits+who+escaped+to+run+hotels+abroad&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g695%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa64f63c8590798137802615a8cd90b7fb42e87c%2F0_92_2464_1478%2F2464.jpg>
Related: 48 hours in Boat Harbour, Tasmania: what to do and where to go 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/mar/31/48-hours-in-boat-harbour-tasmania-what-to-do-and-where-to-go>

You could hardly get any further from Britain than Tasmania. But that’s where 
Mark Montgomery, who hails from Oxfordshire, and wife, Felicity – from Reading 
– run The Weldborough Hotel, a pub, B&B and campsite in a tiny village (30 
people) near the Blue Tier forest reserve in the north-east of the island.


“We first left the UK in 1974 and spent two years working around Australia in 
our Kombi. On a break from fruit picking in Victoria, we did a whistle-stop 
tour of Tasmania and fell in love with the north-east. We were determined to 
return and did so, many years later in retirement, in 2009, to run – in our 
view – the most English of all Tasmanian pubs.” They now serve beer from every 
microbrewery and cider maker in the state and there are seven guest bedrooms, 
plus camping in the lovely grounds.
• Camping £5 a night, doubles from £40 B&B, hotel.weldborough.com.au 
<http://www.hotel.weldborough.com.au/>

Casa Sánchez Hotel, Dominican Republic
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g695%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g695%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ae0ad7e6b8e21bda47940542a2ba09f4e7a685e%2F0_361_6016_3611%2F6016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hospitality%20sweet%3A%20meet%20the%20Brits%20who%20escaped%20to%20run%20hotels%20abroad&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g695%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hospitality+sweet%3A+meet+the+Brits+who+escaped+to+run+hotels+abroad&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g695%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ae0ad7e6b8e21bda47940542a2ba09f4e7a685e%2F0_361_6016_3611%2F6016.jpg>
Behind a nondescript façade in Santo Domingo’s old colonial quarter lies this 
comfortable and quirky boutique hotel. It’s the type of place where friends are 
made and you spend far too much time around the pool or in the Jacuzzi. Rooms 
have bold colour schemes matched with cool, tiled floors, but the real point of 
the place is the service: ultra helpful and friendly.


Related: Ten of the best Caribbean beaches: readers' travel tips 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/oct/28/ten-best-caribbean-beaches-readers-tips>

This is all thanks to Brit Jonathan Baldrey. “I sold my recruitment company in 
London in 2008, then sat down and looked at the map,” he says. “Santo Domingo 
looked promising, so I went out. At first I hated it, but then I saw this 
ruined building in the old colonial quarter. Without any idea of what it might 
become, I bought it and started doing it up.”

That decision paid off, but only after three years of pain and “several 
thousand trips to the builders’ merchants”. The ruin has become a gorgeous 
11-room boutique hotel, a real haven for visitors passing through or keen on 
exploring the area’s fascinating heritage.

“It hasn’t been an easy project,” says Jonathan. “I cried several times, lost 
count of the disasters, and learned some extremely colourful Spanish. Looking 
back, I think I must have been mad but, now it’s finished, I do get a sense of 
pride at what I’ve achieved.”
• Doubles from $73 B&B, casasanchezhotel.com <http://www.casasanchezhotel.com/>

Romiti del Torrente, Tuscany, Italy
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g695%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g695%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F66869f3bab8fdde20df2b1879f9462b5769fa5a0%2F0_36_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hospitality%20sweet%3A%20meet%20the%20Brits%20who%20escaped%20to%20run%20hotels%20abroad&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g695%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hospitality+sweet%3A+meet+the+Brits+who+escaped+to+run+hotels+abroad&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g695%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F66869f3bab8fdde20df2b1879f9462b5769fa5a0%2F0_36_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 Photograph: sawdays.co.uk 
In the forested hills above Lucca, this former Augustinian monastery and 
church has been tastefully converted an into original, historic place to stay 
by owners Steven Newell and Lindsay Henderson, both glass artists from London. 
“Having replaced the hum of tube trains and street life in London with goat 
bells, screech owls, the roar of the river in the valley below us,” they say, 
“we hold our own in the local bar and keep up with the local gossip – politics 
and football – as well as we can, content that we are no longer the main 
subject of the local gossip. Visitors become friends, nobody wants to leave and 
evenings around the shared dining table, under the immense pincushion sky, are 
never dull. Life is chaotic and it often feels like a subtle blending of Fawlty 
Towers and Babette’s Feast.”

Related: Top 10 affordable restaurants in rural Tuscany 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/apr/23/top-10-affordable-restaurants-tuscany-italy>

The bare stone walls, chunky chestnut-wood beams and stone floors take you 
back to another age, and outside there’s an infinity pool for picturesque 
lounging and organic breakfasts. The vibe’s arty – various creative courses, 
from ceramics to cookery, are held here. They were on the hunt for a barn to 
renovate in the area, when Lucca’s historic planning department got in touch, 
asking if they wanted to buy an abandoned hamlet.

The painstaking journey to raise funds began in 2006 and the hotel opened in 
2014. “One challenge was keeping all the locals who had an emotional stake in 
the buildings, known as Romiti, onside and happy,” they said. “From Adriana, 
94, who was born in one of the houses, to Franco, whose father lived here and 
swore there was a ghost (no sign yet), and Ferdinando, 86, who kept his goats 
in the church – they all needed to see we wanted to restore it properly and 
maintain an attachment with the local community; so there are no walls and 
there’s a bridge they can walk over to visit when they want to. Sadly, a flood 
carried the bridge away in 2013, leaving an alarming hole in our budget.”
• Doubles from €110 B&B through sawdays.co.uk 
<http://www.sawdays.co.uk/italy/tuscany/lucca/romiti-del-torrente>

Almohalla 51, Andalucía, Spain
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g695%2Fsfb%23img-6&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g695%2Fsfb%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F560d21fd911703e909b193569a41c09bdac99a9e%2F0_662_4782_2870%2F4782.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hospitality%20sweet%3A%20meet%20the%20Brits%20who%20escaped%20to%20run%20hotels%20abroad&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g695%2Fstw%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hospitality+sweet%3A+meet+the+Brits+who+escaped+to+run+hotels+abroad&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g695%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F560d21fd911703e909b193569a41c09bdac99a9e%2F0_662_4782_2870%2F4782.jpg>
 Photograph: Bradley Cobb 
Related: Málaga holiday guide: what to see plus the best bars, hotels and 
restaurants 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jul/25/malaga-holiday-guide-spain-best-hotels-bars-restaurants>

This stylish, five-bedroom B&B in the pretty hilltop town of Archidona, 40 
minutes’ drive from Málaga airport, opened in 2012 in a pair of derelict 
19th-century houses. Inside, it’s all wooden beams and stone-tiled floors, with 
sleek, modern bathrooms. There’s a lovely pool, landscaped terraces and comfy 
communal areas with plenty of space for relaxing. David Matthews and Myles 
Gregson left London and jobs with an airline and in marketing to move here. The 
couple had no experience of running hotels but took the plunge and sold 
everything to buy the buildings, then hired local craftsmen to restore them to 
their former glory.
• Doubles from €89 a night, two-night minimum, no under-14s unless whole house 
booked,almohalla51.com <http://www.almohalla51.com/>

Finca Malvasia, Canary Islands

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g695%2Fsfb%23img-7&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g695%2Fsfb%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a3f468c004347748af37ab72403e1ccf1543cc4%2F0_23_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hospitality%20sweet%3A%20meet%20the%20Brits%20who%20escaped%20to%20run%20hotels%20abroad&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g695%2Fstw%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hospitality+sweet%3A+meet+the+Brits+who+escaped+to+run+hotels+abroad&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g695%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a3f468c004347748af37ab72403e1ccf1543cc4%2F0_23_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
 Photograph: James Mitchell 
Surrounded by a working vineyard, in the rural heart of Lanzarote, Finca 
Malvasia comprises four cool self-catering apartments around a pool, all 
blending into the volcanic scenery. Richard and wife Tarnya left London and 
sold their online technology and design business to travel and look for a 
potential B&B property soon after the birth of their son Joss (now 10).

Related: Lanzarote’s beautiful cactus garden 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/aug/19/jardin-de-cactus-garden-lanzarote-canary-islands>

“Having worked relentlessly in a boom industry – long hours, high pressure and 
not feeling fulfilled at all on a personal level – we were ready for a major 
change,” says Tarnya. Initially interested in Biarritz, they were drawn to 
Lanzarote by the climate (a long season for holidaymakers), the surf and César 
Manrique’s iconic 1960s architecture. This is reflected in the finca, with its 
white rendered volcanic-stone and exposed-stone interiors.

“It sounds cheesy but, as we bumped down the 1km stretch of dirt track to the 
property, we both knew this could be the one,” says Tarnya.

It couldn’t have been more different from London and the couple had their work 
cut out, but the result is a stylish yet homely hideaway. A personally written 
guide helps visitors discover the “real” Lanzarote. “It hasn’t been plain 
sailing and, at times, we’ve questioned our sanity, but we grow our fruit and 
veg, have two dogs and, when Joss finishes school at 4pm, we have time to 
dedicate to us as a family.”
• Apartment for two from €135 a night, fincamalvasia.com 
<http://fincamalvasia.com/>
