
“They’re not mine, they’re not mine,” honks Michelle Young 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2013/nov/22/scot-young-estranged-wife-judge> as 
she totters forward on a pair of unfathomably high heels. “They were lent by 
someone at Christian Louboutin who appreciates what I am doing.”

Leaning in conspiratorially, she whispers: “It’s a big fight, right, Daniel? 
Big stuff… This is Mario.”

“No,” corrects the young man who had appeared out of her cab, “I’m Marco.”

“Oh, sorry. Yes, I was just talking to Mario. This is Marco.” Marco’s presence 
is never explained.

Nothing is straightforward with Michelle Young. From the 51-year-old’s 
conspiracy theories (more of that to come) to her shoes, everything is oh so 
dramatic, to the point of laugh-out-loud farce. It might be why a Channel 4 
documentary crew is hovering in the background as we talk.

Michelle first made headlines (in the Daily Mail  
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2512258/Wife-tycoon-Scot-Young-says-20m-divorce-deal-isnt-enough.html>
mainly) when a judge lifted reporting restrictions in 2009 on her extremely 
dogged efforts to grab her rightful share of her husband’s suspected £400m 
fortune.

Property developer Scot Young had walked out on their 11-year marriage three 
years earlier, declaring that the collapse of a big Russian deal had left him 
penniless. His wife wasn’t having it. Her contention was, and still is, that 
Young, who countedSir Philip Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/philip-green> among his friends, was 
worth “a few billion pounds at least”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ey35%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ey35%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9410182022a963f148868a47741723f2d1c71b68%2F0_136_3172_1901%2F3172.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20the%20First%20Wives%20Club&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ey35%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet+the+First+Wives+Club&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ey35%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9410182022a963f148868a47741723f2d1c71b68%2F0_136_3172_1901%2F3172.jpg>
 Michelle Young: ‘After 10 years of litigation what I’ve been left with is no 
more than an empty paper bag.’ Photograph: Amelia Troubridge for the Observer 
The courts heard that Michelle hired eight private detectives to track Young’s 
movements, working in shifts. He, in turn, repeatedly lied about his true 
wealth, funnelling it into offshore entities, even being jailed for six weeks 
for “flagrant and deliberate” contempt of court. After 65 hearings, and 
millions frittered away in legal fees, Michelle was awarded £20m in 2013. The 
judge complained, however, that “extremely serious allegations have been 
bandied around like confetti”. Michelle reasserted that justice had not been 
done. “Woman who says £20m divorce deal isn’t enough!” reported theMail.

Since then Scot Young, who battled drug problems and suffered from bipolar 
affective disorder, has died. Well, that rather underplays it. He was impaled 
on railings after he fell from a fourth-floor Mayfair flat.

Michelle has suggested there might be something more sinister to the incident 
than mental ill health. She also complains that she has never received a penny 
of the award because he had hidden it all away. Oh, and she is facing an £11.2m 
legal action by the backers who funded her divorce battle on the grounds that 
instead of using their funds to pay for the costs of her litigation, she 
appears to have used some of the cash for what they describe as her “champagne 
lifestyle”.

But the specifics of Michelle’s case aren’t why we are meeting, or why the 
Channel 4 team is following her around. It might sound hard to believe, but 
Michelle believes there are some wider issues in her extraordinary case that 
should make us all worry. And she has set up the portentously namedMichelle 
Young Foundation <http://www.michelleyoungfoundation.org/> (she also refers to 
it as the First Wives Club) to highlight them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ey35%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ey35%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10be74405cb64bcb5ad4bf2672e5fdab1efa9d11%2F0_0_3192_1914%2F3192.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20the%20First%20Wives%20Club&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ey35%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet+the+First+Wives+Club&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ey35%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10be74405cb64bcb5ad4bf2672e5fdab1efa9d11%2F0_0_3192_1914%2F3192.jpg>
 Fair shares: campaigner Michelle Young and her ex-husband Scot Young leaving 
court in 2013. He died last year after falling from his Mayfair flat. 
Photograph: PA 
Asked to explain her objectives over a fizzy water at an unpretentious pub – 
the Constitution in Pimlico – Michelle robotically intones without stopping for 
breath: “The reason I set it up is that I have had 10 years of litigation in 
which I have had to borrow money from litigation funders, on huge returns, 
trying to get the justice I deserve. What I have been left with is a judgement 
order that is no more than an empty paper bag.” There is a pause. “Impressive,” 
she mutters to herself.

Perhaps, but it doesn’t sound like a rallying call to the masses. Some further 
questioning elicits more significant goals: to make the courts go after 
super-rich men who try to hide their wealth through sophisticated financial 
engineering, both from their wives and the taxman; and to cut down on the legal 
costs at the family courts that can often lead to whole estates – often quite 
modest ones – over which a man and former wife are fighting to then be blown on 
fees for their lawyers. That is more substantial. And Michelle has three other 
big characters behind her cause.

First to join us at the Constitution is Janna Kremen, 48, former wife of a 
Russian oligarch. Janna met her husband, Boris Agrest, in 1988 when she worked 
as a military officer in the Soviet Ministry of Defence. He started off as a 
manager of a Russian pop group but became a financier with an extraordinary 
range of business interests. Janna suggests that the foundations of his massive 
wealth date back to the wild west years that was early post-communist Russia.

Janna was awarded a divorce payout of £12.6m in 2012. But that was an 
emotionally straining and financially crippling five years after she had 
demanded a divorce from the husband she describes as aggressive, only to be 
told by him that technically that had already happened without her knowing (in 
Israel – it’s a long story), and that due to a post-nuptial agreement she had 
signed she should move out of the family home (a £9m mansion in Surrey) and be 
given only £1m from his estimated £30m fortune.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ey35%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ey35%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d998f8e2b6ee4628d24079d66b0bbde952635f1%2F0_608_1536_921%2F1536.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20the%20First%20Wives%20Club&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ey35%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet+the+First+Wives+Club&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ey35%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d998f8e2b6ee4628d24079d66b0bbde952635f1%2F0_608_1536_921%2F1536.jpg>
 The ex-factor: Michelle Scot Young on their wedding day 
When she took her ex-husband to court, he further claimed he was penniless, 
earning just £150 a month from a Russian business. But Janna wasn’t having it. 
After all, she’d seen oodles of cash up close. “Before we moved to the UK,” 
Janna says in a thick Russian accent, “I was deeply involved in his business 
because I was doing the book-keeping, the bank accounts, his partner’s 
accounts. I was connected,” she said. “I was so smiling when I was watchingThe 
Wolf of Wall Street the other day. Did you see it? Remember how they had 
suitcases with money? That is how I travelled to Switzerland.” She giggles. 
“Can you do this now? It is impossible, isn’t it?”

The court heard that Janna’s husband, then 43, who had taken up with a 
23-year-old, nevertheless sought to evict her and his three children from their 
home and leave them in financial ruin. He was, the judge said, “actuated by 
extreme malice”.

I was smiling when I watched The Wolf of Wall Street. The suitcases with 
money? That’s how we travelled

Not only was her husband lying about being penniless and unemployed – evidence 
of various business interests in Panama, Lichtenstein and Belize helped – but 
the post-nup she had signed was a sham, the court concluded. Agrest was 
described by the judge as a serious and serial nondiscloser determined to do 
down his wife by “foul means”. But he then ran back to Russia, leaving the 
courts pretty powerless to enforce her award. Agrest has since been described 
by the high court as “a fugitive from justice”. His ex-wife and three children 
were left with £1m out of the few assets her husband left in the UK.

For Janna the part that really enrages her, though, is the legal fees. It was 
an endless fight to get any justice, she says, with hearings galore and 
“shadowy” attempts to sell their family home from under her feet which she 
believes should never have been allowed to get off the ground. Her husband once 
told her that Britain was a “good place for rich men”. That, she concluded, was 
true. “If I had a good lawyer, this case should have taken a few months, and no 
problems. But in three months the lawyers’ fees were £45,000, which I couldn’t 
pay, and they had done nothing but send letters. I went to the Citizens Advice 
Bureau and they put me in touch with a different lawyer, who was a lot cheaper. 
But it was the same story: pay money, pay money. No action. Hundreds of letters 
were sent between my lawyers and his. Altogether my legal fees were £90,000. It 
shouldn’t have been like that.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ey35%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ey35%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f09dd2e3e9bdfdea749483019f0e1db5c17c994%2F0_244_3279_1965%2F3279.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20the%20First%20Wives%20Club&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ey35%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet+the+First+Wives+Club&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ey35%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f09dd2e3e9bdfdea749483019f0e1db5c17c994%2F0_244_3279_1965%2F3279.jpg>
 Search for justice: Janna Kremen photographed in London in October 2015. 
Photograph: Amelia Troubridge for the Observer 
Charming, intelligent and sparky, but no longer extremely rich, the final 
women to join us, Caroline Hopkins and Vivien Hobbs, know a thing or two about 
legal fees. “These lawyers are getting huge amounts of cash from these fighting 
couples,” says Caroline, 63, sitting down on a bench outside the pub. “Of 
course it is worse if one half is very wealthy and has loads of money behind 
them to carry on fighting, which is what my husband was like.” How much did you 
spend on lawyers? “I hate the idea of that going in [to the article] but it was 
over £300,000.”

Caroline had claimed in court that she was bullied into signing a post-nuptial 
agreement as her marriage to William Hopkins started to crumble. He is one of 
the richest men in Somerset and worth an estimated £38m. She adds that she 
found Hopkins’s lawyer,Fiona Shackleton 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/shortcuts/2013/jul/10/nigella-lawson-fiona-shackleton-divorce-lawyer>
 (who was famously soaked by a water-jug-wielding Heather Mills at the High 
Court at the end of her divorce battle with Sir Paul McCartney), to be an 
intimidating presence in the background to her decisions at the time.

The court heard that Hopkins had “confessed to bullying behaviour” in letters, 
but concluded that Caroline had not been “operating under any undue influence, 
duress or improper pressure when she entered into the post-nuptial settlement”. 
She was left with one home in Wincanton, Somerset, worth £530,000, and a 
£250,000 bungalow which she has had to remortgage to pay the legal fees. The 
post-nuptial agreement also gave her a lump sum of £200,000, and she will get 
50% of her husband’s pension. She’s adamant that it wasn’t enough and that the 
judge was mistaken, and she is taking legal action against one of her 
solicitors.

And then there is Vivien – campaign manager of the Michelle Young Foundation. 
“The entangled complexities of the relationship between these parties and their 
litigation could be the subject matter of a book,” Justice Holman said at the 
latest hearing regarding Vivien’s divorce (her second) to naval architect 
Dennis Welch, 66, who lives in Singapore.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ey35%2Fsfb%23img-6&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ey35%2Fsfb%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1278acd9854364abedfa7b4da7f199e4fb9a6ebb%2F0_195_4697_2815%2F4697.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20the%20First%20Wives%20Club&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ey35%2Fstw%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet+the+First+Wives+Club&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ey35%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1278acd9854364abedfa7b4da7f199e4fb9a6ebb%2F0_195_4697_2815%2F4697.jpg>
 After the split: Vivien Hobbs. Photograph: Amelia Troubridge for the Observer 
Vivien’s first divorce left her saddled with a debt of £414,000 to her 
solicitors due to legal wranglings over the settlement. Her second has seen her 
rack up around £70,000 in legal bills so far, with Vivien insisting her husband 
has not been frank about his wealth and enjoys a “champagne lifestyle”. He 
denies it. The court agrees with him. Vivien, 58, has a court of appeal hearing 
coming up. “The commonality of most people who come through the Michelle Young 
Foundation website is that they are screaming injustice,” she says. “I was a 
sceptic at first. I rationalised it as individual failures, but the numbers 
have built and there is a growing feeling that it is a problem with the family 
courts – they are dysfunctional.”

It isn’t, however, an argument with which Vivien’s former husband, who 
successfully applied for a two-year civil restraint order on her in July 
preventing her from making further applications in the court against him, has 
much sympathy. Asked to respond to Vivien’s complaints, Welch emailed: “I’ve no 
wish to comment on the so-called First Wives Club other than my ex-wife is 
described on the Foundation website as co-campaigner/campaign director – ‘a 
tireless campaigner of civil liberties’. It should be added ‘whilst also 
receiving state benefits as being allegedly unfit for work’. The facts of my 
divorce judgments are now thankfully the subject of public knowledge in which 
she is described as ‘vengeful, obsessive, irrational and unjustified’. She 
applied all of these characteristics as a ‘serial litigator’ who has wasted 
large sums of money and court time in denying facts and reality and causing 
unbelievable stress and pain in her relentless attacks on me, her first husband 
and our families.”

Vivien says she is no longer on benefits.

It might be tempting then to dismiss this campaign as something of a 
concerted, and perhaps even at times irrational, moan. Back at the 
Constitution, Michelle and Vivien (who have claimed to the police that their 
phones are being tapped) talk ominously about the judiciary being on the take 
and misogynistic judges helping out their golfing friends when they come up in 
court. A fifth member of the group, who turns up at the pub but doesn’t want to 
be named, suggests that an elderly gentleman sitting on a stool by the bar is 
listening in on their conversations, presumably to report back to some 
mysterious master. Michelle doesn’t dissuade her. “We are dealing with a very 
sensitive subject, aren’t we?” she says. “Offshore accounts; a judiciary that 
makes a lot of money out of it not working. We are touching on things that have 
never been touched on before. And it has to be addressed.”

But cut through all the hyperbole, and there is something here. These women 
have been through hell. Each of them loved their husbands and were left 
devastated by the collapse of their relationships. Children were sometimes 
involved. Their own lives were thrown up in the air and they have, in quite 
significant respects, been let down by their lawyers or the system. And the 
courts can be horribly brutal. Caroline, who is clearly a nervous interviewee, 
says she is not the same woman today having lived through her ordeal.

There may not be a conspiracy against these women and others, but ask lawyers 
who are coming to the end of their careers and feel free to be frank, and the 
Family Courts do appear to resemble one hell of a cock-up.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ey35%2Fsfb%23img-7&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ey35%2Fsfb%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ff1bf8d2c3d86685d9c9911a75e926c319d882a%2F0_318_4601_2760%2F4601.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20the%20First%20Wives%20Club&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ey35%2Fstw%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet+the+First+Wives+Club&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ey35%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ff1bf8d2c3d86685d9c9911a75e926c319d882a%2F0_318_4601_2760%2F4601.jpg>
 Caroline Hopkins: ‘It is worse if one half is wealthy and has loads of money 
behind them to carry on fighting, which is what my husband was like.’ 
Photograph: Amelia Troubridge for the Observer 
Pam Collis, a family law solicitor for 30 years, and an expert in big money 
claims, insists that however the system is set up, there will always be devious 
people who get away with hiding their wealth. A good lawyer, she adds, knows 
when to cut and run and not eat too heavily into their client’s cash. “There 
are certain men you cannot catch out. I had one disastrous case with a lady 
living in Surrey, in a whopping great house, married to a man who had pots of 
money, but there was almost nothing I could do for her. The money had 
disappeared. The house was in an offshore company. It was awful. It is possible 
to get away with it – if that is your ambition.

“I had another case where I got the solicitor on the other side to come round 
to my office. The husband’s solicitor said: ‘Listen, my client is Russian. You 
are never going to discover what he has got.’

“I said: ‘I know, but this can’t be true.’ And he said: ‘But, Pam, what are 
you going to do?’ My client and I had foreseen this, so we just did the best 
deal we could. There was no point in running up costs. I could have gone and 
gone, but my client would have ended up with nothing.”

But as pragmatic as Collis says lawyers need to be, the courts aren’t holding 
the rich to account, she admits. It isn’t misogyny to blame, though, she 
insists. It’s a matter of the law. “The powers are there to imprison people who 
refuse to disclose, but they are not always exercised in the way they should 
be, in my opinion. TheHuman Rights Act 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1998/42/contents> has changed things 
dramatically.
 Happier times: Caroline with William Hopkins, one of the richest men in 
Somerset. 
“In the old days I issued summonses left, right and centre. And it was 
effective. You can’t do it under the Human Rights Act because you can’t deprive 
someone of their liberty without being able to prove that you’ve given them 
every opportunity to comply, and if they can show that they couldn’t comply for 
some reason, you don’t get your order. So the courts have gone a bit soft on 
this.”

But Collis’s biggest beef is the issue that impacts on everyone, not just the 
rich, and that is that legal costs at Family Courts have spun out of control. 
All too often, she adds, lawyers in this field are simply not good enough. “I’m 
coming to the end of my career, I can say this: the whole way the system is run 
is inefficient and it affects people more at the bottom end of the pile. The 
rich can pay.

“If three solicitors are put on a case rather than one, which is typically 
what happens, it is bad news for the standing of family law generally and for 
people who don’t have lots of money. There has not been enough thought about 
shaking the system up big time. I mean, family lawyers should understand a set 
of accounts, but there are many who don’t. It is appalling. There has been case 
after case where the assets are £2m and the legal costs are £2m. That is 
completely mad.”

Leaving the Constitution pub, Michelle thanks me for my time. “I think you get 
it,” she adds. Perhaps.

The Michelle Young Foundation has set up a petition demanding reform (it has 
366 signatories). It is arguable whether Michelle and co are the right people 
to be waging this fight. But as their former husbands know, they are highly 
unlikely to be dissuaded.
