
Are you a risk seeker? Do you know when to hold ’em, when to fold ’em and when 
to walk away? What would you choose if offered £500 for sure or a gamble with a 
15% chance of winning £1,000,000?

Although ostensibly about risk seeking, this test is actually a test of your 
reasoning ability and, more generally, your intelligence. Now we can make an 
exception if you have some particularly unusual specific personal 
circumstances. Perhaps, for example, you owe £500 to a loan shark who will be 
calling round first thing Monday morning. Perhaps you think all forms of 
gambling are morally wrong. Or perhaps you think being a millionaire would make 
you miserable. But if not, you would be crazy not to take the gamble.

But isn’t this just a matter of personal preference, with no right or wrong 
answer? Well, yes, if you like, but know this: participants who had high scores 
on a standard test of intelligence were twice as likely to choose the gamble as 
those who had lower scores. The same pattern holds for gambles involving lower 
amounts (eg £100 for sure or a 75% chance of winning £200), and switches around 
for losses (eg smarter people are almost twice as likely to accept a certain 
£50 loss over a 10% chance of losing £800).

In fact the degree of preference for the (mathematically speaking) better 
option was a significant predictor of performance on the SAT (those college 
tests they go on about in American teen movies), the ACT (a rival to the SAT), 
the Wonderlic Personnel Test (taken by American football players in the NFL) 
and the Need For Cognition test (which measures how much people enjoy 
intellectual activities like thinking). Although gambling is often seen as a 
mug’s game, sometimes the smartest people put all their chips on the table.


Psy-Q by Ben Ambridge is published by Profile Books at £8.99. To order a copy 
for £7.19, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/305948/>
