
Four candidates applying to replace Alan Rusbridger 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/alanrusbridger> as editor-in-chief of 
Guardian News & Media (GNM) will have the opportunity to make their case to the 
publisher’s journalists at a hustings on 25 February, before a ballot of 
editorial staff.

The four who have put their names forward for the ballot are Emily Bell, 
director of the Tow Center for Digital Journalism at Columbia University and a 
non-executive director of Guardian owner the Scott Trust; Wolfgang Blau, GNM’s 
director of digital strategy; Janine Gibson, editor-in-chief of 
theguardian.com; and Katharine Viner, editor-in-chief of Guardian US.

A spokeswoman for the Scott Trust, the sole shareholder in Guardian Media 
Group (GMG), GNM’s parent company, said that 26 people had applied for the job. 
Participation in the ballot, which is being organised by the National Union of 
Journalists (NUJ) and is separate from the trust’s recruitment process, is 
voluntary. Liz Forgan, chair of the Scott Trust, said in December that 
candidates not wishing to take part in the ballot will still be considered for 
the post.
 Alan Rusbridger is to take up a new role as principal of Lady Margaret Hall, 
Oxford. Photograph: Graeme Robertson for the Guardian 
The hustings will take place at GNM’s headquarters at Kings Place, London, on 
25 February. The candidates have agreed to provide written statements outlining 
their vision for GNM, which will be available on the NUJ’s internal GNM website.

All core editorial staff at GNM – which publishes the Guardian and Observer 
newspapers and theguardian.com, Guardian US and Guardian Australia websites – 
will be able to vote in the ballot, whether or not they are union members. It 
will open on 26 February and close at midnight on 4 March.


Forgan has said the winner of the staff ballot would be guaranteed a place on 
the interview shortlist for the job, which was advertised externally.

The vote is similar to that staged in 1995, the first time such a ballot was 
carried out. Rusbridger received the overwhelming backing of Guardian staff and 
was subsequently appointed editor. The role has since expanded as the 
editor-in-chief now oversees editorial content across both GNM newspapers and 
its global website, theguardian.com.

“The Scott Trust retains the right to choose a candidate irrespective of the 
result of that vote,”Forgan said in an interview in December 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/dec/19/guardian-observer-staff-vote-editor-in-chief-alan-rusbridger>
. “The views of the staff are very important, but the duty of the trust is to 
think about the Guardian in perpetuity and that is to look beyond the interests 
of the current generation of journalists.

Related: Guardian and Observer journalists to get vote on next editor-in-chief 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/dec/19/guardian-observer-staff-vote-editor-in-chief-alan-rusbridger>

 “Global stakeholders include readers from all over the world who have come to 
look to the Guardian for their understanding of the world, which is why it’s so 
important to open up this process.”

The board of GMG will also have the chance to meet the shortlisted candidates, 
but again the views of the board and Andrew Miller, the group chief executive
who is also departing later this year 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jan/29/andrew-miller-to-stand-down-guardian-media-group>
, will only be indicative.

Having studied the history of the newspaper going back to 1821, Forgan said: 
“From time to time the managing director has been part of the process, which 
seems to me to be absolutely not right in terms of the constitutional 
delicacies of the Guardian.”

Rusbridger, who is to replace Forgan as chair of the trust in 2016, after 
standing down as editor-in-chief this summer 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/dec/10/alan-rusbridger-stand-down-guardian-editor-in-chief>
, will have no vote in the appointment of his successor. He will however be 
“consulted” by Forgan, who said: “What Alan says about the candidate I will 
listen to very carefully,” before adding that it was “conceivable” that the 
trust could choose a candidate who wasn’t the one recommended by the 
award-winning editor.

The Guardian <http://www.theguardian.com/media/theguardian> is highly unusual 
in allowing staff to hold any sort of vote on their next boss. Le Monde is the 
best known example of a newspaper in which the staff elect the editor, although 
this model is not to be adopted at the Guardian, which has only had 10 editors 
since its foundation in 1821.


Forgan has chaired the trust since 2003. Rusbridger will replace her after 
taking up a new role as principal of Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford 
<http://www.lmh.ox.ac.uk/News/Latest-News/Mr-Alan-Rusbridger-elected-as-next-Principal-of-La.aspx>
.
