
U Bo sits on the floor of his bamboo hut and puts away a plastic tray covered 
with a small heap of what looks like sticky, brown tar. This is the day’s opium 
harvest, which he and his family scraped off the bulbs of their two-acre field 
of poppies.

His farm, at the foot of a lush mountain, in eastern Myanmar’s Shan state, 
includes another two acres of rice. Opium will provide his family of seven in 
Pe Kin village with much-needed cash – his 6kg of opium could fetch about 
$1,800 (£1,250) – while the paddy provides food.

Related: To win the war on drugs, stop brutalising farmers who grow them | 
Pien Metaal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/19/to-win-the-war-on-drugs-stop-brutalising-farmers-who-grow-them>

“We grow poppies because other [cash] crops don’t grow well here. Corn is not 
good with the poor soil and weather,” says U Bo, 57, a farmer from the Kayan 
ethnic group.

 “I spend most of the money [from opium] on sending my children to school, the 
rest I use to plant fruit trees,” he says. The opium is sold through a network 
of secret traders.

His family is one of the estimated 133,000 households 
<https://www.unodc.org/documents/crop-monitoring/sea/Southeast_Asia_Opium_Survey_2015_web.pdf>
 (pdf) in Myanmar, mainly found in impoverished, remote regions, who last year 
grew poppies across 55,500 hectares (about 137,000 acres) of land, according to 
the UN Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC). Myanmar is the second largest 
producer of opium after Afghanistan.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k68x%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k68x%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff020a945ab299262d11d61a1ca1a5aa90e60e947%2F0_112_3716_2230%2F3716.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20opium%20bulbs%20of%20Myanmar%3A%20drug%20crop%20or%20lifeline%20for%20poor%20farmers%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k68x%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+opium+bulbs+of+Myanmar%3A+drug+crop+or+lifeline+for+poor+farmers%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k68x%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff020a945ab299262d11d61a1ca1a5aa90e60e947%2F0_112_3716_2230%2F3716.jpg>
 Opium farmer U Bo, in eastern Myanmar’s Shan state, shows his crop. 
Photograph: Paul Vrieze 
 The trade in opium and its derivative heroin is controlled by many rebel 
groups 
<https://www.tni.org/files/download/tni-2014-bouncingback-conflictcrimecorruption.pdf>
 (pdf) and pro-government militias who use it to fund along-running civil war 
<http://www.irinnews.org/report/95195/briefing-myanmar%E2%80%99s-ethnic-problems>
. The opiates, along with huge amounts ofmethamphetamine 
<https://www.unodc.org/documents/southeastasiaandpacific/Publications/2015/drugs/ATS_2015_Report_web.pdf>
 (pdf), end up in China and across south-east Asia.

While the hardy plant has long been a lifeline for poor farmers, U Bo says he 
is tired of growing a crop that is taxed by armed groups and corrupt police. “I 
really hope the new government can bring good changes. We would like to have 
power, roads, water — then I don’t have to grow poppy,” he says.

 The ruling National League for Democracy (NLD) faces the task of boosting 
rural development to improve livelihoods and reduce opium cultivation. It will 
also have to tackle widespread drug abuse in some regions.

The Drug Policy Advocacy Group 
<https://www.facebook.com/Drug-Policy-Advocacy-Group-Myanmar-995656970513733/>, 
comprising local NGOs, healthcare workers and independent experts, is hoping 
the new government willreform what they regard as harsh, ineffective drug laws 
<http://www.mmtimes.com/index.php/national-news/19861-advocacy-groups-call-for-drug-policy-reset-ahead-of-un-meet.html>
 and policies.

 “We want them to revise the 1993 drug law to decriminalise drug use and 
reduce sentences for poppy farmers, and we want more health services for 
users,” says Nang Pann Ei Kham, the group’s coordinator. “We have contact with 
advisers to the new government leaders; hopefully we can draw their attention.”

 Founded in 2014, the group has been organising events with police, NGOs, 
international aid groups and organisations representing farmers and drug users 
to discuss policy changes.

Related: Farmers in Burma swap opium poppies for coffee crops – in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2015/jun/16/farmers-burma-shan-swap-opium-poppies-coffee-crops-in-pictures>

The first public event was held in Yangon in April. A member of the Myanmar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/myanmar> Opium Farmers’ Forum told attendees 
that the government should allow subsistence poppy farming until it can provide 
alternative cash crops and improve land rights, infrastructure and basic 
services. “Many laws were adopted by the government without consulting opium 
farmers – we should now raise our voice,” said Lashila, a community leader from 
the Shan ethnic group.

 Khin Maung Myint, an NLD MP from Kachin state, said his party had yet to 
decide on drug law reforms, but would prioritise rural development over poppy 
eradication and “help farmers change their livelihoods”.

The UNODC is already attempting to do this. It has set up a co-operative among 
800 farmers in Shan state to grow 550 hectares of coffee for sale on domestic 
and export markets. It worked with the state land records department to give 
farmers land rights certificates. The programme is expected to expand to 1,300 
hectares, and reforest areas cleared for poppies.

 “Reducing illicit cultivation can only be achieved when the socio-economic 
conditions and livelihoods of rural households have been improved,” says Troels 
Vester, UNODC’s Myanmar country manager.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k68x%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k68x%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d1ff6d6265e684fd1753b4ec92ca28e76156783%2F0_521_4000_2401%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20opium%20bulbs%20of%20Myanmar%3A%20drug%20crop%20or%20lifeline%20for%20poor%20farmers%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k68x%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+opium+bulbs+of+Myanmar%3A+drug+crop+or+lifeline+for+poor+farmers%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k68x%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d1ff6d6265e684fd1753b4ec92ca28e76156783%2F0_521_4000_2401%2F4000.jpg>
 A sign put up by the ethnic Kachin anti-drug vigilante movement Pat Jasan is 
seen in northern Myanmar’s Kachin state. Photograph: Kyungmee Kim 
 Such initiatives, however, run up against the realities on the ground. In 
Shan and bordering Kachin, the army allows militias to control vast poppy areas 
if they help fight rebel groups.

Tom Kramer, a Dutch researcher with the Transnational Institute, says the 
army’s position on illicit activities by its militias is an “obstacle for 
reform” of drug policy and unlikely to change until there is a nationwide peace 
accord.

In Kachin, local leaders complain that the influx of cheap drugs is destroying 
their communities. A local NGO estimates a third of all male university 
students inject heroin, though there isscant official data 
<https://www.unodc.org/southeastasiaandpacific/en/myanmar/2016/02/nsc-meeting/story.html>
.

A lack of government action in the region has led to the emergence of 
vigilante groups, such asPat Jasan 
<http://www.irrawaddy.com/interview/pat-jasan-reverend-well-continue-our-poppy-eradication.html>
, established by leaders at Kachin Baptist church.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k68x%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k68x%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc50c6083b38a0f8f488932e842e28d4a2dc61669%2F0_246_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20opium%20bulbs%20of%20Myanmar%3A%20drug%20crop%20or%20lifeline%20for%20poor%20farmers%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k68x%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+opium+bulbs+of+Myanmar%3A+drug+crop+or+lifeline+for+poor+farmers%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k68x%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc50c6083b38a0f8f488932e842e28d4a2dc61669%2F0_246_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 About a pound of raw opium, the morning’s harvest of a poppy field, is 
displayed in eastern Myanmar’s Shan state. Photograph: Paul Vrieze 
 Since 2014, Pat Jasan has mobilised thousands of volunteers to clear poppy 
areas and apprehend hundreds of drug dealers and users. The latter are taken 
intocontroversial, Bible teaching-based rehabilitation 
<http://www.nationmultimedia.com/breakingnews/Fighting-north-Myanmars-addiction-curse-with-stick-30271159.html>
.

Kramer says the vigilantes’ emergence indicates the public’s desperation over 
the drug trade, but to address the problem, he says, “you need a 
development-led approach, an inclusive peace process, and [to] tackle 
corruption”.

U Bo says he is unaware of the abuse and conflict linked to the drug trade. “I 
don’t know about these things, I only grow poppies,” he says. “But I just want 
to grow a different crop and would like the government to support us.”
