
This month we are looking back at the Guardian's women's page. In 2007 a G2 
special <http://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/series/50yearsofthewomenspages> 
reflected on the previous 50 years of the women's pages with recollections of 
past editors and writers.

The history of the page does however go back even further, with the launch of 
a daily Women's Page in May 1922. It promised to address "domestic economy, 
labour-saving, dress, household prices, and the care of children." Perhaps with 
an early indicator of what was to come, on the second day an article appeared; 
'The Hospital Almoner: A Career for Educated Women.' Guardian historian, David 
Ayerst commented that the long-standing editor CP Scott would not have 
tolerated a page based on the assumption that a woman's place was in the 
kitchen.

Madeline Linford  
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/the-northerner/2012/aug/14/women-women>was 
appointed to edit the page in 1922. When interviewed in 1963 she explained "My 
briefing was lucid and firm. The page must be readable, varied and aimed always 
at the intelligent woman."

The Women's Page used established Guardian writers such as Evelyn Sharp 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Evelyn_Sharp_%28suffragist%29> and introduced new 
young writers such asWinifred Holtby 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Winifred_Holtby> and Vera Brittain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/mar/24/vera-brittain-testament-of-youth>
. The page was suspended in 1939 and returned in 1957.

Mary Stott 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2002/sep/18/pressandpublishing.genderissues> 
was women's editor from 1957-1972. In 2001 in aninterview with journalist Terry 
Coleman 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=OHP%2f88&>
 who has written about the history of the Manchester Guardian, she looks back 
on her career and time as women's editor.

Along with subsequent editors Mary was frequently questioned about the need 
for a women's page. She robustly explained in an article in 1962Women Talking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/jul/18/gender.uk5> that "It certainly 
isn't our intention to provide a cosy corner for females who aren't up to the 
rest of the paper." She highlighted social problems which had been discussed on 
the page such as a letter which began the Pre-school Playgroups Association. In 
number128 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/interactive/2011/may/16/moments-that-made-guardian-interactive>
 of 192 moments there is a list of organisations inspired by some of the pieces 
appearing on the 'Mainly for Women' page.

When Linda Christmas followed Mary Stott as editor she said that "Our biggest 
concerns during those years were equal opportunities and equal pay. (Equal pay 
did not become law until 1976)." On reflection in her articleAfraid to be 
frivolous <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/jul/18/gender.uk6> she 
explained that she had wanted the page "to sparkle and to elicit a response 
from readers, but we were afraid to be frivolous."

By the late 1970s when Suzanne Lowry became editor "the egalitarian precepts 
of feminism seemed like innate truth" as she describes in a featureThe heady 
days of women's lib <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/jul/18/gender.uk7>. 
She remembers "…a stunning kaleidoscope of women, men and ideas whirling round 
a special time and place." She remembers the exciting contributions ofJill 
Tweedie <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jill_Tweedie>, who is remembered in number
141 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/interactive/2011/may/16/moments-that-made-guardian-interactive>
 of 192 moments, including the first account of female circumcision in Africa 
andPolly Toynbee <http://www.theguardian.com/profile/pollytoynbee> reporting 
impressively on life in Britain andPosy Simmonds 
<http://www.theguardian.com/profile/posy-simmonds> "with her latest delicious 
illustration." There were setbacks and triumphs. WhenSimone de Beauvoir 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Simone_de_Beauvoir> was approached for a 
contribution she crushingly replied, "Madame, I have neither the time nor the 
inclination to do what you ask". Mary Wilson, the wife of the Prime Minister, 
however, did agree to write about her life in Downing Street.

Editor from 1978-1981 Liz Forgan believed she was the luckiest editor as "In 
1978 feminism was the most interesting thing on the political horizon. Further 
insight can be found in her articleThe agenda was dazzling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/jul/18/gender.uk>.

Four editors ran the women's page in the 1980s. Frances Cairncross (1981-1984) 
and Jane McLoughlin (1984-1985) had previously written about economics and 
industry respectively. It was the time of Greenham Common and the age of 
Margaret Thatcher, and Cairncross wrote inConfusion, cookery and a Common 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/jul/18/gender.uk13> that "women were 
stocking up on wire-clippers to hack into the American air force base and 
arguing that women were more interested in promoting peace."

Brenda Polan, who was editor from 1985-1989 explained, "I was an unusual 
women's editor in that I had wanted the job since I was a child." She describes 
her time inA childhood ambition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/jul/18/gender.uk2>. Polan explains that 
the debate about the role of a women's page still rumbled on throughout the 
1980s. However, inequalities still existed and the page was "a forum where the 
inequalities could be addressed on a case-by-case basis." Polan described how 
"In Thatcher's Britain we wrote about unequal pay …maternity rights, childcare 
and workplace crèches."

Louise Chunn <http://www.theguardian.com/profile/louisechunn>, editor from 
1989-1994, was brought in as editor when working at Elle magazine. The section, 
which had been under threat, had been saved by campaigning women staff members. 
She introduced the weekly big interview with the likes of Kirsty MacColl and 
Ruth Deech. She explains how she brought about some change to the page inSexing 
it up in serious style 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/jul/18/gender.uk3>.

The editors of the 1990s, Clare Longrigg 
<http://www.theguardian.com/profile/clarelongrigg>, Becky Gardiner 
<http://www.theguardian.com/profile/beckygardiner> and Libby Brooks 
<http://www.theguardian.com/profile/libbybrooks> were strong defenders of the 
women's page. Longrigg describes in her featureRejection and regeneration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/jul/18/gender.uk14> that some women 
columnists would not be seen on the women's page. "Women weren't interested in 
feminism, but they were interested in work, and removing obstacles to their 
progress – we campaigned for paternity leave, affordable childcare and equal 
pay."

In 1994 the Guardian commissioned a portrait 
<http://www.npg.org.uk/collections/search/portraitLarge/mw09287/Womens-Page-Contributors-to-The-Guardian?LinkID=mp06352&role=sit&rNo=0>
, which hangs in the National Gallery, to celebrate the contributions to the 
paper of its feminist writers on the women's pages of the 1970s and 1980s. 
Editors Mary Stott and Liz Forgan sit with cartoonist Posy Simmonds and 
columnists Jill Tweedie and Polly Toynbee. Anaudio guide transcript 
<http://www.npg.org.uk/assets/files/pdf/collections/explore/by-artists-and-sitters/AGguardianwomen.pdf>
 captures the personalities of the women and also the sadness they felt as Jill 
Tweedie was dying of motor neurone disease as the painting was being done.

Below are two articles from the 1970s by Jill Tweedie, described by her 
colleagues and editors as a brilliant writer and "the greatest women's page 
writer", by Polly Toynbee. Guardian historian Geoffrey Taylor said that she 
"blazed her way through the women's page during the 1970s and for much of the 
1980s … She stood in relation to what had gone before as heavy metal did to 
Handel."

Words in action: article on a Women's Lib demonstration by Jill Tweedie, March 
1971 <http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1383127764821/Words-in-Action-Guardian-Ji.pdf>

Education and the middle classes by Jill Tweedie, September 1971 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1383127766254/Education-and-the-middle-cl.pdf>

Libby Brooks <http://www.theguardian.com/profile/libbybrooks>, editor from 
1999-2001 was thrilled by her appointment. "To me it amounted to no less than 
taking responsibility for the whole illustrious heritage of the pages." As 
editor when New Labour was coming to the end of its first term of office the 
page kept tabs on how far the government was fulfilling its commitment to women 
voters.

Kira Cochrane <http://www.theguardian.com/profile/kiracochrane> was appointed 
editor in 2006 and in her featureStill so much to do 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/jul/18/gender.uk16> contrasts the time 
of Mary Stott in 1957 with fifty years on. Kira explained that when it started 
the women's page was often the only part of the newspaper where women's 
concerns were given space. Despite women having entered the public spheres 
since then, there was still an equality gap in pay and public life. "While 
others talk about living in a post-feminist age, the women's pages are still 
looking forward to a truly feminist age – one in which men and women are 
treated equally, no more, no less."

Polly Toynbee <http://www.theguardian.com/profile/pollytoynbee> who was a 
contributor to the women's page for 11 years explained in anarticle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2007/jul/18/gender.pressandpublishing>
 in 2007 why she thought the Guardian still needed a women's page.

In 2012 Jane Martinson <http://www.theguardian.com/profile/janemartinson>, who 
has been women's editor of the Guardian since 2010, chaired apodcast 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/audio/2012/oct/15/media-talk-podcast-gender-gap>
, following a report byWomen in Journalism <http://womeninjournalism.co.uk/>, 
on the gender gap in the media industry. The report showed that women are still 
lagging behind in many areas of the media.

Looking at the most recent features covered in the Women's Blog: Malala 
Yousafzai 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/womens-blog/2013/oct/21/malala-yousafzai-heroine-pakistani-schoolgirl>
, the Pakistani schoolgirl shot for campaigning for the right of all girls to 
an education in Pakistan; the music industry; body image; politics; television; 
it is clear that the brief given to Madeline Linford in 1922 echoes 
resoundingly down the years "The page must be readable, varied and aimed always 
at the intelligent woman."

In October 2013 Jane Martinson said, "Feminism and the rights of women have 
become more vibrant and important in the past few years with everything from 
the horrific gang rape in India to theEveryday Sexism 
<http://everydaysexism.com/index.php/about> campaign and Malala Youfsafzai's 
fight for girls' education putting them back at the top of the global agenda. I 
feel lucky to be women's editor at such a time."

The Guardian News & Media Archive <http://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive> 
holds a unique collection of records including correspondence, oral history 
interviews and photographs relating to the Women's page and its contributors 
and editors. Acatalogue <http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/default.aspx> of 
the material is available to search online and the collection can be consulted 
in the GNM Archive reading room by appointment.

Past teaching resources of the month from the GNM Archive 
<http://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/series/resource-of-the-month>
More teaching resources can be found on our resources for teachers 
<http://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/resources-for-teachers> page.
