
Seven Spices

2 Mellor Road, Cheadle Hulme, Manchester, 0161-485 4700

Given that the kitchen team is recruited from Moti Mahal, a long-standing 
restaurant group in India, it's no surprise the menu is closer in approach to 
food you'd find in a restaurant over there than you would in a typical curry 
house in Britain. The tandoori dishes are particularly good. They have a real 
understanding of Indian ingredients.

Kai

65 South Audley Street, London W1, 020-7493 8988

The food here is amazing, and not just about the usual Cantonese menu suspects 
- there are lots of light salads and soups made with typical ingredients but 
used in inventive ways. I love the dishes featuring chai, a kind of vegetable 
protein that's one of their specialities - the chai cooked with three chillies 
is delicious.

Oloroso

33 Castle Street, Edinburgh, 0131-226 7614

I first visited this bar and restaurant after a day's filming. I wasn't that 
hungry, as we'd been cooking all day, so just concentrated on the cocktails and 
the bar snacks, both of which were great. It's on the top floor, so the views 
are stunning, too.

The Sir Charles Napier

Sprigg's Alley, Chinnor, Oxfordshire, 01494 483011

A fantastic country pub, complete with roaring fires and really impressive 
food that's all about local, seasonal sourcing. There's a particularly 
impressive wine list, too.

Baker & Spice

20 Clifton Road, Maida Vale, London W9, 020-7266 1122

One of my favourite spots for lunch. They have an imaginative range of salads 
- maybe something based around lentils, or roasted pumpkin with feta and 
rocket. Teatime is a good time to drop by, too - the cakes, cookies and muffins 
are great.

Scalini

1-3 Walton Street, London SW3, 020-7225 2301

I've been going here for years, and haven't had a bad meal yet. As soon as you 
sit down, you're brought tomatoes steeped in olive oil, toasted bread and huge 
chunks of very good Parmesan to nibble on, so you're enjoying food even before 
you've ordered, which I love. The lobster spaghetti - loads of lobster meat 
served in a tomato-y, lobster-infused sauce - is wonderful, and they have a 
traditional dessert trolley, which is a dying art.

•  Anjum Anand's latest book is Anjum's New Indian (£20, Quadrille).
