
The Cannes Lions advertising festival <https://www.canneslions.com/> kicks off 
on 18 June as the industry descend on the French Riviera to recognise the best 
advertising in the world and set the stage for what’s next.

As technology advances and data proliferates, ad professionals are more 
equipped than ever to offer customised and meaningful campaigns. To fuel this, 
brands are taking social good beyond their corporate social responsibility 
(CSR) department and making it central to the work. What we will see at this 
year’s festival is the success of companies that are using insights gleaned 
from new data sources to deploy creativity that will change our world.

Do-good advertising

Procter & Gamble’s Always #LikeAGirl has become the gold standard for do-good 
advertising through its ability to access deeply held consumer beliefs and 
excite new ways of thinking. The campaign disassembled culturally ingrained 
stereotypes in a step toward rebuilding female identity. The initial ad sparked 
a massive campaign that took the newly rebuilt identity and celebrated it, 
driving awareness and engagement across the globe. When a company’s actions 
align with consumer values, loyalty and passion are bred in an audience hungry 
for social change.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL3BjUvjOUMc&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL3BjUvjOUMc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL3BjUvjOUMc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL3BjUvjOUMc&media=>
On the surface, Heineken’s ad celebrating moderate drinkers would confuse 
anyone. Why is a beer company telling people to drink less? Responding to a
millennial audience that values social responsibility 
<http://www.nielsen.com/us/en/insights/reports/2015/the-sustainability-imperative.html>
, the brand chose to present alcohol consumption in a way that reinforces 
responsibility and moderation as cultural values. What I love about this 
campaign is how Heineken builds brand awareness by tapping into a rich social 
insight that matters, and re-establishes brand loyalty through positive 
perception.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5A4v3vyHWOU&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5A4v3vyHWOU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5A4v3vyHWOU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5A4v3vyHWOU&media=>
Burger King tried to do the same thing with its McWhopper proposal for Peace 
One Day <http://mcwhopper.com/> – offering to partner with rival McDonald’s for 
one day, with all proceeds supporting the United Nations’ day of ceasefire and 
non-violence. Even though McDonald’s declined, the proposal reinforced how a 
brand can rise above short-sighted self-promotion and align with societal 
concerns to resonate with consumers and ultimately engender goodwill for the 
brand.

Blending creativity with positive change, the Together We Are Stronger 
campaign uses video filmed by professional athletes to give those with multiple 
sclerosis experiences they have been unable to enjoy for decades through the 
use of virtual reality. As VR continues to gain traction in ads (seeSamsung’s 
helping millennials overcome their fears 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GWkrTrRC2t0>) this particular example points 
to a future where technology can play a pivotal role for brands to give 
patients their lives back.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DT_VUJUBIpQ4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DT_VUJUBIpQ4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DT_VUJUBIpQ4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DT_VUJUBIpQ4&media=>
How doing good leads to loyalty ... and trophies

Brands today are figuring out how to gain consumers’ loyalty in an environment 
that rewards short attention spans, and where instant gratification is 
expected. As consumer choice is demanded and companies vie for attention, 
securing loyal customers becomes more difficult. But, when a core message is 
built on true insight and aligns with the audience’s values, it sparks 
something meaningful and penetrates through the flashy, splashy marketing noise.

I particularly enjoyed Jet Blue’s humorous yet touching surprise on a Mother’s 
Day flight <http://fortune.com/2016/05/03/jetblue-crying-babies-ad/>; every 
time a baby screamed, passengers received 25% off their next flight. This 
tribute turned flying on a plane with babies, traditionally considered a 
negative experience, into a joyous occasion that turned scowls into applause 
and passengers into loyal customers.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxQyfu1LrOSM&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxQyfu1LrOSM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxQyfu1LrOSM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxQyfu1LrOSM&media=>
 In the end, brands are putting big ad dollars behind campaigns that don’t 
(directly) promote their products and are coming out on top. Standing for 
something more than an immediate bump to the bottom line will permeate the work 
at Cannes. These campaigns form powerful and lasting connections with an 
audience that demands more from their purchase decision than a mere 
transaction. Doing well by doing good is the stuff that takes advertising from 
good to great and earns coveted Lions hardware.

Note: Proctor & Gamble’s Always #LikeAGirl and Heineken’s Moderate Drinkers 
Wanted campaigns were produced by the Publicis Groupe network.

Ash Kuchel is global group president at Publicis Health 
<http://www.publicishealthcare.com/en/index.aspx>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.


All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled ‘Advertisement feature’ – find out morehere 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
