
Another 86 courts across England and Wales will close over the next 18 months, 
forcing defendants, witnesses and lawyers to travel even further afield to 
obtain justice.

In a second round of thinning out the HM Courts & Tribunal Service’s depleted 
estate, magistrates courts, crown courts, county courts and tribunals will be 
sold to raise funds for investment in technology and judicial modernisation 
programmes.

About 140 courts shut following the last review in 2011. Falling crime rates, 
the need to save money and the prospect of developing online justice have 
combined to persuade ministers that old and underused courthouses should be 
turned into flats or fast-food restaurants.

The proportion of the population able to reach a magistrates court within an 
hour by public transport will fall, under the Ministry of Justice’s (MoJ) 
plans, from 82% to 74%.

Related: Top judge says justice system is now unaffordable to most 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jan/13/uk-most-senior-judge-says-justice-has-become-unaffordable-to-most>

Anglesey, with a population of 69,000, will no longer have any courts on the 
island. The neo-Jacobean Holyhead magistrates court building will be closed by 
June, meaning future defendants and witnesses will have to spend more than an 
hour and a half on train and bus – often in close proximity – travelling to 
Caernarfon criminal justice centre.


Many of the court buildings are unloved 1970s glass and brick monoliths. The 
rambling structure housing Bury St Edmunds’ magistrates, crown and family 
court, however, was built in 1841. Halifax’s imposing Grade II-listed county 
court dates from 1872, and Watford will lose its elegant 1930s magistrates 
court that adjoins the police station.


Announcing the closures, justice minister Shailesh Vara said: “Our courts and 
tribunal system is in need of urgent reform. Maintaining our underused and 
dilapidated court buildings costs the taxpayer £500m a year but some courts sit 
for less than half the time available.

 “This is simply unsustainable. Closing these courts in poor quality buildings 
will raise £40m to reinvest in the justice system, and save hardworking 
taxpayers £27m per year.

“The decision to close a court is never taken lightly, but in the digital age 
I am confident we have measures in place to ensure access to justice is not 
diminished.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gj3k%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gj3k%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdce8e63ee85f5bafb2fb57aa0b7e981c2cfad48f%2F164_210_5092_3056%2F5092.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ministry%20of%20Justice%20to%20close%2086%20courts%20in%20England%20and%20Wales&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gj3k%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ministry+of+Justice+to+close+86+courts+in+England+and+Wales&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gj3k%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdce8e63ee85f5bafb2fb57aa0b7e981c2cfad48f%2F164_210_5092_3056%2F5092.jpg>
 The demise of Holyhead magistrates court on Anglesey will mean defendants and 
witnesses have to travel to Caernarfon. Photograph: Alamy 
Last year, 48% of all courts and tribunals were empty for at least half their 
available hearing time, according to the MoJ. On average, the 86 courts due to 
close had been used for just over a third of their available hearing time – 
equivalent to less than two days a week.

There has been widespread opposition to the latest review. Responding to the 
announcement, Malcolm Richardson, the national chairman of theMagistrates 
Association <https://magistrates-association.org.uk/>, said: “The accessibility 
of local justice is the prime concern of our members, therefore such 
wide-ranging closures are worrying. Simple things like getting to and from 
court can have huge consequences for victims, witnesses, defendants and 
magistrates alike.


“We hope the Ministry of Justice will work with magistrates to focus its 
forward planning on coping with the additional pressures these closures will 
bring.”

 Jo Edwards, the chair of family law organisation Resolution 
<http://www.resolution.org.uk/>, said: “This is devastating news for thousands 
of separating families. Parents and children need to be able to access the 
justice system. That is why it’s disappointing to see the Ministry of Justice 
closing so many family courts across the country.

 “Those affected the most by these closures will be vulnerable people such as 
victims of domestic abuse, young people and those who rely on public transport 
to get around.

Related: Top UK judges denounce 'dangerous' increase in court fees 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jan/26/top-uk-judges-denounce-dangerous-increase-in-court-fees>

 “Resolution members, and many other organisations, have presented the 
government with local expertise and local knowledge which shows that their 
assessment of the true impact on people using the courts is patchy at best. For 
example, they haven’t presented any analysis of the impact on remaining courts.

“Instead of this simplistic, ill thought through exercise, ministers should be 
coming forward with detailed plans for modernising family courts. While we 
welcome the additional investment in remaining courts that the government has 
promised, this work needs to be done as a matter of urgency if the impact of 
these closures is to be mitigated.

 “Unfortunately, parents and children will now be faced with closures at a 
time when the system is already struggling due to a devastating combination of 
funding cuts, fewer judges and an increase in the number of people representing 
themselves in the family court.”

 Jonathan Smithers, the president of the Law Society 
<https://www.lawsociety.org.uk/>, said: “We are disappointed that the 
government is pressing ahead with the closure of so many courts. The majority 
of these closures will make it more difficult for a significant number of 
people to get to court, disproportionately affecting people living in rural 
areas, those with disabilities and lower-income families.

 “Combined with increases in court fees 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jan/26/top-uk-judges-denounce-dangerous-increase-in-court-fees>
 and reductions in eligibility for legal aid, many of the closures will serve 
to deepen the inequalities in the justice system between those who can and 
cannot afford to pay.”
