
German politicians have criticised the former London mayor Boris Johnson for 
claiming the EU has the same goal as Hitler 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/16/tories-divided-by-boris-johnsons-eu-hitler-comparison>
 in trying to create a political superstate.

“Anyone who allows himself to stoop to such polemics shows that they are 
running out of proper arguments”, said Jürgen Hardt, the foreign affairs 
spokesman for Angela Merkel’s Christian Democrats. “If we look at the cultural 
life and the way business is done on the continent, it is clear thatEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> has never been more British 
than it is now. We want things to remain that way – with Britain inside the 
EU,” Hardt said.

Related: German readers say Johnson's EU-Hitler comments are just 'British 
hysteria' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/16/boris-johnson-silly-things-said-by-a-silly-man-germans-on-eu-hitler-comparison>

Johnson’s remark that the EU was an attempt to recreate Hitler’s and 
Napoleon’s aims of unifying Europe “by different methods” was widely reported 
in German media on Monday.

In an interview with the Sunday Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/05/14/boris-johnson-the-eu-wants-a-superstate-just-as-hitler-did/>
, Johnson, seen as the de facto leader of the leave campaign, said the past 
2,000 years of European history had been dominated by doomed attempts to unify 
the continent under a single government to recreate the “golden age” of the 
Romans.

“Napoleon, Hitler, various people tried this out, and it ends tragically. The 
EU is an attempt to do this by different methods,” he said.

Axel Schäfer, European affairs spokesman for the Social Democratic party 
(SPD), said: “Like many other politicians inGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> I am speechless at what stupidity 
nationalism can trigger in seemingly intelligent people.

“The European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> is a club which 28 
member states have joined voluntarily, not by force, and which is made up of 
them, and not of Brussels. It is also a club in which Britain plays a leading 
role, and which would be unimaginable without British leadership.”

Schäfer told the Guardian he was sad to see Johnson joining “a group of 
anti-European nationalists made up of Hungary’s prime minister, Viktor Orbán, 
and Front National leader Marine Le Pen”.

“Anyone who makes such comparisons shows that they have run out of proper 
arguments,” he added.

Related: Boris Johnson has pressed the big red button marked ‘Hitler’. Watch 
out | Matthew d’Ancona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/15/boris-johnson-hitler-tory>

Johnson’s comments came before of a series of meetings between British and 
German politicians in London this week.

Both Hardt and Thomas Oppermann, the leader of the SPD’s parliamentary 
faction, will be meeting members of the leave and remain camps to discuss the 
consequences of a British vote to leave the EU. Hardt said there were no plans 
to meet Johnson.

So far, German politicians have been reluctant to comment in public on the 
referendum. But the Guardian has learned that Oppermann will present British 
MPs and diplomats with a copy of the winner of a short story competition that 
sends a warning about the consequences of Brexit.

The story, by 18-year-old student Stefan Endewald, is set in the year 2030. 
Britain asks Germany and France to be readmitted to the EU only 14 years after 
voting to leave, proposing a so-called “Brintro”. “They have finally noticed 
that we no longer need them as urgently as they need us,” the narrator remarks.
