



Can Australians really do anything to help with the crisis?


Globally, 60 million people were recorded as being displaced by mid-2015: this 
is the largest number of displacements since the Second World War. People may 
think this number is so huge and overwhelming and that there is nothing they 
can do to help. The message is you can. We have helped many, many thousands of 
people. I want Australians to understand they can make a positive difference 
and not be overwhelmed.

At this time we also think about the courage and resilience of refugees. 
Whether they are a rape survivor, or an 80-year-old woman on a three-week 
journey to get across a border, or a disabled man in a wheelchair thrown on the 
back of a truck to make the journey to safety. You can be anybody and be a 
refugee - it’s not about poverty. Our support can absolutely be transforming 
for people.

What are some of the most affecting experiences from your work in the field?
 One of my first field missions was to Afghanistan in 2002, six months after 
the Taliban had left. I visited a site called “The Shoe Factory”. This was a 
bombed-out factory in Kabul where many poor families were living. There was one 
woman called Miriam who was typical of lots of the women there. Her husband had 
been killed and she was now responsible for her family.

When I met her, she had just been to the market and had sold her leather shoes 
to get food for her children. That was everything she had. There was no other 
support other than what UNHCR was providing. If we didn’t step in she would 
have had nothing.

Another time in Jordan I was with the border patrol monitoring refugee 
movements from Syria across the 7km of no-man’s land into the country. I saw 
one family coming over with a little girl struggling on crutches. She had 
hobbled across and had two cloth bags around her neck - carrying her only 
possessions. I realised I was witnessing literally the moment this girl became 
a refugee.

One moment you are a citizen and the next you are without the protection of 
your country. Once you cross that border you are totally reliant on the host 
country or humanitarian organisations.

What are the recurring themes when working with displaced peoples from around 
the world?
While every refugee’s story is different, there are also common themes. 
Conflict is the biggest driver of displacement and it is the woman and children 
who are the most vulnerable. There is often the absence of men and boys in the 
camps because they have been killed or are off protecting the homeland.

In one mission to Gambella in Ethiopia, seeing thousands of people fleeing 
from South Sudan, I was again reminded of the vulnerability of people forced to 
flee their home and country but also their resilience and courage in facing the 
huge challenges of displacement.

What can Australians do to help support and shape the lives of refugees? 
Since we were established, Australians have donated more than $160 million for 
UNHCR’s humanitarian needs. Although we get some corporate support, it’s 
largely individual Australians who have generously supported our fundraising. A 
typical donation is around $30 a month, which is a relatively modest but 
regular amount, which means that we have a predictable and sustainable 
fundraising base.

This means that Australian donors can help UNHCR to be a first responder to 
emergencies. This was the case in the Nepal earthquake emergency, where UNHCR 
was one of the first operational agencies on the ground delivering aid.

UNHCR is also leading operations with Australian support across many other 
humanitarian emergencies caused by conflict and war.

What are some of the other ways the funding helps?
The majority of our funding goes to UNHCR emergency operations on the ground 
with the rest allocated to targeted projects that we identify with UNHCR to 
help improve quality of life in the camps. These projects generally wouldn’t go 
ahead without Australian support, so we play a crucial role.

One example is a reproductive health program for Rohingya refugees in Myanmar 
we set up several years ago. This was the first ever aid project of its kind 
supporting Rohingya refugees.

We also set up a computer technical centre in a deep field location on the 
border of the Democratic Republic of Congo and Uganda. This came about after 
asking the community leaders in the Nakivale refugee camp what their priorities 
were. Of the 50,000 refugees in Nakivale camp at the time, half were under 18 
and they wanted education, computer skills and to be connected to the outside 
world. The project is now self-sustaining. Refugees pay a small fee to use 
computers in the internet café. This money is then used to pay refugee 
trainers, teaching computer skills in the adjoining computer lab.

Yasmine, a young Somalian refugee who was employed as a trainer, said of the 
internet connections: “It makes me feel like I’m more than a refugee.” On 
Facebook and Twitter she is on an equal footing to everyone else.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t7b6%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t7b6%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b2e88fae699961fbcfb498fbfe71b39f3ba86be%2F0_0_1920_1153%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tens%20of%20millions%20of%20displaced%20people%20globally%20need%20Australia%E2%80%99s%20help&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t7b6%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tens+of+millions+of+displaced+people+globally+need+Australia%E2%80%99s+help&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t7b6%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b2e88fae699961fbcfb498fbfe71b39f3ba86be%2F0_0_1920_1153%2F1920.jpg>
 There are 60 million displaced people globally, which is the largest number of 
displacements since the Second World War. Photograph: Howard Davies/CORBIS 
You trained as a lawyer and worked as a diplomat and then in the union 
movement before setting up Australia for UNHCR. What inspired you to get 
involved in your current work and what keeps you going?
I think this is the world’s best job. First, I work in the philanthropic space 
which puts you in touch with the best qualities of people. We see people 
helping somebody thousands of miles away who they will never meet and that is 
inspirational.

Second, I think the plight of refugees is one of the most compelling 
humanitarian causes of the twenty-first century. For me to have a role in that, 
changing lives and helping people in a really positive way is an important part 
of why I stay here.

What is your biggest achievement with the organisation?
Building Australia for UNHCR from a small, one room office into an 
organisation supported by hundreds of thousands of Australians, in turn 
supporting millions of refugees worldwide. I am very proud we are the 19th 
largest donor to UNHCR overall, ahead of many governments and foundations. This 
is all thanks to individual Australians.

When I visit refugees in camps they are incredibly welcoming when they meet me 
and, perhaps surprisingly, optimistic about their future. I think this is 
because they see that they are getting support and they have not been 
forgotten. It’s important to fuel that optimism. And there are so many examples 
of refugees who have done amazing things to rebuild their lives, either when 
they have been able to return home or settled in new countries like Australia.

Many of our fundraising staff are refugees themselves. They are wonderful 
advocates because often they are telling their own story and how UNHCR helped 
them. It’s probably the best testament we could have.

What is the best way for concerned Australians to get involved and help?
Australia is such a fortunate country. We have such opportunity and I believe 
we have an obligation to share that as part of being a good global citizen. If 
we have the capacity to help, that is something we should do. Donating to 
Australia for UNHCR is one of those ways.



