
The Labour leadership has drafted in Ken Livingstone 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/livingstone>, the former London mayor who 
is a strong opponent of the Trident nuclear weapons programme, to help oversee 
the party’s defence review.

As Jeremy Corbyn <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> 
intensifies his efforts to drop Labour’s support for Trident, Livingstone has 
been appointed to serve alongside the shadow defence secretary, Maria Eagle, as 
a co-convenor of the party’s defence review.

 Eagle supports Trident and infuriated the Labour leader recently when she 
backed Gen Sir Nicholas Houghton, the chief of the defence staff, afterhe 
questioned the Labour leader’s statement 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/08/rmed-forces-chief-jeremy-corbyn-defence-trident>
 that he would never endorse the use of Trident.

Livingstone will co-convene the defence review in his capacity as a member of 
Labour’s national executive committee. Corbyn had hoped to take steps towards 
dropping Labour’s support forTrident <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/trident> at 
this year’s Labour conference.


A bid to hold a vote on whether to support the renewal of Trident failed after 
Corbyn could not win the support of the major trade unions. Corbyn is hoping 
that the defence review will lead to a change of policy at Labour’s national 
policy forum. The leadership believes the appointment of Livingstone will 
create a balanced ticket with Eagle in the hope of finding common ground on 
Trident.

A source close to Eagle: “Maria and Ken are co-covening the review and Maria 
will still be leading it as was outlined by Jeremy at conference. Trident will 
be just one of many issues the review will look at; there isn’t a separate 
review.”

Labour may face an earlier challenge on Trident. The SNP is planning to hold a 
Commons vote on Trident next week. Labour is still officially in favour of 
Trident, raising the prospect that frontbenchers could vote in different ways. 
The Labour leadership is understood to be pressing forLabour 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> MPs to abstain on the grounds that 
the party’s policy is under review and the real vote on Trident will come in 
the “maingate” decision next year.

Livingstone threw his weight behind Corbyn on Tuesday when he supported his 
call for any extension of RAF airstrikes against Islamic State into Syria to be 
agreed by the UN. Livingstone told the PM programme on BBC Radio 4: “Britain 
and America are so discredited because of our record in Afghanistan and Iraq. 
This has got to be a UN-led coalition. We need to bring on board countries like 
China, Nigeria, Brazil. It can’t just be seen as Britain and America 
interfering in the Middle East again.”

Asked whether he would support the strikes if a UN security council resolution 
were agreed, Livingstone said: “Of course, because Isis is an absolutely 
horrendous organisation. It’s not just the threat they pose to us here in 
London, but it is the appalling regime they inflict on people living in Syria 
and Iraq, beheading them, raping their women. They should be defeated, they 
should be overthrown. But it has got to be a UN-led coalition. It can’t just be 
the west interfering again.”

Tensions within the Labour party have burst into the open after a succession 
of MPs, including two frontbenchers,openly challenged Corbyn’s authority 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/17/jeremy-corbyn-labour-isis-momentum-shoot-to-kill>
 in the House of Commons over his response to theIslamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> threat.
