
My first glimpse of Clare Short’s face across the hotel lobby sparks a rush of 
the sort of affection ordinarily reserved for a much-loved, long-lost aunt. It 
catches me by surprise, and makes no sense, for this is only the second time we 
have met. The first was in the spring of 2010, when Short was preparingto stand 
down from parliament after 27 years 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/feb/06/clare-short-iraq-chilcot-inquiry>
. For many women of my generation, she had always been a political hero, and I 
remember finding it hard to picture Westminster without her.

Related: 'Something profound has been lost' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/feb/06/clare-short-iraq-chilcot-inquiry>

And then it was as if she simply vanished. For the former member for 
Birmingham Ladywood, there has been no political afterlife as Lady Short or as 
a media pundit, and when I ask which colleagues she has remained close to, she 
says lightly: “Oh, I haven’t kept in touch with people particularly, nor they 
[with] me.” Surely there must be the occasional call for a chat with an old 
political friend? “No, I’ve just told you. Never.” Save “the odd meeting”, she 
hasn’t even returned to the building where she spent more than quarter of a 
century. “I don’t particularly like going back. There’s no point in hanging 
around, like a spectator.” All political careers, she smiles ruefully, end in 
failure. Would she include hers? “Well, yes.”

As secretary of state for international development, Short had been one of the 
surprise success stories of the 1997 New Labour government. If she had resigned 
in protest before the 2003 invasion of Iraq, her popularity might have endured 
to this day. But having announced that she would resign, Short allowed Tony 
Blair to seduce her with false promises of a dazzling UN-led reconstruction 
plan for postwarIraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq>, and she changed 
her mind. She says the gravity of the situation eclipsed any personal 
considerations of reputational damage, but I suspect the vitriol she incurred 
was a shock from which she has never fully recovered.

“I know I brought loads of flak on myself. There was some kind of twist or 
spin that I was being very arrogant, that I thought only I could make [the 
reconstruction plan] work. And that’s not true. But I think I respect myself 
for making that decision, because if it had worked, things would have been 
massively better.” It didn’t, of course, and two months latershe walked out of 
office <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2003/may/12/labour.voluntarysector>
. If Iraq was the great tragedy of Blair’s career, it was also, Short concedes, 
the tragedy of hers. “But it’s an ongoing tragedy for lots of people who are 
dead, and a country that’s let down. So compared to the enormity of that, Blair 
or me are nothing.”

Except that both are about to be pitched back into the spotlight one more 
time. Early next month, John Chilcotwill finally publish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/09/chilcot-report-iraq-war-inquiry-published-6-july>
 his report on Britain’s role in the invasion of Iraq. For years, the war’s 
critics have been impatient for Chilcot’s conclusions, but if any assume that 
Short shares their enthusiasm, they are mistaken. “I don’t think anyone’s even 
going to read it,” she scoffs witheringly. “Except perhaps historians. Do you 
know, it’s longer than all the Harry Potter books put together?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ytj5%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ytj5%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c08f5d16fca47a4b434e8d724a3bc460663c321%2F0_0_1481_1173%2F1481.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clare%20Short%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20Chilcot%20report%20is%20longer%20than%20the%20Harry%20Potter%20books%20put%20together%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ytj5%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clare+Short%3A+%E2%80%98The+Chilcot+report+is+longer+than+the+Harry+Potter+books+put+together%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ytj5%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c08f5d16fca47a4b434e8d724a3bc460663c321%2F0_0_1481_1173%2F1481.jpg>
 Members of Labour’s shadow cabinet in 1996, the year before New Labour were 
elected: (left to right) Gordon Brown, Robin Cook, Clare Short, Tessa Jowell, 
Tony Blair, Mo Mowlam and John Prescott. Photograph: Sean Dempsey/Empics Sports 
Photo Agency 
Short’s brusque dismissal of the Chilcot report can be interpreted in two 
ways. Like everyone else criticised by the inquiry’s interviewees, Short was 
shown extracts relevant to herself. Her critique can therefore be read as a 
defensive attempt at rebuttal – or as the verdict of someone who knows what she 
is talking about.

“I thought,” she says of the extracts she read, “it was terrible. It was 
deeply underwhelming, and not well informed. It had lost the plot on what it 
was meant to do. It was going over meeting after meeting, and second-guessing 
what I or someone else should have said at that meeting. The person who had 
written it – well, I don’t believe this is John Chilcot, because he is a very 
bright guy.

“What the report should have been,” she argues, “is an account of what was 
wrong with the decision-making process, and of what needs to be changed in the 
British constitutional arrangement, so that such things can’t happen again. 
Because actually, the same thing happened in Suez. The informality in the 
British constitution means that it can be captured and misused, so I think 
that’s what the report should have been about. I think the whole focus should 
be on what’s to be done so this can never happen again.”

The report Short had hoped for, but does not expect, would call for “the whole 
constitutional status of the attorney general to be changed. It should cease to 
be [an] appointment of the prime minister, and member of the government, 
because if the prime minister appoints his mate to go in the Lords and then be 
the attorney general, he’s got a lot of capacity to lean on him, and that’s not 
right. The House of Commons should have its own legal ability to take legal 
opinions on international law when war is contemplated.”

Similarly, she argues, no prime minister should be at liberty to bypass 
cabinet by confining intelligence and influence to a favoured inner circle. 
“There should be some strict and stern recommendations that mean such 
informality can’t be the way of making decisions in the future.”

If the “gossip” she has heard is accurate, Chilcot’s report will blame many 
different parties – not just government ministers or legal advisers, but civil 
servants, army commanders, intelligence officers. “And if you’re blaming 
everyone, you’re not really holding anyone to account.” But if she believes 
Blair should betried for war crimes in the Hague 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/aug/05/tony-blair-could-face-trial-illegal-iraq-war-jeremy-corbyn>
, she won’t say.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ytj5%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ytj5%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F062deb610ab7e04c39b27da56702e33ac88ebde3%2F0_0_2000_1270%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clare%20Short%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20Chilcot%20report%20is%20longer%20than%20the%20Harry%20Potter%20books%20put%20together%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ytj5%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clare+Short%3A+%E2%80%98The+Chilcot+report+is+longer+than+the+Harry+Potter+books+put+together%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ytj5%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F062deb610ab7e04c39b27da56702e33ac88ebde3%2F0_0_2000_1270%2F2000.jpg>
 The then international development secretary Clare Short with prime minister 
Tony Blair in 2002, a year before the invasion of Iraq. Photograph: Stefan 
Rousseau/Empics Sports Photo Agency 
“Well, it’s not going to happen. I know a lot of people keep calling for him 
to be taken to the international criminal courts, but because of the provisions 
of the international courts, that’s not going to happen.” Does she think it 
should? “I think if we lived in a world where international law was enforced, 
it would be a better world. But we don’t.” In that better world, would Blair be 
indicted? “Well, in that world he wouldn’t have done it, would he? That’s the 
point. You’re trying to say that I would like him to go to the Hague, and I’m 
not saying that, because it’s completely out of the question. We don’t live in 
a world where we’ve got that kind of international criminal accountability, and 
if we did, he wouldn’t have done it.”

Short is a curious mixture of candour and caution. In 2006, she resigned the 
Labour whip <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2006/oct/20/labour.clareshort>
, serving out her final years on opposition benches as an independent MP. Not 
once has she contemplated rejoining, and she says she never will. Yet whereas 
she can still be oddly cagey over a question as harmless as: “If she had a 
daughter, would she recommend a parliamentary career to her?”, on far more 
contentious subjects she can be dauntlessly frank.

The investigation Jeremy Corbyn has commissioned into antisemitism within 
Labour 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/29/jeremy-corbyn-sets-up-inquiry-into-labour-antisemitism-claims>
 will find absolutely nothing to corroborate the charge, Short states 
emphatically. “There’s lots of good writing by lots of organisations, including 
Jewish organisations, saying what a load of nonsense it is. Just allegations 
and smearing. There is not a current of antisemitism. I’ve lived girl and woman 
inside and around the Labour party, and the people who are critical of Israel’s 
policy – and of course, lots of Jews are part of that movement of criticism – 
don’t say ‘Jews are horrible.’”

The memory of arriving in Leeds as an undergraduate and hearing “a drunken man 
at the bus stop singing a song about ‘Hitler was right’” still haunts her. “So, 
I’m not saying antisemitism doesn’t exist. But I’m saying, no, I do not believe 
there is a problem with antisemitism in the Labour party.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ytj5%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ytj5%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed5211dbaa323a304de6b2aeb5fc572d6985e4fe%2F0_0_1200_1767%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clare%20Short%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20Chilcot%20report%20is%20longer%20than%20the%20Harry%20Potter%20books%20put%20together%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ytj5%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clare+Short%3A+%E2%80%98The+Chilcot+report+is+longer+than+the+Harry+Potter+books+put+together%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ytj5%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed5211dbaa323a304de6b2aeb5fc572d6985e4fe%2F0_0_1200_1767%2F1200.jpg>
 Tony Blair and Clare Short during the debate on Iraq on 18 March 2003 that 
preceded the votes leading to parliamentary approval for the war. Photograph: PA
“It’s not to say,” she goes on, “that there might not be people who’ve said 
antisemitic things. I haven’t heard them, but I find it believable that they 
clumsily go from their critique of Israeli policy to saying things that are 
antisemitic. But there isn’t a big climate of antisemitism, there isn’t. It’s 
just not true.”

Unlike most Labour members currently accused of antisemitism, Short has never 
described herself as an anti-Zionist. Despite this, she says: “Anyone who is 
persistently loyal to the Palestinian cause and critical of Israeli policy has 
been smeared as an antisemite. That’s been going on for a long time. I mean, 
they did it to me years ago. And it culminated and became a public issue just 
before the [London] mayoral election, interestingly – and now it’s all gone 
quiet.”

She did wince at “clumsy Ken” Livingstone’s comments about Hitler and Zionism 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/14/ken-livingstone-i-didnt-say-hitler-was-a-zionist>
 days before the mayoral election, but insists the allegation of Labour 
antisemitism was an orchestrated lie. “I’m certain it was organised. I mean, 
it’s a matter of record that Israel is very worried about the boycotts, 
disinvestment and sanctions, and has organisations that try to change opinion. 
These people use antisemitism as a smear to prevent a fair critique of Israeli 
policy.”

Were she still an MP, Short says she would be happy to serve in Corbyn’s 
shadow cabinet, and thinks the parliamentary Labour party has “behaved 
disgracefully”, with senior MPs flouncing off to the backbenches. A Labour 
majority at the next election is out of the question – “because 40 seats were 
lost in Scotland, and even if the archangel Gabriel was the leader, they bloody 
cannot win” – but the Tories could, nonetheless, lose. In a coalition with the 
Scots and Welsh nationalists, the Greens and the Lib Dems, she claims she can 
see Corbyn in No 10. “Not in the Blair/Cameron sort of image of a prime 
minister, but more like Harold Wilson.”

Even now, Short still seems to be an indomitable idealist. Although “not a 
fan” of Hillary Clinton – “Well, she’s a neo-con really, isn’t she?” – she 
simply cannot believe the US would elect Donald Trump. Nor can she see how we 
could conceivably vote to leave the EU next week. “I have this intuition that 
it’s a bit like the 1992 election, when all the polls said Labour was going to 
win.” Since leaving Westminster, Short has done unglamorous work chairing an 
organisation promoting more accountable extraction of natural resources, and 
another working with urbanisation and slums.

When I call her two days after we meet, she has just got home on the Eurostar 
from Brussels, and hasn’t heard thenews about Jo Cox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/live/2016/jun/17/jo-cox-death-police-labour-mp-latest-updates>
. She absorbs my account in shocked silence, but is alert to the mention of 
mental illness. “This is just awful. I’m so sorry. But we’ve got this pattern, 
haven’t we? Very unstable, lone-wolfy kind of people think it makes them big 
and important [to attach their grievance to a cause]. But in Orlando it looks 
like, really, the man was mentally unstable and screwed up about his sexuality. 
Yet everyone reads everything as big politics, and we are in a hysterical time.”

When the IRA was bombing Britain, she reflects, everyone made a point of 
remaining calm – “because we knew they wanted us to get hysterical. But then 
you get Charlie Hebdo, and all the leaders of the world have to go to Paris. 
It’s the wrong response, just like the war on terror was the wrong response.”

When she thinks back to the eve of the Iraq war, and recalls her worst fears, 
did she picture anything like the world as it is today? “No. I knew it would be 
bad and shameful. I thought it would bring terrible suffering to the people of 
Iraq, and be terrible for Britain. But I didn’t see it spreading all over the 
Middle East. I didn’t see this. No, I didn’t know how bad it would be.”
