
Spin and slant are hardly unknown in newspapers, but the front page of 
Wednesday’s Sun subjected the truth to such aggressive editing as to give a 
completely upside-down impression of what was going on in financial markets.

A day after the newspaper’s front page editorial, beseeching voters to 
“BeLEAVE in Britain”, the tabloid put together a bizarre pastiche involving 
Remain’s dwindling poll lead, “nasty Euro moths” and what a large sub-headline 
described as a “Brexit Rocket Boost to Shares”. What makes this last item the 
stand-out in this bizarre brew is that the big financial story overnight had 
been the£30bn wiped off the FTSE on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/14/ftse-100-three-month-low-brexit-fears-shares-sterling>
, which was widely thought to be associated with the surging position of the 
leave camp in the latest polls.

The “rocket-boost” claim was repeated and attributed to “analysis” in the text 
of the story on the front page, but only readers who pressed on to the bottom 
of the second column of the story on the second page got any indication of what 
this claim was based on,a Deutsche Bank research note 
<https://next.ft.com/content/cc1c1d9c-3c10-32ad-afac-a77a1971b246> which 
observed that European shares were set to tank by around 10% in the event of 
Britain voting leave, but also suggested that the slide in UK shares could be 
somewhat smaller, leading to a relative over-performance of around 5%.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y9dm%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y9dm%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3027e05f96b895f1f4214dc71f02031ee1a4626%2F5_9_794_1008%2F794.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sun's%20'Brexit%20boost%20to%20shares'%20front%20page%20is%20a%20topsy-turvy%20take%20on%20the%20truth&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y9dm%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sun%27s+%27Brexit+boost+to+shares%27+front+page+is+a+topsy-turvy+take+on+the+truth&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y9dm%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3027e05f96b895f1f4214dc71f02031ee1a4626%2F5_9_794_1008%2F794.jpg>
 Photograph: Clipshare 
The “rocket booster” then turns out to be not an increase, but a smaller 
decline than that witnessed elsewhere. And even that is a highly speculative 
suggestion. To highlight this figure after a trading session when the the 
London markets had been in freefall is a little bit like splashing on somebody 
predicting that Manchester United might win the league next year, the evening 
after they had suffered a five-nil defeat. The basis for Deutsche Bank’s 
prediction, by the way, was that Brexit would trigger such a run on the pound 
that UK exports would get cheaper, making them easier to sell.

Dylan Sharp, head of PR at The Sun <http://www.theguardian.com/media/sun>, 
suggested on Twitter that those “being snotty” about the Sun’s “rocket booster” 
claim should “blame Deutsche Bank”. He added that the full original news report 
had included some details of Tuesday’s rout in shares. It did indeed. But in 
the print edition inspected by the Guardian this information did not make it 
into the front-page story.
