
This fiery little salad is one of Thailand’s best known culinary exports 
(despite persistent rumours that it migrated over the border from Laos 
relatively recently) – and justly so. It’s at once addictively hot and 
refreshingly crunchy; intensely savoury and insanely sour – in short, the 
flavours of south-east Asia on a plate, and the only salad to make it into the 
(extremely subjective) list of “the world’s 50 most delicious foods 
<http://travel.cnn.com/explorations/eat/worlds-50-most-delicious-foods-067535>” 
a few years ago. While fans of Niçoise, caesar and tabbouleh may quibble with 
that particular accolade, I suspect they wouldn’t argue with its inclusion on 
the list – especially in the sticky heat of a Thai July, when som tam’s 
remarkable cooling properties come into their own. One to bear in mind if the 
British summer ever puts in a reappearance.

The papaya


Interestingly, Leela Punyaratabandhu, author of the excellent She Simmers blog 
<http://shesimmers.com/2010/06/som-tam-tutorial-how-to-make-thai-green.html>, 
explains in her book Simple Thai Food that the name som tam essentially means a 
salad made in a mortar, from an old dialect word for sour, and the verb “to 
pound” – so “though green papaya is the most popular main ingredient … it is by 
no means the definitive ingredient”.

Since moving to the US, she says, she has experimented with many different 
vegetables and fruits, including carrots, cabbage (asused by Allegra McEvedy 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2008/feb/20/recipe.foodanddrink>), 
radishes, turnips, corn and “my current favourite … som tam made with grated 
raw rutabaga [swede] and raw golden and candy-striped beets”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4aq5p%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4aq5p%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F22%2F1437564820484%2Facd6056c-388c-492f-9ef5-0d17675c9f06-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20som%20tam&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4aq5p%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+som+tam&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4aq5p%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F22%2F1437564820484%2Facd6056c-388c-492f-9ef5-0d17675c9f06-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Leela Punyaratabandhu experiments with many vegetables and fruits for her som 
tam. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
McEvedy who also suggests substituting cucumber in the absence of green 
papaya, perspicaciously observes that if you can’t get it, “don’t worry, it’s 
all about the dressing”. This is certainly true; green papaya has much more in 
common with the blandly flavoured cucumber than the sour green mango, for 
example – its role here is to provide crunch, which means that it is easily 
replaced by a deseeded cucumber or (better from a textural point of view, I 
think) courgette, kohlrabi or other root vegetable, though as Punyaratabandhu 
gently points out, it’s wise to “know what som tam is like before you start 
deconstructing it”.

David Thompson writes in Thai Street Food 
<http://travelling-foodies.com/2013/11/11/som-tam/> that the traditional way of 
preparing the papaya is “to hold it in one hand while it is cut and shredded 
vigorously with a large sharp knife held in the other hand. Every so often the 
knife is used to pare away the papaya, yielding a somewhat coarse, uneven 
shred”. My large sharp knife skills are rusty, however, so I decide to opt for 
the more popular domestic option, a grater, which he acknowledges is “easier 
and faster” though “the uniform cut means the papaya loses some of its rustic 
appeal”.

Rustic appeal be damned – I’m more concerned by the fact that, just as 
Punyaratabandhu warns readers, my box grater yields “a lacklustre result, limp, 
bruised strands that are much too short”. A julienne peeler proves a much 
better tool for the job, though I also have a go at hand-cutting the fruit for
the Hairy Bikers recipe 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/foodanddrink/recipes/10633141/Hairy-Bikers-Thai-green-papaya-salad-som-tum-recipe.htm>
, which, though time-consuming, gives pretty decent strands too. As (God help 
me) would a spiraliser, I imagine.

The other salad ingredients

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4aq5p%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4aq5p%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F22%2F1437564650865%2Ff35c5615-a93f-482f-93c9-b590efa31cd1-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20som%20tam&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4aq5p%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+som+tam&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4aq5p%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F22%2F1437564650865%2Ff35c5615-a93f-482f-93c9-b590efa31cd1-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Molly Wizenberg’s som tam features blanched beans. Photograph: Felicity Cloake 
for the Guardian 
Most recipes add snake (AKA yardlong) beans to the papaya. These can be easily 
found in Asian grocers, though the French beans suggested as an alternative by 
many recipes work in much the same way – their function is to supply extra 
crunch, so blanching them,as Molly Wizenberg suggests 
<http://www.bonappetit.com/recipe/thai-green-papaya-salad>, seems the wrong way 
to go.

Tomatoes are the other constant, and again, for textural purposes I prefer the 
cherry variety; the larger ones I try in therecipe from Jean-Pierre Gabriel’s 
Thailand 
<http://www.smithsonianmag.com/arts-culture/these-photos-and-recipes-authentic-thai-food-will-make-you-drool-curry-180951893/?no-ist>
 go too mushy in the mortar.

Wizenberg also adds thinly sliced spring onions, which I don’t think is 
necessary with so much garlic in the dressing. Which brings us on to …

Dressings and flavourings

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4aq5p%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4aq5p%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F22%2F1437565190979%2F9c18c03a-baf6-4a07-8640-a09a64136e91-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20som%20tam&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4aq5p%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+som+tam&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4aq5p%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F22%2F1437565190979%2F9c18c03a-baf6-4a07-8640-a09a64136e91-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Allegra McEvedy’s som tam adds soy sauce. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the 
Guardian 
Every recipe I try contains garlic, chilli, fish sauce, lime juice and dried 
shrimp – which fits with Thompson’s direction that som tam “should taste sweet, 
sour, hot and salty”. The chillies, which should be the incendiary little 
bird’s eyes rather than the big red milder sort suggested by McEvedy, must be 
sharp enough to pack a punch; the Bikers’ one between four is not sufficient, 
while Gabriel’s three between two makes my heart do funny things. Only you know 
how many you’ll need to make your eyes water while your tongue begs for more, 
but Thompson also decrees they should be added late in the day, and barely 
crushed, rather than pounded into fiery smithereens as in some of the other 
recipes; observing the rule that “the more they are pounded, the hotter the 
dish – and how hot you want it is up to you”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4aq5p%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4aq5p%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F22%2F1437565312280%2F6f4d138f-1ee7-418b-ac5b-43d92edfa2c4-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20som%20tam&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4aq5p%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+som+tam&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4aq5p%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F22%2F1437565312280%2F6f4d138f-1ee7-418b-ac5b-43d92edfa2c4-2060x1236.jpeg>
 David Thompson’s som tam: careful pounding those chillies. Photograph: 
Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Some recipes use tamarind water as well as lime juice – you can leave it out 
if you prefer, but I like the slightly more complex sweet and sour flavour it 
brings to the dressing. I would, however, omit the soy sauce McEvedy and the 
Bikers use for reasons best known to themselves – though it is common in modern 
Thai cooking, it doesn’t taste right here to me, and the same goes for the 
Bikers’ grated ginger.

Better to add sweetness in the form of palm sugar, if you can’t find it; 
Punyaratabandhu’s suggested substitution, soft light brown sugar, has a 
slightly similar caramelised flavour, and McEvedy’s honey will do at a pinch. 
As long as there’s something to balance out the saltiness of the fish sauce and 
shrimp, and the sourness of the lime and tamarind.

Those dried shrimp should be rinsed before use to slightly soften them, and, I 
find, they have more flavour if,like chef Andy Ricker 
<http://www.templeofthai.com/recipes/pok-pok-papaya-salad>, you dry fry them 
before adding them to the mortar. The same goes for the peanuts – and though I 
do enjoy Wizenberg’s salted ones, the traditional plain variety are a happier 
fit with the saltiness of the fish sauce.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4aq5p%2Fsfb%23img-6&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4aq5p%2Fsfb%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F22%2F1437565506631%2F25c99294-eca3-4cc6-9460-693067eb42a5-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20som%20tam&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4aq5p%2Fstw%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+som+tam&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4aq5p%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F22%2F1437565506631%2F25c99294-eca3-4cc6-9460-693067eb42a5-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Hairy Bikers pile on the herbs for their som tam. Photograph: Felicity 
Cloake for the Guardian 
Wizenberg and the Bikers, who tie neck-and-neck for the title of this week’s 
mavericks, both stick fistfuls of fresh herbs in their salads; coriander in the 
case of the former, mint and Thai basil for the latter. I’m never displeased to 
find coriander, in particular, on my plate (the mint and basil are too strong), 
but its soapy flavour does change the flavour of the salad quite considerably, 
so I can’t in all conscience include it in the perfect recipe.

The method


As the name suggests, this is a dish that requires a pestle and mortar or 
similar. In Thailand, they would use a clay version but a stone one is fine, as 
long as you are careful not to pound the ingredients too hard – the vegetables 
should be bruised, rather than crushed. (Wizenberg does not suggest using any 
kind of pestle and mortar, but as we’ve already seen, she’s very much ploughing 
her own furrow with this recipe.)

Extras 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4aq5p%2Fsfb%23img-7&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4aq5p%2Fsfb%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F22%2F1437564995843%2F7e6e5ec3-d1b8-4001-be13-701716cd8e46-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20som%20tam&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4aq5p%2Fstw%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+som+tam&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4aq5p%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F22%2F1437564995843%2F7e6e5ec3-d1b8-4001-be13-701716cd8e46-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Jean-Pierre Gabriel’s som tam – with chicken. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for 
the Guardian 
McEvedy suggests adding brown shrimp, which works very nicely indeed if you’d 
like to make it a more substantial dish, and Gabriel advises serving it with 
grilled chicken, which is also a pleasing combination. Sticky rice is a must, 
however.

The perfect sam tom


Serves 4

2 tbsp dried shrimp, rinsed

3 tbsp roasted peanuts

2 garlic cloves

Pinch of coarse salt

2-6 whole bird’s eye chillis, depending on degree of bravery

3 snake beans or 12 French beans, cut into 1cm lengths

10 cherry tomatoes, halved

1 lime cut into wedges, plus 3 tbsp lime juice

275g green papaya (about 1 medium fruit)

1 tbsp tamarind water

2 tbsp fish sauce

3 tbsp shaved palm sugar
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4aq5p%2Fsfb%23img-8&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4aq5p%2Fsfb%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F22%2F1437565587024%2Fa1fbb74a-2a25-4588-b4e8-33233fc73962-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20som%20tam&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4aq5p%2Fstw%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+som+tam&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4aq5p%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F22%2F1437565587024%2Fa1fbb74a-2a25-4588-b4e8-33233fc73962-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Felicity Cloake’s perfect som tam. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian
Put a small frying pan on a medium-high heat. Rinse the shrimp, pat dry and 
then dry fry for about four minutes until crisp. Tip out and toast the peanuts 
until browned, then tip out, roughly chop and set aside.

Mash the garlic with a pinch of coarse salt in a pestle and mortar, then add 
the shrimp and two thirds of the peanuts and crush to a rough paste. Add the 
chillies and merely bruise (unless you want it really spicy, in which case 
pound away).

Add the beans, tomatoes and lime wedges to the mortar and roughly bruise with 
the pestle, then scoop the lot out into a bowl (unless you have a very large 
pestle and mortar in which case you can leave them in).

Peel the papaya and cut into narrow matchsticks; a julienne peeler or 
mandoline is ideal, but you can use a sharp knife if not. Working in batches if 
necessary, lightly bruise in the pestle and mortar then add to the bowl.

Mix the lime juice, tamarind water, fish sauce and sugar in the mortar until 
the sugar has dissolved, then taste; it should be a balance of sour, salty and 
sweet. Adjust as necessary.

Toss the dressing and the salad ingredients together, making sure the peanut 
paste is well distributed, and sprinkle with the remaining peanuts before 
serving.

Som tam; is it really the world’s greatest salad, and if not, what is? And 
what do you suggest as a good homegrown substitute for green papaya?

• This article was amended on 23 July 2015. An earlier version referred 
frequently to the pestle rather than the mortar.

