
This summer’s timetable for GCSE and A-levels 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/alevels> is fixed and will not be changed 
to further accommodate Muslim pupils who may be fasting despite recent media 
reports, examination boards have said.

The Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ), which represents the major exam 
agencies in England, Wales and Northern Ireland, said there had been a “clear 
misunderstanding in some parts of the media” over the 2016 exam schedule after 
it announced that the timetable had takenRamadan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ramadan>, the Muslim month of fasting, into 
account.

In a strongly worded statement 
<http://www.jcq.org.uk/media-centre/news-releases/jcq-statement---exam-timetables>
 the council said the timing of Ramadan had been considered in the same way as 
other events – such as the Queen’s diamond jubilee in June 2012 – and that the 
timetable was not open to change.


Some media outlets, including the Daily Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3387163/GCSE-levels-set-rejigged-summer-Islam-s-holy-month-Ramadan-account.html>
,Sun 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/6843807/Exam-timetables-set-to-be-rejigged-for-Ramadan.html>
 andDaily Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/education/educationnews/12084785/Exams-to-be-taken-earlier-in-the-day-to-fit-around-Ramadan-exam-boards-say.html>
, suggested on Wednesday that the timetable was still in flux as a result of 
the discussions held between the exam boards, the exam regulator Ofqual and 
Islamic leaders, which appears to have raised concerns that crucial exam dates 
could change.

The reports followed comments by the children’s commissioner, Anne Longfield, 
that discussions were under way over “delaying the exam timetable”.


Related: Ramadan: a guide to the Islamic holy month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/17/ramadan-guide-to-islamic-holy-month-muslims-fast>

But the JCQ said: “There has been a clear misunderstanding in some parts of 
the media as to how the GCSE and A-level timetable is set and the impact 
religious events, such as Ramadan, Easter and Passover, have on it. It is 
important to note that the timetable for 2016 was drafted over a year ago, is 
published and won’t be changing.

 “Each year the timetable is reviewed to ensure it meets the current needs of 
students, schools and colleges. This review includes a consultation and 
considers comments from a wide range of stakeholders including schools, 
colleges and religious groups. However, each year there are only minimal 
changes.

 “In such a large, complex system where there is a large number of candidates 
taking examinations and a diverse range of subjects available, it is not always 
possible to meet each and every request. Exam boards will always aim to be as 
fair as possible to all. If a small change can be made for any one group that 
does not impact negatively on most students, it will, quite rightly, be 
considered – but these are made before the timetable is published.”

In 2016 the beginning of Ramadan falls on 7 June, in the latter part of the 
summer exam season.

After discussions, the exam boards decided to make minor adjustments to the 
timetable, which included moving some popular exams to before the start of 
Ramadan and holding others in the mornings, to avoid penalising pupils who were 
fasting during daylight hours.

Related: Popular exams in UK to be rescheduled to avoid Ramadan 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jan/06/popular-exams-in-uk-to-be-rescheduled-to-avoid-ramadan>

Comparisons of the 2015 and 2016 timetables show the changes have been minor, 
and in some cases the advent of Ramadan had no obvious effect on timings.

In the case of GCSE English – a compulsory subject taken by more than 500,000 
candiates last year – the OCR and AQA exam boards have in fact moved the date 
of some papers back from 2 June in 2015 to 7 June – the first full day of 
Ramadan – in 2016.

In the case of the Islam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam> paper 
within GCSE religious studies, OCR has also shifted the exam back to within 
Ramadan on the afternoon of 7 June. GCSE maths – another compulsory subject – 
has been shifted forward in part by AQA so that some papers fall before the 
start of Ramadan but others remain within the fasting period.

Ramadan – when the Qur’an, the holy book of Islam, is believed to have been 
revealed to the prophet Muhammad – is commemorated by Muslims with fasting 
during the hours of daylight.


As Ramadan is set by a lunar calendar, its start date moves forward by 11 days 
every year. In 2016 the holy month is scheduled to run from 7 June to 5 July, 
overlapping with the summer exam season in May and June.

Ramadan will continue to fall largely during peak periods in the exam season 
for the next two years, being forecast to begin on 27 May in 2017 and 16 May in 
2018.
