
A history of the BBC’s attempts to systematise the pronunciation of English 
does not, on the surface, sound like a gripping read. But inDictating to the 
Mob: The History of the BBC Advisory Committee on Spoken English 
<https://global.oup.com/academic/product/dictating-to-the-mob-9780198736738?cc=gb&lang=en&>
, Oxford University Press may have a surprise bestseller on its hands.

OK, I exaggerate a bit. Professor Jürg Schwyter’s book is pretty academic in 
places, but bubbling away among all the footnotes is a wonderful sitcom about 
a committee of the great and the good – poet laureate Robert Bridges, 
playwright George Bernard Shaw, critic Lord David Cecil, art historian Kenneth 
Clark, novelist Rose Macaulay – tying themselves in knots trying to lay down 
standard pronunciation of words in English.

The committee was formed in 1926 and deliberated for the next 13 years. As the 
world confronted the great depression and the rise of fascism, the panjandrums 
commissioned by theBBC <http://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> director-general, 
Lord Reith, grappled with how to pronounce “margarine”, eventually plumping for 
a soft g, despite the fact that the substance was derived from margaric (with 
a hard g) acid. History has vindicated its decision on margarine, but not its 
preference for the Norwegianshee over the French ski. Imported words were a 
particular problem for the committee, and much blood was spilt before the 
Frenchifiedga-raj became the anglicised ga-ridge.

In the early years, the committee published its findings in the Radio Times, 
handing down judgments as if on tablets of stone: gala = gahla; privacy = 
prive-acy; respite = respit; often = off-en. It was happy to anglicise foreign 
placenames, preferring Lions to Lyon(s) and Reams to Rheims, and favoured 
standardised pronunciations of English placenames over local idiosyncrasies – 
Daventry v Daintry was a celebrated case in point.

Related: 8 pronunciation errors that made the English language what it is 
today | David Shariatmadari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/mar/11/pronunciation-errors-english-language>

As war clouds gathered in Europe, however, the battles between liberals and 
linguistic fascists on the committee became more intense, and the great 
Reithian project began to run into the sand. Bernard Shaw, who had succeeded 
Bridges as committee chairman, questioned its modus operandi in a letter to 
Reith in 1935: “Here we have 20 persons chosen as representative presentable 
speakers to determine polite usage. Obviously only decisions either unanimous 
or very nearly so could justify the corporation in declaring that one single 
usage is standard. Well, yesterday, decision after decision was carried by 
eight to seven, nine to eight, 10 to nine, and in three cases by the casting 
vote of the chairman, a superannuated Irishman in his 80th year.”

The committee staggered on, but it was never quite the same again. Happily, 
language proved too slippery to be pinned down by a group of largely 
upper-class writers and critics from the south of England. They were 
pronouncing on English as they spoke it, but there were many equally valid 
linguistic approaches elsewhere in the UK. As Bernard Shaw put it in another 
letter to Reith: “The new committee, so far, is a ghastly failure. It should be 
reconstituted with an age limit of 30, and a few taxi drivers on it.”

The committee was dissolved when war broke out and was never revived. Instead, 
it transmuted into the more modestBBC Pronunciation Unit 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/informationandarchives/archivenews/2013/bbc_pronunciation>
, which advises on place names and personal names, but wisely avoids trying to 
lay down a template for the entire, ever-changing English language.
