
A complaint by Cherie Blair’s half-sister over a Daily Mail 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/dailymail> article about her life after 
converting to Islam has been rejected by the newspaper’s regulator.

Lauren Booth claimed there were numerous inaccuracies in the January article 
headlined ‘How Cherie’s sister has become a cheerleader for Islamic zealots’.

The article detailed Booth’s Islamic marriage to Sohale Ahmed, who was at the 
time legally married to another woman, as well as her work with Muslim groups 
such as Cage and Helping Households under Great Stress (HHUGGS).

Booth claimed that the article inaccurately suggested that her partner was a 
bigamist, that his first wife lived “round the corner” and that organisations 
she was involved with were extremist. She also challenged what she said was the 
suggestion she had converted toIslam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam> 
for financial reasons following two bankruptcies.


She also disputed the article’s claims that she had built a journalistic 
career around “sharing indiscrete tittle-tattle about the Blairs” and that she 
had been fired from her job at news channel al-Jazeera.

In addition, she said that the newspaper was discriminating against her by 
describing her as having “pale skin” and had failed to include parts of her 
response to the claims put to her by the Mail.

However, the Independent Press Standards Organisation (Ipso) rejected her 
claim, saying the article had either not made the statements as Booth claimed, 
or that they had not been inaccurate.

It said that the headline claiming that Booth was a “cheerleader for 
extremists” was justified, given her work with Cage and HHUGGS and the 
newspaper’s subjective opinion the organisations in question were “notorious” 
and “Islamic zealots”.

Ipso <http://www.theguardian.com/media/ipso> also took into account the Mail’s 
decision to print a clarification saying that Ahmed’s first wife in fact lived 
three miles away and that Booth had resigned from al-Jazeera rather than being 
“let go”.

It also said the reference to Booth’s skin colour was “genuinely relevant to 
the story” given her move from the London social scene to a largely ethnic 
minority community.

Booth began a journalistic career at the Evening Standard in 1997, the same 
year as Tony Blair became prime minister. In 2006 she appeared on I’m a 
Celebrity... Get Me Out of Here!, donating the money to the Palestinian Relief 
and Development Fund.She converted to Islam in 2010 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/oct/24/lauren-booth-converts-to-islam>
 following a trip to Iran, and has worked for the country’s news channel, Press 
TV.
