
Nearly 1,000 people were killed in attacks on health centres worldwide over 
the past two years, almost 40% of them in Syria, theWorld Health Organisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/world-health-organisation> (WHO) said on 
Thursday inits first report 
<http://www.who.int/hac/techguidance/attacksreport.pdf?ua=1> on what has become 
a growing issue.

The UN <https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> agency documented 594 
attacks resulting in 959 deaths and 1,561 injuries in 19 countries with 
emergencies between January 2014 and December 2015.

Syria, where a civil war has raged since 2011, had the most attacks on 
hospitals, ambulances, patients and medical workers, accounting for 352 deaths. 
The Palestinian territories of Gaza and the West Bank, as well as Iraq, 
Pakistan and Libya, followed. An estimated 62% of all attacks were deemed 
intentional and many led to a disruption of public health services.

Related: Bombing hospitals and schools cannot become the new normal | Vickie 
Hawkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/19/yemen-msf-bombing-hospitals-schools-cannot-become-the-new-normal>

“This is not an isolated issue, it is not limited to warzones, it is not 
accidental. The majority of these are intentional,” Dr Bruce Aylward, executive 
director of the WHO emergency programme, told a news briefing.

“It is also not stopping and it has real complications for what we are trying 
to do. It is getting more and more difficult to deploy people into these 
places, it is getting more and more difficult to keep them safe when they are 
there and it is getting more and more difficult to ensure they survive, let 
alone recover in crises.”

The casualty figures include 42 killed and 37 wounded in a US air strike on a 
Médecins Sans Frontières hospital in Kunduz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/29/kunduz-hospital-attack-msf-us-military-charges>
, Afghanistan last October.

A US military report last month said that the incident did not amount to a war 
crime but was caused by human error, equipment failure and other factors, but 
MSF has called for an independent inquiry.

The charity’s anger over the repeated targeting of medical facilities in 
warzones – and the lack of a concerted political response – wasamong the 
reasons it gave for withdrawing from this week’s inaugural world humanitarian 
summit in Istanbul 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/05/medecins-sans-frontieres-world-humanitarian-summit-istanbul-fig-leaf-pulls-out>
.

The WHO said 53% of the attacks were perpetrated by states and 30% by armed 
groups, with the identities of those behind the remaining 17% unknown.

“One of the most important rules of war you is that you don’t attack 
healthcare facilities, healthcare providers, the sick, the disabled. So these 
attacks do represent gross violations of international humanitarian law,” said 
Rick Brennan, WHO director of emergency risk management and humanitarian 
response.

He added: “Violations of international humanitarian law, if proven, can be 
considered war crimes and the perpetrators can be taken to the international 
criminal court.”
