
I want to start an honest conversation about equality, diversity, and 
inclusivity in our universities. The fact that I feel I have to be anonymous to 
do so should indicate that something is seriously amiss.

My concerns, thankfully, do not relate to my colleagues or my students. My 
problem is with the “equality, diversity, and inclusivity” office. It sits at 
the heart of the campus; a position that suggests these ideals are at the core 
of institution, both physically and ideologically.

But rather than engaging with the many important, weighty issues of fairness 
and representation on campus, this office seems to be solely concerned with 
protecting the reputation of the institution, largely through worthless 
box-ticking exercises.

 Take, for example, the recent inclusivity in the workplace training session I 
was required to attended. I had genuinely high hopes for the session and was 
impressed that my employers felt the issue was important enough to block out an 
entire working day. Unlike some, I was not moaning about it. I was fully on 
board.

Related: Academics Anonymous: the inside stories of universities in 2015 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2015/dec/31/academics-anonymous-university-staff-revealed-the-inside-stories-in-2015>

Then the session, which had been outsourced to a private company, began. We 
started with a group activity: participants were divided into teams, each of 
which was assigned a stereotype to discuss.

My group was given “welfare claimants”. We were told to come up with a list of 
common assumptions about them – buzzwords of hate, essentially. I objected to 
the category being included in an exercise that was meant to be about promoting 
inclusivity in the workplace, as welfare claimants were unlikely to be among 
our colleagues.

I was told that “lots of well-off people claim welfare, including child 
benefits”. I said I understood, but pointed out that the examples of hate 
speech our group had spent 10 minutes dredging up – “dole cheat”, “scrounger” 
and so on – were unlikely to be applied to an employed person. I was ignored.

Another team was given the category “gay men”. When someone suggested 
“paedophilia” as a characteristic of this group, several colleagues tried to 
refute it, only to be told by the session leader that there was “clearly a 
grain of truth in it, otherwise, why would so many people think it?” We were 
incredulous.

It is one thing for equality and diversity culture to merely pay lip service 
to its brief; this was something else entirely. In trying to take a shortcut to 
tick the equality box, the university ended up paying people to peddle harmful, 
dangerous myths.

The university spends thousands of pounds each year on such initiatives in the 
hope that our institution will rise in league tables such as theStonewall Top 
100 Employers <https://www.stonewall.org.uk/sites/default/files/top100_2015.pdf>
. There’s money to burn, it seems, yet the university’s LGBT staff group has no 
budget.

A culture of managerialism ensures that the priorities for equality and 
diversity remain skewed. The focus is not on the promotion of genuine equality 
but maintaining the impression of it, whatever the cost. As someone who is 
engaged in activism on a number of fronts, this realisation has been a hugely 
depressing one.

Related: Bomb threats, breakdowns and bongs: the life of a university security 
guard 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jan/15/bomb-threats-breakdowns-and-bongs-the-life-of-a-university-security-guard>

I understand that acquiring a good reputation is an expensive endeavour for 
universities. I know that this is no longer built on positive and meaningful 
relationships between staff and students, but is instead established through 
external accreditation – a lengthy process that involves endless form-filling 
and hoop-jumping.


We live in an age in which discussions and debates about equality take place 
frequently and passionately. We might assume that universities would be the 
most hospitable environments for promoting such progressive values – we even 
have an equality, diversity and inclusivity office.

But let’s not be so naive. We have to accept that it is all about managing 
appearances, rather than affecting real change.


Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
