
At the world humanitarian summit next week in Istanbul, Turkey, governments 
have a rare opportunity. By getting behind an initiative aimed at delivering 
education to some of the world’s most vulnerable children, they could make this 
a summit that delivers something more than vague promises and a communique that 
is long on words and short on action.


The initiative comes in the form of a ground-breaking financing mechanism. The 
Education Cannot Wait 
<http://www.campaignforeducation.org/en/news/global/view/467-education-cannot-wait-education-in-humanitarian-emergencies-and-conflict-situations>
fund 
<http://www.campaignforeducation.org/en/news/global/view/467-education-cannot-wait-education-in-humanitarian-emergencies-and-conflict-situations>
 will be launched at thesummit 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/world-humanitarian-summit> by the
UN special envoy for education, Gordon Brown 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/26/2015-is-year-of-fear-for-children-worldwide-warns-gordon-brown>
, and a group of development agencies, including Unicef, UNHCR – the UN refugee 
agency – and the Global Partnership for Education.

Related: When will the UK stand up to save education from bullets and bombs? | 
Martin Bell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/06/education-conflict-uk-stand-up-to-save-education-from-bullets-and-bombs>

The aim is to raise $4bn-5bn (£2.7bn-3.5bn) over the next five years to reach 
children whose education has been disrupted by conflict and other humanitarian 
emergencies.

We need this initiative for a very simple reason: the current aid architecture 
for education in emergencies is broken beyond repair.

Consider Syria. In the space of a single primary school generation, the 
country has gone from education indicators comparable with those in Thailand to 
levels comparable with South Sudan. Six years of conflict have left some2.6 
million children out of school 
<http://www.unicef.org.uk/Media-centre/Press-releases-archive/14-million-children-impacted-by-conflict-in-Syria-and-Iraq-Unicef/>
, either inside Syria or in the neighbouring states.

Describing the international response as inadequate does not do justice to the 
scale of the shortfall. UN agencies have been responding to a protracted 
humanitarian crisis in education through chronically under-funded annual 
appeals to donors. The World Bank’slending rules 
<https://www.odi.org/comment/10378-%E2%80%98we-need-faster-bigger-and-more-effective-world-bank%E2%80%99>
 have hampered the delivery of concessional finance to middle-income countries 
like Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey. It has taken a protracted effort by the Bank’s 
president, Jim Yong Kim, to establishexceptional financing facilities 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2016/03/25/world-bank-group-announces-exceptional-financing-lebanon>
 that are delivering modest amounts – commitments to Lebanon’s refugee 
education strategy are$100m <http://menafinancing.org/>. 

The education opportunities of an entire generation of Syrian children have 
burned

Other donors have a mixed record. The UK has played a critical role in 
championing the case for investment in refugee education and jobs creation. 
These were the core elements in the £1.2bnin additional commitments 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/topical-events/supporting-syria-conference-2016> 
made at the London conference on aid support for Syria and the region this 
year. However, humanitarian appeals remain badly under-funded. Only one-quarter 
of the money needed to finance theUN’s Syria regional response plan 
<https://fts.unocha.org/onlineReport/onlineReport.aspx?RepID=&Param=&Year=&Type=PDF&rparams=ocha_r32sum_a1133&URL=daily/ocha_r32sum_a1133.pdf&Refer=fts.unocha.org>
 has been delivered.

As the international community has fiddled, the education opportunities of an 
entire generation of Syrian children have burned.

One symptom of the education crisis is the epidemic of child labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/06/war-to-sweatshop-for-child-refugees>
. Another is the flight of refugees.Recent research 
<https://www.odi.org/publications/10317-journeys-europe-role-policy-migrant-decision-making>
 has identified the desperation of parents to secure education for their 
children as a major reason for undertaking the hazardous journey to Europe.

While the Syria crisis has been in the spotlight, other education emergencies 
get less attention. Today, one in threechildren in Central African Republic 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/26/extreme-violence-blighting-a-generation-in-central-african-republic>
miss out on education <http://www.unicef.org/appeals/car.html> because of 
violence, displacement and a shortage of teachers. Children among theforgotten 
refugee populations of Burundi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/10/burundi-ethnic-violence-refugees>
,Eritrea 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/21/escaping-eritrea-migrant-if-i-die-at-sea-at-least-i-wont-be-tortured>
 and theDemocratic Republic of the Congo 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2012/aug/10/thousands-seek-refuge-congo-conflict-escalates>
 have not only lost their homes. They have also lost the chance for an 
education that could enable them to rebuild their lives.Conflict in Yemen 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/06/education-conflict-uk-stand-up-to-save-education-from-bullets-and-bombs>
 has pushed the education system into freefall.

In 2013, less than 2% of humanitarian appeals were directed to education

Armed conflict is not the only problem. When disasters strike – floods in 
Pakistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan-flood>, earthquakes in 
Nepal 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/nepal-earthquake-one-year-on> and
Haiti 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/12/haiti-earthquake-five-years-on-village-solidarite>
 orEbola <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ebola> in west Africa, the 
restoration of education is often viewed as a second order priority. In 2013, 
less than2% of humanitarian appeals were directed to education 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=3&ved=0ahUKEwimpYyU7dHMAhWDDiwKHfteBqAQFggqMAI&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.odi.org%2Fsites%2Fodi.org.uk%2Ffiles%2Fresource-documents%2F10497.pdf&usg=AFQjCNF5ebMpBUuC6628UhHqacCvoDrkyA&sig2=iI3oa8LVvELqdj1Giu3gXg&cad=rja>
. Yet parents and children affected by armed conflict and other emergencies 
consistently view education as a priority.

Based on a proposal framed by the Overseas Development Institute (ODI), the  
<https://www.odi.org/publications/10405-education-cannot-wait-fund-education-emergencies>
Education Cannot Wait fund 
<https://www.odi.org/publications/10405-education-cannot-wait-fund-education-emergencies>
 could mark a step towards changing this. For the first time, the facility 
would establish a pooled resource dedicated to education provision in 
emergencies. Operating under the auspices of the UN and the Global Partnership 
on Education, it could help curtail the turf wars and coordination problems 
that blight education.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j3ym%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j3ym%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e2c6af2e12be846c59d21f03d46f78b15b5a4e7%2F0_345_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=30%20million%20children%20have%20lost%20their%20homes%20%E2%80%93%20they%20must%20not%20lose%20their%20education%20%7C%20Kevin%20Watkins&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j3ym%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=30+million+children+have+lost+their+homes+%E2%80%93+they+must+not+lose+their+education+%7C+Kevin+Watkins&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j3ym%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e2c6af2e12be846c59d21f03d46f78b15b5a4e7%2F0_345_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Syrian girls play next to a train wagon at the northern border point of 
Idomeni, Greece. Photograph: Petros Giannakouris/AP 
The Istanbul summit provides an opportunity to get the fund off the ground. 
Bilateral donors – including Norway and DfID – have indicated they will provide 
seed funding. But financing at the required scale will require a broader base. 
The World Bank should step up with a commitment to mobilise $1bn over five 
years. With a credible delivery mechanism in place, regional donors, 
philanthropists and the private sector should play an expanded role.

Ultimately, the proof of the concept is in delivery. With bold leadership, the 
Education Cannot Wait fund could be used to support local and international 
NGOs striving to deliver education on the frontline. It could enable 
governments to expand education provision for refugees through investments in 
public education. And with30 million children living as refugees or displaced 
people <http://www.unicef.org/hac2016/>, it could help tackle a major source of 
poverty and inequality.

Last year, governments gathered at the UN to sign up for a set of development 
goals <https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/post2015/transformingourworld> 
including universal secondary schooling. They now have a chance to show they 
mean business – and that they will not allow kids affected by conflict to get 
left behind.
