
Waking up on a gloomy Monday morning, I was filled instantly with nausea and 
severe panic. It wasn’t the usual blues one gets at the beginning of a new 
working week – it was something more sinister and surprising for a woman in her 
mid 30s. It was the result of 18 months’ worth of workplace bullying in theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>.

 I had worked nearly all my adult life in a hospital setting. I loved all 
aspects of my job, but patient contact and customer care were the two areas I 
enjoyed the most. I had good relationships with the people I worked with and 
the patients I saw on a regular basis. My job was my life and I often worked 
over my contracted hours for no extra pay because I was dedicated to patient 
care.

 When I got a promotion in the hospital that I had worked in for several 
years, I was delighted. It was a job that required training and constant 
supervision; there was no room for error, as this could result in a fatality.

When a woman was hired to work in my department, it became clear, after a 
short time, that she was not all she seemed, and her attitude to work and 
patient care became cause for concern. I found myself the target of her 
calculated actions. Everything I asked her to do and help with was met with 
abuse and volatile behaviour. She would enjoy playing me off against other 
senior staff members and delighted in causing arguments between members of what 
was once a warm and caring team.

 I reported her actions to my line manager many times and spent hours with the 
bully, pouring out how she made me feel, in the hope that she might realise 
what she was doing and stop. My biggest mistake was letting her know she 
intimidated me.

 My mental health declined and I was put on very high doses of antidepressants 
and felt such despair that my beloved career and life were slowly dying. I 
wanted to die – despite being a single mother at the time, I couldn’t face life 
any more. I was deskilled, devalued and isolated.

 I was subject to months of botched and biased investigations that should have 
taken six weeks. There was no continuity of staff dealing with my complaint, 
there were changes to meetings without my knowledge and my computer was wiped 
while I was absent from my desk to remove email evidence I had collected. I was 
made to move to another area, even though it was policy for the bully to be 
moved. I also found out that I was not the only one to suffer at her hands and 
at least two people had left because of her vindictiveness towards them; 
several staff had complained unsuccessfully to management. With no support in 
the workplace and an incompetent union rep I was slowly losing my grip on life.

Related: I loved being a midwife but bullying, stress and fear made me resign 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline/2015/mar/23/i-loved-being-a-midwife-but-bullying-stress-and-fear-made-me-resign>

 I finally resigned at the end of an eighteen-month battle – forced by the 
hardness and lack of care of the people who helped run a caring institution. I 
faced debt and unemployment for the first time in my life which was terrifying.

 I managed, with the support and love from many of my close friends – most of 
whom were former NHS workers – to gradually heal myself by taking up a new 
career.

 I will never forget what happened to me, and four years on I still suffer 
trauma whenever I go near the hospital where I once worked. No action was taken 
against my bully even though it was acknowledged that she had an attitude 
problem and this was not the first time they had had complaints against her. I 
will never be able to work in the NHS again because I have seen a side that I 
never thought existed. I am fearful for its future and the future of many staff 
who have found themselves in similar situations to mine. I know they are still 
out there and there is little support and no help because the view is that 
bullying in the NHS can’t possibly exist. It does and it deprives that once 
wonderful institution of many loyal, dedicated and hard-working staff.

Some details have been changed.

 * In the UK, the Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the 
National Suicide Prevention Hotline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis 
support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. Hotlines in other countries can be 
foundhere <http://www.suicide.org/international-suicide-hotlines.html>

If you would like to write a blogpost for Views from the NHS frontline 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline>, 
readour guidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2014/aug/12/highs-lows-nhs-write-guardian>
 and get in touch by emailinghealthcare@theguardian.com 
<mailto:healthcare@theguardian.com>.


Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
