
As front page political endorsements go, the Sun’s backing for Brexit 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/14/eu-referendum-morning-briefing-sun-backs-brexit>
 is utterly unsurprising. The newspaper has been consistently Eurosceptic for 
almost 40 years.

Just a couple of years after urging its readers in 1975 to vote to stay in the 
Common Market, it changed its mind.


Related: EU referendum live: poll leads and Sun backing for Brexit prompt 
remain 'panic' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/14/eu-referendum-live-polls-sun-brexit-remain-panic>

From at least 1981 onwards, it has not concealed its contempt for the European 
project. It has, as its Tuesday leading article stated, “campaigned 
relentlessly against the ever-expanding superstate.”

In so doing, I am convinced it has reflected the views of the majority of its 
audiences. Sure, its relentless opposition to the EU may have changed some 
readers’ minds.

But I doubt very much that it can be accused of a mass conversion. I spent 
five years as the paper’s assistant editor and it was clear that its various 
anti-EEC campaigns were received enthusistically by the readership.

In 1984, many thousands of readers wrote in to obtain badges bearing the 
slogan “Hop off you Frogs” during an alleged “war” over the import British lamb 
into France.

The Sun <http://www.theguardian.com/media/sun> has opposed every attempt at 
forging greater European integration, as exemplified by its famous 1990 front 
page deriding Jacques Delors, the then president of the European Commission.

That “Up Yours Delors” article referred to “the Froggie Common Market chief” 
and called on readers to “tell the French fool where to stuff his ECU.”

Overt anti-French and anti-German racism was a common theme in the Sun’s 
original coverage. That xenophobia has become a little more muted in recent 
years, although echoes of it occur (and, arguably, remain within the mind-set 
of its older readers).

Related: EU referendum morning briefing: cheer for leavers as the Sun backs 
Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/14/eu-referendum-morning-briefing-sun-backs-brexit>

Now comes BeLEAVE in Britain 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/1277920/we-urge-our-readers-to-believe-in-britain-and-vote-to-leave-the-eu-in-referendum-on-june-23/>
, a front page that can be seen as the culmination of the paper’s desire to 
pull Britain out of the European Union.

Trevor Kavanagh <http://www.theguardian.com/media/trevor-kavanagh>, the Sun’s 
associate editor, columnist and former political editor, told Radio 4’s Today 
programme that it represented “a long and legitimate campaign” going back over 
40 years. He was undeniably correct.

“We must,” said the paper, “set ourselves free from dictatorial Brussels... If 
we stay, Britain will be engulfed in a few short years by this relentlessly 
expanding German dominated federal state” (hear that echo?).

The Sun, which supported David Cameron 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> in the general election, 
scorned the prime minister’s “witless assurances” about Britain benefiting from 
voting Remain. By staying, it said, “our powers and values will be further 
eroded.” It continued:

“Staying in will be worse for immigration, worse for jobs, worse for wages and 
worse for our way of life...

To remain means being powerless to cut mass immigration which keeps wages low 
and puts catastrophic pressure on our schools, hospitals, roads and housing 
stock.”

The Sun (in company with its owner, Rupert Murdoch) likes nothing better than 
to oppose “the establishment”, thereby aligning itself with “the outsiders” 
(the people, its readers) in their fight against “them.”

So its description of the Remain campaign as being “made up of the corporate 
establishment, arrogant europhiles and foreign banks” also has a long history. 
It goes right back to the Sun’s chip-on-the-shoulder arrival as a red-top 
tabloid in 1969.

The positive message was an assertion that “outside the EU we can become 
richer, safer and free at long last to forge our own destiny... let’s leave it 
and, using our enormous clout as the world’s fifth biggest economy, strike 
great trade deals with the other 85 per cent of the world.”

The paper contended that, once we “reassert our sovereignty, embracing a 
future as a self-governing, powerful nation envied by all” we will be able to 
“pick and choose the best migrants from the whole world.”

So who decided on the Sun’s stance? Kavanagh was unequivocal, telling Today it 
was the editor’s call. Well, I am sure that the editor,Tony Gallagher 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/tony-gallagher>, agreed with every word of 
his leading article.

He has not concealed his contempt for the EU and all its works in his previous 
positions, as editor of theDaily Telegraph 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/dailytelegraph> and in senior executive 
positions at the Daily Mail.

But it is inconceivable that Gallagher would have run that front page without 
knowing that he had Murdoch’s firm backing. On this topic, Murdoch, Gallagher 
and Kavanagh are in complete agreement.

What difference will it make? Precious little. The overwhelming majority of 
the Sun’s readers who have decided to vote on 23 June have already made up 
their minds where to place their cross.

But the Sun’s statement certainly has a symbolic importance and it is likely 
to give the jitters to the already nervous Cameron and his Remain campaigners.
