
I have been with a guy for two years. He comes from one far-off country; I 
come from another. In a few months, I will have to go home for visa reasons, to 
be with my family and start a new job. But he has to stay at his job for now. 
We love each other and he imagines having a family with me. I love the idea, 
but couldn’t commit to moving to his country and he couldn’t commit to moving 
to mine. I would love to visit his and he would love to visit mine, but we 
couldn’t leave our families for ever.

The thought of this hurts, because we could be so happy if it weren’t for 
location. It seems as if we will have to break up when I go home, but I’m not 
sure how to handle it for the next few months. We want to make the most of our 
time together, but is it just going to make it harder when I say goodbye? It 
seems impossible to split up right now.

• When leaving a message on this page, please be sensitive to the fact that 
you are responding to a real person in the grip of a real-life dilemma, who 
wrote to Private Lives asking for help, and may well view your comments here. 
Please consider especially how your words or the tone of your message could be 
perceived by someone in this situation, and be aware that comments that appear 
to be disruptive or disrespectful to the individual concerned will be removed.

• If you would like fellow readers to respond to a dilemma of yours, send us 
an outline of the situation of about 150 words. For advice from Pamela 
Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your 
concerns.

• All correspondence should reach us by Wednesday morning. Email: 
private.lives@theguardian.com <mailto:private.lives@theguardian.com> (please 
don’t send attachments).
