
Changing your mind with two weeks to go? If so you’re not the only one. News 
overnight was dominated by the Conservative MP DrSarah Wollaston’s 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/sarah-wollaston> defection from the Vote 
Leave campaign 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/09/dr-sarah-wollaston-defects-vote-leave-remain-campaign>
. We discuss your reaction to that and invite you to take a look at some other 
conversations we’re highlighting around the site, including those onTony Blair 
and John Major in Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/09/tony-blair-and-john-major-brexit-would-close-irish-border>
 and the latest in ourReality Check series 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/series/eu-referendum-reality-check>. 


Click on the links at the end of each section to get involved, or head over to 
ourEU referendum live blog 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/09/eu-referendum-live-wollaston-remain-vote-leave-sturgeon-johnson>
 to follow the news and discussion as it happens.


Some readers we’ve spoken to have suggested there hasn’t been enough focus on 
getting people to register to vote 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/09/arron-banks-leaveeu-may-challenge-extension-of-voter-registration-deadline>
. So here goes. You can still register to vote until 23.59 on Thursday 9 June. 
If you are eligible,click here to do so <https://www.gov.uk/register-to-vote>.


1. Sarah Wollaston defects to remain campaign and accuses Vote Leave of 
‘post-truth politics’ 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/09/dr-sarah-wollaston-defects-vote-leave-remain-campaign>
 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/09/eu-referendum-live-wollaston-remain-vote-leave-sturgeon-johnson>

Wollaston, a former GP, says she was prompted to defect by the claim 
emblazoned on the Vote Lea 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/27/uk-statistics-chief-vote-leave-350m-figure-misleading>
ve battlebus 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/27/uk-statistics-chief-vote-leave-350m-figure-misleading>
 that Brexit would free up £350m a week for the NHS,something she says “simply 
isn’t true” 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/09/eu-referendum-morning-briefing-defector-debate-midnight-deadline>
.


Our morning briefing included early reaction 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/09/eu-referendum-morning-briefing-defector-debate-midnight-deadline>
: “David Cameron wascertainly pleased 
<https://twitter.com/David_Cameron/status/740656927462596609> and Brexiters 
were not, their views ranged from thecritical 
<https://twitter.com/montie/status/740664088427167744> to the dismissive 
<https://twitter.com/oflynnmep/status/740630480110915585> to the conspiracy 
theorist <https://twitter.com/RaheemKassam/status/740661104511209472>.” Here we 
look at the conversations you’re having.
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13267225> Brian Milligan  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13267225> 09 June 2016 10:17am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/75971509> 
I admire her honesty. The BBC "reality check" on the £351m is worded as though 
there's some doubt. The media needs to expose the Brexit camp for the most 
outrageously flaunted political lie since the pack told by Better Together in 
the Scottish referendum. The BBC had no reality check for that referendum when 
the entire English media seemed to be taking lessons from their North Korean 
colleagues.
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3991931> Riverdog  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3991931> 09 June 2016 12:46am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/75948402> 
Good for Dr Wallaston. I am surprised there haven't been more who change their 
minds. Apparently it was a really, really hard decision for Boris. He wavered 
for both sides before finally deciding to go with leave. So if some kind of 
convincing argument or new piece of research came to light, such as over 80% of 
economists thinking Brexit would be disastrous for the UK economy might Boris 
revert, change his mind and back remain? Would anything persuade the Leave 
supporting politicians? No, because actually they don't really care. This is 
not, for them, about what's best for the UK or for the British people. This is 
about their careers. That's all. It's despicable.

Needless to say, it wasn’t all support though. Here’s a comment from one of 
her constituents:
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16311910> Luke Murch  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16311910> 09 June 2016 10:32am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/75972682> 
Sarah is the mp for my area. She wrote a column in the local magazine on how 
she believed that leaving the EU was the right thing for Britain, and that is 
precisely why she WON the local elections here just last month. Another MP who 
cant be trusted and does not represent the people of her constituency who are 
majority for leave (Torbay, Totnes).
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fmp-sarah-wollaston-defects-from-brexit-campaign-to-vote-remain-video&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fmp-sarah-wollaston-defects-from-brexit-campaign-to-vote-remain-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=MP%20Sarah%20Wollaston%20defects%20from%20Brexit%20campaign%20to%20Vote%20Remain%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fmp-sarah-wollaston-defects-from-brexit-campaign-to-vote-remain-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=MP+Sarah+Wollaston+defects+from+Brexit+campaign+to+Vote+Remain+%E2%80%93+video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fmp-sarah-wollaston-defects-from-brexit-campaign-to-vote-remain-video&media=>
MP Sarah Wollaston defects from Brexit campaign to Vote Remain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jun/09/mp-sarah-wollaston-defects-from-brexit-campaign-to-vote-remain-video>
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3059683> iamthin  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3059683> 09 June 2016 10:53am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/75974300> 
What an extraordinary lack of integrity. 

She's quitting the Leave campaign because that campaign is being economical 
with the truth, and she is now to going back Remain? Presumably she thinks 
Cameron holds the flaming sword of Truth in his hand. Maybe she was so blinded 
by Cameron's own virtue and integrity she couldn't see straight.

An MP, who is supposed to do her own thinking, and reach her own conclusions, 
based on careful examination of the issues, is now going to vote Remain and 
back the campaign for Remain, because she might feel a little bit sad on June 
the 24th if we have voted for exit.

How much worse can this shiftfest get?
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13248060> stevenfieldfare  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13248060> 09 June 2016 10:31am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/75972620> 
Difficult to see why she should decide so this late on, as the figure has been 
used for some time.

But she overlooks the main problem in the NHS: demand and treatment costs are 
going up faster than efficiency can be improved and additional resources 
provided, within the EU or without.

Finally on that topic, a question that provoked hundreds of reactions and 
perhaps the longest discussion thread so far today:

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2636579> noeldarlow1  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2636579> 09 June 2016 12:30am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/75947807> 
If she is genuinely concerned about the NHS, why is she a conservative MP?

Join the debate here 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/09/dr-sarah-wollaston-defects-vote-leave-remain-campaign#comments>
.


2. Live: Major and Blair warn of Northern Ireland’s fate post-Brexit 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/09/eu-referendum-live-wollaston-remain-vote-leave-sturgeon-johnson?page=with:block-5759498be4b00f7e4b1774b1#block-5759498be4b00f7e4b1774b1>

There’s been quite a bit of chatter about how Brexit could have a 
destabilising effect on Northern Ireland. On Wednesday, our reporter Esther 
Addley wrote about the “Brexit threat causing alarm among Northern Irish border 
communities 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/08/brexit-threat-northern-ireland-border-communities>
”. The former US presidentBill Clinton has said that leaving the EU could put 
peace in Northern Ireland at risk 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/09/eu-referendum-live-wollaston-remain-vote-leave-sturgeon-johnson?page=with:block-57593cc3e4b01a5ff948b144#block-57593cc3e4b01a5ff948b144>
, and now two former prime ministers, Tony Blair and John Major have appeared 
in front of students at Ulster University and declaredBrexit would close the 
Irish border 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/09/tony-blair-and-john-major-brexit-would-close-irish-border>
 as we know it.

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2937291> freespeechoneeach  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2937291> 09 June 2016 11:49am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/75978744> 
Here, at the same event, speaking on the same side, are the two politicians 
who respectively achieved the highest recent popular vote and largest Commons 
majority for the Tories and the highest recent popular vote and largest Commons 
majority for the Labour party.
 Between them they might just know a little about what the British voter wants.

Of course the two are also pretty divisive figures among you.
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/11609340> Mick Freer  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/11609340> 09 June 2016 12:30pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/75982014> 
Major has shown bad judgment in campaigning alongside Blair - one of the most 
unpopular politicians of all time. Of course this then brings Major's judgment 
in supporting 'Remain' into question. Bad move.

But after Theresa Villiers, the Northern Ireland secretary, said she did not 
accept the future Blair and Major set out 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/09/eu-referendum-live-wollaston-remain-vote-leave-sturgeon-johnson?page=with:block-57595e89e4b064f52e5f98ad#block-57595e89e4b064f52e5f98ad>
, you went on to discuss the issue of Northern Ireland.

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4636393> SElondon1980  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4636393> 09 June 2016 12:35pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/75982434> 
I'm from a border county in the Republic and am old enough to remember the 
towers and checkpoints. You can barely tell when you pass from the Republic 
into the North now. A lot of travel over and back it is sustaining lots of 
businesses etc. How does Leave propose to manage the border if Britain votes 
Out?
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Ftony-blair-and-john-major-warn-brexit-would-threaten-union-video&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Ftony-blair-and-john-major-warn-brexit-would-threaten-union-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tony%20Blair%20and%20John%20Major%20warn%20Brexit%20would%20threaten%20union%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Ftony-blair-and-john-major-warn-brexit-would-threaten-union-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tony+Blair+and+John+Major+warn+Brexit+would+threaten+union+%E2%80%93+video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Ftony-blair-and-john-major-warn-brexit-would-threaten-union-video&media=>
Tony Blair and John Major warn Brexit would threaten union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jun/09/tony-blair-and-john-major-warn-brexit-would-threaten-union-video>
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15030868> Gozo51  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15030868> 09 June 2016 12:29pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/75981920> 
Leave campaign must be made to explain why 'taking control of our borders' 
doesn't need to include the only land border between UK and EU . Keeping that 
border free and open as the N Ireland Secretary insists it will remain makes a 
nonsense of their border claims.

You can click on any of these links to join the conversation.

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/10730568> leodfruma  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/10730568> 09 June 2016 12:25pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/75981595> 
When Eire won independence, Britain granted her citizens equal rights and 
privileges with British citizens. Irish Republic citizens didn't need passports 
to come to the UK before we joined the EEC and they won't need them after we 
leave the EU. Irish citizens can get a British passport virtually on demand, 
they can vote in all British elections and can (and have with distinction ) 
serve(d) in the British armed forces.

There will be no border between Eire and Northern Ireland 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>. That's a fact, and if Blair 
and Major are claiming otherwise they're lying.

The elites are running scared. Don't give what they want. Vote leave.
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/83513> nwhitfield  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/83513> 09 June 2016 12:36pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/75982510> 
If there is no border between the Republic and the North, then effectively you 
have to reply on the border controls of the Republic (for example, at Dublin or 
Shannon) to decide not only whether or not a particular person is welcome in 
their country, but whether or not they will be welcome in the UK.

You are delegating control over entry to the UK to another nation, unless you 
agree that the UK Border Force will be checking passports when someone flies 
into Ireland. And that doesn't sound much like taking back control of borders 
to me.

Now, how large the group of people "allowed into Ireland, but undesirable in 
the UK" may be, I don't know. But without some controls between the states, 
there's not much you can do, and surely once that lack of controls is known, it 
will become an even more attractive route for people.

You could check passports for people travelling from (any part of) Ireland to 
the UK mainland, but that is effectively a) breaking the CTA and b) really 
going to piss off the Unionists in the North.

Join the debate here 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/09/eu-referendum-live-wollaston-remain-vote-leave-sturgeon-johnson#comments>
.


3. Reality check: What is the European Union? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/09/what-is-the-european-union>

 Many of you have been contributing to a form – see the bottom of the page – 
with stories you want us to report on. One was on the workings of the EU. You 
made the point that before considering whether Britain should leave, it’s 
important to understand what the EU is, and what it isn’t. Seems fair to us.

Many of you saw this article as a good place to debate not just what the EU is 
as an institution, but how democratic it is. Not all of you agreed with an 
analogy in the piece:

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15983477> djinnie  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15983477> 09 June 2016 12:35pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/75982406> 
How dare you compare the European Commission with the British Civil Service??
European Commission has the power to overrule all EU decisions, inclusive 
those of individual countries' Civil Service. And in secret if needed when 
going against the grain.

And that includes all international trade deals, environmental decisions, 
agricultural policy, deals with mafia ruled countries to keep immigrants at bay.

Who is being fooled here?
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/11946655> DavidRees  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/11946655> 09 June 2016 12:45pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/75983252> 
The commission is responsible for ensuring member states act in accordance 
with European law and does, in fact, act like a civil service in the same way 
that the job centre polices benefits.

European law itself is passed jointly by the council of ministers (our own 
governments - missing from this piece as things stand for some reason) and the 
parliament.

In the UK treaties are negotiated in large part by delegates from various UK 
government departments - in other words, by the civil service.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fhow-would-brexit-affect-you-eu-referendum-video-explainer&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fhow-would-brexit-affect-you-eu-referendum-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20would%20Brexit%20affect%20you%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fhow-would-brexit-affect-you-eu-referendum-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+would+Brexit+affect+you%3F+%E2%80%93+video+explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fhow-would-brexit-affect-you-eu-referendum-video-explainer&media=>
How would Brexit affect you? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jun/07/how-would-brexit-affect-you-eu-referendum-video-explainer>
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/11079613> gbrading  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/11079613> 09 June 2016 1:00pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/75984669> 
The EU is about solving problems collectively, as a continent. I know that 
Britain likes to see itself as separate from Europe and not really part of it, 
but I still feel this stems from a frankly imperialistic viewpoint. Britain 
once had the largest empire in the world, and with it a historical sense of 
superiority. I believe some people still haven't lost this feeling that Britain 
is superior to other nations, and that our way of doing things is better. Thus, 
the compromise that must be achieved by being in the EU, by being part of a 
team and not always getting your way, is difficult to stomach.

Does the EU have problems? Yes. It's very bureaucratic and inefficient, 
including the ludicrousness of commuting between Strasbourg and Brussels, it 
could do with simplification and non-interference in certain national matters, 
but generally our membership has been of a benefit to the UK. I do dislike 
these arguments that the EU is undemocratic though. We vote for our MEPs 
regularly, and the EU Commission is just 28 people. Compare that to the 802 
unelected House of Lords members, who have about the same amount of power as 
the Commission. The Commission cannot create laws; it only suggests them to 
Parliament.
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3486049> boban24  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3486049> 09 June 2016 1:10pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/75985512> 
As far as I see it, the elected MEPs act like the House of Lords. The 
unelected commission propose laws based on meetings by the elected (or not 
really as with the UK) representatives of the individual countries' 
governments. The MEPs/House of Lords then decides which laws go through. Seems 
like a very democratic and sensible system. The only problem being that 
countries like us a) don't have a proper democracy and b) we don't treat the 
European elections very seriously. The best thing that could happen would be 
for the EU to make it essential for countries that wanted preferential trade 
deals to have a decent level of democracy. This would exclude the UK and US 
though, so probably unlikely.

One exasperated reader provoked a discussion early on about whether the public 
should even be deciding whether to leave or remain in the first place.

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2813727> johan1974  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2813727> 09 June 2016 12:26pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/75981665> 
Only 10 comments in and we can safely conclude that some people aren't even 
interested in what theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> is 
- they'll vote against it regardless.

I need no further proof for my belief that no referendums should be held on 
any vital issues.

But all was not lost:
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3944348> MightyGibbon  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3944348> 09 June 2016 12:42pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/75983045> 
Articles like this should have been published months ago instead of all those 
horror stories. In fact articles like this should have been published ever 
since we were part of the EU.

The biggest problem we have in this country with regards to the EU is that few 
people seem to know how it works, where it's checks and balances are and how 
its democracy works. I've lost count of how many people have claimed that 
"we've tried to reform the EU and they told us to get stuffed", yet we've never 
tried to reform it, we've just tried to get special treatment.

If more people understood how it worked and how leverage can be applied, then 
there'd be a greater impetus for the government of the time to actually use 
those levers instead of making a half-hearted, piss poor go of it and then 
blaming the EU for it.

The other problem we have in this country is that we're given very little 
information about anything. Most of the media slants information to suit its 
own political agenda, and so we have popular outrage over absurd proposals as 
if they've just gone into law.

Regardless of how the referendum goes and regardless of what side any of us 
stand on it, this issue really has to be addressed. Until it is, the idea of an 
informed electorate is practically impossible to achieve.

And without an informed electorate, democracy isn't possible.

Join the debate here 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/09/what-is-the-european-union>.


We’ll be back tomorrow with another roundup of what you’re talking about in 
the comment sections on theEU referendum 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>. You can help inform what 
we report on by filling in the form below.
