
If anyone needs convincing of the need for greater UK investment in 
infrastructure, they should visit south-east Asia. Hanoi, the capital of 
Vietnam, has a modern airport and a highways network that is arguably better 
than that of any major UK city other than London. Lining the highways are large 
factories built by global corporations such as Canon and by local businesses. 
The huge levels of employment and wealth creation would not exist without the 
highway infrastructure.

Kuala Lumpur, the capital of Malaysia, has a modern highway network connecting 
it to other major cities, and a clean, modern suburban rail network. Its 
airport is world class. Viewed from the air, the massive industrial 
developments around the highway network are breathtaking. The high-speed 
railway that is being built to Singapore will open at least 10 years ahead of 
the first of the UK’s high-speed lines.

Hong Kong has a top international airport and a modern highway, rail and metro 
infrastructure. Its suspension bridges and tunnels overcome obstacles such as 
straits between islands, hills or population centres. Its public transport 
system has more passengers than London. Investment has paid off: since 1960 its
GDP per head <http://www.tradingeconomics.com/hong-kong/gdp-per-capita> has 
increased twelve-fold, nearly tothat of the UK 
<http://www.tradingeconomics.com/united-kingdom/gdp-per-capita> (it saw a 
three-fold increase) and which it will soon overtake.

Related: Smart infrastructure is the key to sustainable development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/may/10/smart-infrastructure-sustainable-development-low-carbon-transport>

Singapore remains south-east Asia’s star performer. A poverty-stricken nation 
of shanty towns 50 years ago, it has become theworld’s number one city 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2015/08/06/travel/singapore-50-reasons/> and is aiming 
to be the world’s firstsmart nation <http://www.smartnation-forbes.com/>. Its 
international airport, Changi, is a showcase for the country’s ambition. With 
50 million passengers a year, nearly as many as Heathrow, it remains thebest 
airport in the world 
<http://www.changiairportgroup.com/export/sites/caas/assets/media_release_2015/Media-Release-Changi-voted-worlds-best-airport.pdf>
. It plans to increase capacity to 130 million passengers annually before 2030. 
Not bad for a country of just five million people and an area of 716 square 
kilometres.

Justifying the development a few years ago, Singapore’s prime minister said: 
“The question is, do we want to stay this vibrant hub of south-east Asia, or do 
we want to let somebody take over our position, our business and our jobs?” Two 
more lines are being added to its rail network of clean and pleasant trains. 
The road network is superb, with 10 motorways and an 11th being built. One 
10-mile-long road tunnel underneath the city has mostly five lanes on each 
side. With less than 2% unemployment, per capita income at twice that of the UK 
and no national debt, Singapore is a model for other nations and cities.

Thailand is investing heavily to try to catch up. With a modern, world-class 
airport at Bangkok, it has four high-speed rail projects due for completion 
soon after 2020, dwarfing those envisaged for the UK for the 2030s, as well as
massive highways and other rail projects 
<http://www.boi.go.th/tir/issue/201409_24_9/42.htm>. 

The link between infrastructure investment and prosperity for citizens is 
clear. The UK lost its way many years ago. It is 170 years since a rail tunnel 
was built through the Pennines. That closed 50 years ago and none has been 
built since. Its motorway network is heading for third-world status. Nearby 
cities such as Manchester and Sheffield are without decent road links. Commuter 
journeys between Manchester and Leeds are 40% below what they should be.

The government is to be commended for recognising the importance of 
infrastructure to economic growth and job creation. However, despite some 
initiatives in the past 50 years – such as the Humber Bridge, Crossrail and the 
Greater Manchester tram system – current plans are wholly inadequate in the 
face of fierce global competition.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
