
Posy Simmonds <https://www.theguardian.com/books/posy-simmonds> has been 
producing illustrations and cartoons for the Guardian since 1972. TheGNM Archive
 <http://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive> holds a huge and varied collection 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=PSI&> 
of her drawings. Amongst them all are many Christmas themed cartoons, typically 
with Simmonds casting her critical eye over conspicuous consumption during the 
festive season, and highlighting the frustrations and foibles of British 
society at Christmas.

Many of Simmonds' Christmas cartoons rework literary classics, much like her 
longer worksGemma Bovery 
<http://www.vintage-books.co.uk/books/0224061143/posy-simmonds/gemma-bovery/> 
andTamara Drewe <https://www.theguardian.com/books/series/tamara-drewe>. Her 
retelling of Hans Christian Andersen'sLittle Match Girl 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=PSI%2f12%2f1&>
 for the Christmas edition of the Observer magazine on 23 December 1984, is 
transposed to contemporary Britain. In this version, the barefooted match girl 
(in 1984 selling batteries as well as matches) does not feel sorry for herself, 
but for the middle class family in the house she is standing outside, all of 
whom are grumpy and uncomfortable â€“ too many toys, too much food and drink, too 
many television adverts blaring out news of post-boxing day sales. She saves 
the day for them by giving them the batteries they need for the little boy's 
new toy rocket to work. The family, extremely grateful, shower her with gifts 
(or at least, re-gift the items that nobody wanted anyway). The moral of the 
story is, "it's better to give than to receive", especially when what you're 
receiving is useless (Lurex legwarmers and a bottle of bath salts).

Like the Little Match Girl, several of Simmonds' full colour illustrations and 
comic stories for Christmas transform traditional fairy stories into modern 
morality tales. Across Christmas week 2001, the Guardian published Simmonds' 
version ofCinderella 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=PSI%2f9%2f2&>
 inG2 <http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1385389641024/Cinderella-p1-2-G2.pdf>, in 
which residents in an old people's home called Clissold Court are the 
Cinderella figures, demeaned and belittled by the wealthy owners of the home, 
who are planning a lavish Christmas party for themselves. Two of the unhappy 
residents are transformed back into their younger selves by a fairy 
goddaughter, and are able to go the swanky party, where their glamorous 1940s 
good looks draw plenty of attention from the guests. While there, Miss Cinders 
seduces the owners' son, while Desmond Duff delivers some home truths about the 
state of Clissold Court in front of all the guests. Running away from the party 
at midnight, the pair turn back into their older selves, though Cinders has 
left her slipper behind. For the remainder of the Christmas period, the owners 
are far more solicitous; radiators are fixed, sherry is offered to the 
residents and life is better for all at the home.

Another beautiful Christmas colour illustration in the Archive is Simmonds' 
front cover for theholiday TV guide 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/GetImage.ashx?db=Catalog&type=default&fname=PSI_6_36_Santa_372.jpg>
 from 1992. In a visual take on 'While shepherds watched their flocks by 
night', Father Christmas distracts shepherds from the dismayed angel Gabriel 
with a present of a brand new TV showing the Queen's speech. It could be read 
as a playful comment on the secularisation of modern Christmas, as the 
shepherds literally turn their back on the religious icon, but it is also 
truthful about modern traditions, and what Christmas is really about for lots 
of families.

There are also many acerbic comments on society and Christmas in Simmonds' 
regular comic strips for the Guardian. In the 1980s, Simmonds' targets are the 
stockbrokers and traders who embody the decade's obsession with making money. 
One strip from 1988 shows three city workers singing an amended version of '
Dreaming of a white Christmas 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1385389642672/Dreaming-of-a-white-Christm.pdf>', 
hoping that the snow will cover all the unsightly homeless and destitute on the 
streets, so that they don't have to think about them. In another, from 1987, 
the character of Scrooge is updated as astockbroker in a stripy shirt 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1385389643514/A-Christmas-Carol---Posy.pdf> and 
braces, living in Docklands and driving a Porsche.

In other strips, a twinkle of Christmas spirit remains; in 'Twas the night 
before Christmas 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1385389640573/Edcuation-Centre-Archive-re.pdf>, a 
1979 cartoon from her long running series on the Weber family (described by 
Simmonds as "Guardian-reading, middle class and Labour voting ... split ends, 
Dr Scholl sandals and Laura Ashley smocks") the youngest child cannot sleep on 
Christmas Eve, so his father goes to read him a story. Mrs Weber, listening 
from upstairs, is confused by the sudden incongruous turn the story has taken 
and goes downstairs to investigate. She discovers her husband discussing 
sociological theory with Father Christmas in the kitchen.

A more benign look at Christmas is also shown in her drawings for the Guardian 
Saturday review, for which she drew theLiterary Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/posysimmonds/page/0,,1323207,00.html> 
series, and provided the illustrations for Carol Ann Duffy'sMrs Scrooge 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1385389643948/Mrs-Scrooge-illustrations.pdf> in 
2008. The 2004Christmas books issue 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1385389643793/Season's-readings-Review.pdf> 
features Simmonds' illustrations of contented people happily reading books 
they've received for Christmas, as well as cover art of Father Christmas 
reading the review section. Simmonds' tendency towards wry humour still shows 
in her preliminary sketches for this in one of her sketchbooks held in the 
Archive, in which a much grumpier looking Father Christmas peers through 
reading glasses, smoking a fag. This echoes Simmonds' recollection of 
discovering her talent for comic illustration early; in aninterview with 
Nicholas Wroe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2010/aug/28/posy-simmonds-tamara-drewe-interview>
 in 2010, she mentions that as a child "if I drew a fairy very well people 
would say it was good. But if I then made her smoke a cigarette people would 
laugh".
 Posy Simmonds' illustrations for the Christmas books issue of Review, 4 
December 2004 

A catalogue <http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/default.aspx> of Simmonds' 
material held in the GNM Archive is available to search online and the 
collection can be viewed in person in the reading room by appointment.

Past teaching resources of the month from the GNM Archive 
<http://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/series/resource-of-the-month>

More teaching resources can be found on our resources for teachers 
<http://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/resources-for-teachers> page.
