
Whether or not Labour’s decision to weaponise undergraduate tuition fees 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/education/2015/feb/27/ed-miliband-labour-tuition-fees-maintenance-grant>
 as an election issue will succeed in the polls, the disruption has already 
started.


Students <http://preview.gutools.co.uk/education/students> in this year’s 
admissions cycle may be encouraged to defer entry in the hope of incurring 
lower tuition fees from September 2016 (even though they wouldn’t get any 
benefit from doing so for at least 20 years after graduating). Some 
universities are already considering dropping fees for some hard-to-fill 
courses to pre-empt this risk, even though that could mean delivering those 
courses at a loss.

 Labour’s announcements only compound the turmoil that many institutions are 
already encountering, projecting them into an open-ended period of uncertainty 
about the economics of undergraduate education.

Over half of UK higher education providers have experienced falling total 
student enrolments over the past three or four years. To date the impact of 
this has been cushioned by the margin of comfort provided by £9,000 tuition 
fees and the partial protections afforded by student number controls.


Looking ahead, providers can only guess at what their prospective 
undergraduate business will look like. Already facing the insecurity of falling 
numbers of 18 year olds and the lifting of quota controls, institutions now 
have no idea of the revenue that future recruits will bring with them.

 In this environment, planning becomes a guessing game. This will, in turn, 
affect providers’ inclinations and abilities to invest in growth, better 
provision, staffing and innovations – all of which are vital to stemming the 
weakening international competitiveness of UK higher education. Battening down 
the hatches until the situation clarifies will look to many like the safest 
institutional strategy, with the perverse side effect of actually reducing 
student opportunities.

 The uncertainty is especially bad news for the dozen or more institutions 
already struggling in the zombie zone, battling a downward spiral of falling 
student recruitment, financial loses and eroded reserves.

If tuition fees are reduced to £6,000 and they are not compensated for the 
shortfall, it is difficult to see how some of these providers can survive. The 
institutions most at risk tend to be those that have a mission to increase 
local access and opportunities, for example by emphasising foundation, diploma 
and work-based provision. Their demise would impact disproportionately on 
under-represented and disadvantaged student groups.

At least as important as these repercussions of the tuition fee wars is the 
way the political agenda is distracting attention from other crucial issues. 
These include thecatastrophic fall in demand from part-time 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network/blog/2014/apr/11/part-time-student-plummet>
, work-based and older students, theflatlining of postgraduate numbers 
<http://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=6&ved=0CEkQFjAF&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.universitiesuk.ac.uk%2Fhighereducation%2FDocuments%2F2014%2FPostgraduateTaughtEducationTheFundingChallenge.pdf&ei=Lon0VPf5KInuaKOwgsgE&usg=AFQjCNGGa4f475Nbao4dHLCEPUvB2_Jfpw&sig2=gc3qdOh4GmnYiIrcabnqcw&bvm=bv.87269000,d.d2s>
 and, closely related to that, the apparentending of year-on-year growth 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network/blog/2014/apr/04/drop-oreign-student-numbers-uk-universities-too-complacent>
 in international student numbers.

 Around a third of students are studying part-time, equivalent to around a 
million or more highly-skilled work-based, mature and postgraduate students. 
Demand from these groups has dropped catastrophically over recent years, 
falling to little over half of their past levels. These are the very people on 
whom industry is relying for growth and competitiveness, and who employers 
report the greatest difficulties in recruiting.

 Home student demand for postgraduate study has been flat over recent years, 
with provision effectively sustained by strong international demand – there are
as many Chinese taught postgraduates in the UK 
<http://www.hefce.ac.uk/news/newsarchive/2014/news86922.html> as their domestic 
counterparts. However, recent reports (for example fromHefce 
<http://www.hefce.ac.uk/news/newsarchive/2014/news86922.html> and the British 
Council 
<http://www.britishcouncil.org/education/ihe/knowledge-centre/student-mobility/report-international-student-mobility-numbers>
) have flagged concerns about future international recruitment in the face of 
greatly increased competition and huge growth in domestic provision in 
traditional export markets.

 The tuition fee wars offer no solutions to these critical threats, and by 
deflecting attention elsewhere risk pushing them further down the political 
agenda.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>.
