
On 8 February, Chipotle will close its doors nationwide to spend a few hours 
presenting employees with new protocols and plans to move forward following the 
E coli outbreak, which the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has 
reported isofficially over 
<http://www.cnbc.com/2016/02/01/cdc-declares-chipotle-linked-e-coli-outbreak-over.html>
. The outbreak sent stock plummeting and had customers questioning whether 
there aren’t better options for a quick burrito. So here are some suggestions 
for how Chipotle might improve their public image and regain their customers’ 
trust.

Related: Chipotle faces uphill battle to win back reputation after E coli 
outbreak 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/09/chipotle-norovirus-outbreak-profit-plummet>


 * Ensure freshness with live animals 

Steal a trick from the seafood industry and allow customers to browse pens 
containing live pigs, chickens and cows before choosing the one they would like 
to consume. Once chosen, the animals can be taken away and gently slaughtered 
and seasoned on site before being served. The cost of keeping the animals 
sheltered and fed might hurt the bottom line, but giving customers complete 
confidence that their meal is freshly prepared will keep them coming back again 
and again.

2 Place a sullen old sea captain hiding a terrible secret in every location

Stick the old guy in the corner, make sure he always has a beer to nurse, and 
have him occasionally mutter something cryptic, like “What we lost out there 
can never be found,” or “We should have listened to the cook.” This doesn’t 
have anything to do with Chipotle’s brand, per se, but it would give eating 
there a fun air of mystery and adventure.

3 More culture!

Everyone loves Chipotle’s famous cups and paper bags featuring short stories 
or essays by contemporary writers, so how about pushing that dose of culture to 
the next level and promising live performances of Hamilton, the Broadway 
musical sensation that brings history to life, throughout the day at each of 
Chipotle’s 1,900 outlets? Sure, customers dropping in for lunch might not have 
time to sit through the entire show, but get any one of Hamilton’s great 
musical numbers running through their heads and they’ll definitely be back for 
more. As the New York Times writes every Friday, itreally is that good 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/07/theater/review-hamilton-young-rebels-changing-history-and-theater.html>
.

4 Ban political discussion

With many more months of campaigning ahead, customers might enjoy having a 
designated spot guaranteed to be free from mentions of Donald Trump’s latest 
outburst or the threat to national security posed by the now-notoriousBerniebros
 
<http://www.salon.com/2016/02/02/bernie_bros_stop_this_meme_your_dumb_joke_about_hillarys_music_taste_isnt_funny_its_predictably_sexist/>
.

5 Hire Tom Hanks to make a surprise appearance 

Tom Hanks isn’t just a huge star – he’s also the greatest living American, and 
always has been. Having him throw his support behind the beleaguered chain will 
create massive goodwill, and the promise that he’ll make an unscheduled 
appearance at every Chipotle in America at some point in 2016 will keep 
customers returning in hopes of catching the Forrest Gump and Bachelor Party 
star at lunch.

6 Give that sea captain an estranged daughter eager to reconnect with him

What if the old sailor has an adult daughter eager to put the past aside and 
develop a relationship with her father before it’s too late? And he’s too 
bitter and haunted to let her into his life – until she presents him with a 
beautiful, bacteria-free barbacoa burrito, one bite of which fills him with 
such joy that whatever sins he committed in the Arctic Circle – and believe me, 
he committed them – suddenly don’t feel so damning. Suddenly he’s ready to give 
and receive love.

7 Take a firm stance against Isis

There’s absolutely no reason to think that Chipotle isn’t already firmly 
opposed to the terrorist group, but the chain has nothing to lose by publicly 
going on the record and firmly denouncing the organization. It worked for Ted 
Cruz.
