
Alejandro Mesonero, SEAT’s 48-year-old director of design, likens himself to a 
sponge, soaking up inspiration and influences all around him. “I think that’s 
the same of anyone who works in a creative environment,” explains Mesonero, 
“not just car designers, but artists and musicians of all kinds.”

Related: From singing in the backseat to smartphone integration: in-car 
entertainment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/inside-seat/2016/may/23/from-singing-in-the-back-seat-to-smartphone-integration-in-car-entertainment>

In many careers as you move up the ladder you get further from the work that 
attracted you to the trade in the first place. This isn’t so with car design. 
Mesonero may be the boss of design at SEAT’s Martorell design studio, but he is 
always very much hands-on, particularly in the design of the new Ateca: 
drawing, advising his team of designers and rolling up his sleeves to work on 
clay models alongside his staff. And to take part fully in the design process, 
Mesonero also has to be inspired by his environment and by what’s going on 
outside the walls of the studio.

The obvious thought is that the works of Antoni Gaudí that are synonymous with 
the city of Barcelona, including his masterwork the Sagrada Família, have been 
one of the major influences to be sucked up by the Mesonero sponge. “Yes, but 
really it is the whole spirit of Barcelona,” he says. “I grew up in Madrid, a 
city with plenty of its own culture and particular architecture, but here in 
Barcelona, because it is a city by the sea, it seems to have a totally 
different atmosphere.

“It is to do with the people. They seem to have an enjoyment of life and 
contentment that seems to flow out of them, living in such an inspiring city 
full of variety and, of course, with a very good climate. Being surrounded by 
people who are happy and energetic seems to inspire creativity and the desire 
to make things that have style and value.

“And then of course you are right, there is the amazing architecture in 
Barcelona, the colours, the vibrancy. The music, too, and local art. All these 
elements are inspirational.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j3hp%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j3hp%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe22cbcae60f4b8d32bcfad2ea2820251851cecac%2F0_284_4247_2548%2F4247.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=SEAT's%20star%20car%20designer%20reveals%20all%3A%20'Barcelona%20puts%20ideas%20into%20my%20head'&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j3hp%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=SEAT%27s+star+car+designer+reveals+all%3A+%27Barcelona+puts+ideas+into+my+head%27&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j3hp%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe22cbcae60f4b8d32bcfad2ea2820251851cecac%2F0_284_4247_2548%2F4247.jpg>
 The drawings are then made into full-size clay models. Photograph: Jake Curtis 
for the Guardian 
Mesonero studied design in Barcelona in the early 1990s before embarking upon 
a postgraduate degree in vehicle design at London’s Royal College of Art (RCA). 
Dozens of the world’s car designers have studied at the RCA and, like most of 
them, Mesonero found the atmosphere, his tutors and his fellow students 
inspiring. He is diplomatic about London’s very un-Mediterranean climate and 
the effect it might have had, and whether his sponge was dampened only by 
rainwater.

From the RCA Mesonero joined SEAT in 1995, as a designer at Martorell, where 
he worked on vehicles such as the SEAT Bolero concept car, a four-door coupe 
that never reached production itself but influenced future models, including 
the Leon. Two years later Mesonero moved to Audi’s design centre in Sitges, 
less than an hour south from Barcelona on the coast, where he worked on various 
different SEAT, Audi and Volkswagen models. The first decade of the 2000s took 
him to Paris and South Korea before he arrived back in Barcelona in 2011 to 
take charge of design at SEAT.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j3hp%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j3hp%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F318558089d35ef18ddb17813b7d4d5b6c8ecb35d%2F0_1431_2254_2816%2F2254.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=SEAT's%20star%20car%20designer%20reveals%20all%3A%20'Barcelona%20puts%20ideas%20into%20my%20head'&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j3hp%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=SEAT%27s+star+car+designer+reveals+all%3A+%27Barcelona+puts+ideas+into+my+head%27&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j3hp%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F318558089d35ef18ddb17813b7d4d5b6c8ecb35d%2F0_1431_2254_2816%2F2254.jpg>
 Director of design, and vintage bicycle enthusiast, Alejandro Mesonaro. 
Photograph: Jake Curtis for the Guardian 
There are people who work in the motor industry for whom the car itself is 
merely a commodity. Designers, almost without exception, are the opposite – and 
Mesonero falls directly into the besotted camp. “Walking by the sea, along the 
Barcelona waterfront, almost always puts ideas into my head,” says Mesonero, 
“but nothing is as effective a catalyst as going for a drive. It is at the 
wheel where I can really relax and think about driving, what cars mean to us. 
It’s while driving that many of my thoughts for the future designs of our cars 
come to me.

“And I don’t have one particular route or destination; it’s simply the act of 
driving that does it. Mind you, we’re spoilt for excellent roads in Catalonia.”

While it is unlikely that you will ever meet a car designer who does not have 
a passion for motorcars, it is also unusual to come across one who does not 
love the art of creating by hand. “One of my hobbies is to make model cars,” 
says Mesonero. “Not from kits – I make a sculpture of a car, then create a 
mould and cast the model itself. Not in brass or metal, but in a resin 
material.” It’s a process not dissimilar to creating full-size cars, which at 
SEAT are modelled in clay from initial drawings.

SEAT clearly gets very good value from this member of staff who can’t stop 
himself creating designs when the bell goes at the end of the day. But Mesonero 
has a new passion that doesn’t involve cars. “I’ve just bought myself a 
wonderful 1956 Raleigh bicycle that I’m doing up. Not restoring, because I 
don’t want it to be perfect, just getting into nice usable condition but 
without taking away the patina of the past 60 years.”

It’s easy to imagine Alejandro Mesonero pedalling gently along the Barcelona 
waterfront on his vintage British bicycle on a sunny evening, drawing in the 
atmosphere while watching the locals relaxing. It could end simply with a glass 
of wine in a harbourside bar – or perhaps on that ride he will have seen 
something, even subconsciously, that will inspire one of his next car designs.
