
There was a time when Visitacion Valley middle school 
<https://visitacion-sfusd-ca.schoolloop.com/cms/page_view?d=x&piid=&vpid=1233497020841>
 in San Francisco could have featured in a gritty US crime drama. Surrounded by 
drugs and gang violence, the kids were stressed out and agitated. One day 
children came in to find three dead bodies dumped in the schoolyard. “In 2006 
there were 38 killings in our neighbourhood,” says Barry O’Driscoll, the 
school’s head of physical education (PE). He says the lives of students were 
infected by violence in the community, and several fights would break out every 
day.

In 2007 a meditation programme called Quiet Time 
<https://visitacion-sfusd-ca.schoolloop.com/cms/page_view?d=x&piid=&vpid=1319547380534>
 was brought in to meet some of these challenges. “When I first heard about it 
I thought it probably wasn’t going to work,” says O’Driscoll. “We get thrown a 
new thing every couple of years so I didn’t put too much faith in it.” But in 
April, just a month after meditation began, teachers noticed changes in 
behaviour. “Students seemed happy,” says O’Driscoll. “They worked harder, paid 
more attention, were easier to teach and the number of fights fell 
dramatically.”

In the first year of Quiet Time suspensions at Visitacion Valley – which has 
500 students aged 11-13 –were reduced by 45% 
<http://cwae.org/media/SF_Chron_1-13-14-4.pdf> (pdf). By 2009-10, attendance 
rates were over 98% (some of the highest in the city), and today 20% of 
graduates are admitted to the highly academicLowell high school 
<https://lhs-sfusd-ca.schoolloop.com/> – before it was rare for even one 
student to be accepted. Perhaps even more remarkable, last year’sCalifornia 
Healthy Kids Survey <http://chks.wested.org/> from the state’s education 
department found that students at Visitacion Valley middle schoolwere the 
happiest in the whole of San Francisco 
<https://www.wested.org/news-events/using-data-to-find-the-happiest-school-in-san-francisco/>
.


Related: The art of relaxation: ideas to get students to unwind and recharge 
<http://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/aug/03/tips-for-relaxation-mindfulness-meditation>

A lot has changed over this period, including three principals coming and 
going, but O’Driscoll puts the turnaround down to the one constant: the calming 
influence of the meditation programme. “It’s provided a lot of stability to our 
school, helping staff and kids get through the stress they have in their lives.”

The impressive results have led to more schools in the city introducing the 
programme 
<http://www.sfgate.com/opinion/openforum/article/Meditation-transforms-roughest-San-Francisco-5136942.php>
. But Quiet Time took years to develop. Its origins are in the 1990s when two 
Silicon Valley investors – Jeff Rice and Laurent Valosek – developed a 
programme to teach meditation in public schools, inspired by the tragic 
Columbine high school massacre. “After the shooting, the usual culprits were 
blamed: guns, violent movies and video games,” says Rice. “But no one touched 
on the real problem – stress.”

So the privately funded non-profit Center for Wellness and Achievement in 
Education <http://cwae.org/> (CWAE) was set up. When they started everyone said 
it would be impossible to get 12-year-olds to sit for even a minute, but 
through transcendental meditation (TM) they proved critics wrong.

The programme, introduced to all ages, sees students sit for 15 minutes of 
meditation twice a day. Classes take place at students’ desks after the 
qualified TM teacher rings a bell. Students then repeat a personal mantra (a 
word from Sanskrit, the ancient Indian language) in their heads until they 
reach a deep feeling of relaxation. Sometimes the whole school meets to 
meditate in assemblies.

Before the students learn to meditate, the Quiet Time programme requires all 
staff to be trained in TM. O’Driscoll was sceptical at first about mediating 
himself, but since giving it a try he can concentrate better and feels less 
stressed.


The teacher has also seen dramatic transformations in his students. Eighth 
grader Stacy* has been meditating since she joined the school three years ago. 
“She used to have trouble at home and get into fights with her family,” says 
O’Driscoll. “Once Quiet Time started, she mellowed out and started getting 
along with people.” Stacy’s academic performance has also improved – she’s in 
the top 5% of the class.

But adopting the programme isn’t without it’s challenges. To do it properly 
Visitacion Valley middle school made the day 30 minutes longer. Other schools 
have taken a few minutes off lunch and tutorials.

As for getting the children to start meditating, O’Driscoll says the biggest 
hurdle was getting them to feel comfortable with their eyes closed. “They 
thought their classmates would be making fun of them, staring at them, maybe 
possibly even hitting them,” he says. Once the students got over that, they 
were open to trying to meditate.

O’Driscoll also says that leadership buy-in is essential for the programme to 
work as there needs to be support in terms of time and resourcing. It’s also 
important to start small. “Don’t just throw it into 2,000 schools,” he says. 
“Start with one class or year and let it grow from there.”

The UK has already started experimenting with meditation: 400 secondary 
schools offer programmes like theDot B mindfulness meditation programme 
<http://mindfulnessinschools.org/what-is-b/>, which tends to take place once a 
week in personal, social, health education (PSHE) class. An all-party 
parliamentary group has alsorecommended the Department for Education designate 
three schools to pioneer mindfulness teaching 
<http://issuu.com/mindfulnessinitiativereports/docs/mindfulness-appg-report_mindful-nat>
, and set up a £1m fund to allow more schools to benefit from support in the 
practice.

In the outside world, TM has been criticised for the price-tag it comes with; 
the programme at Visitacion Valley costs $280,000 (£185,128) a year - paid for 
mainly through private donations to CWAE. That funds four and a half (full-time 
equivalent) Quiet Time staff on site to teach the classes and support students. 
Rice says they use TM because it takes those who do it to a deep level of 
relaxation, and it’s easy for children to learn. But he admits that “it takes a 
big time commitment in resources and attention commitment to do this. And 
that’s one of the challenges.”

However, Swarana Patel, a teacher in a north London secondary school where 
behaviour is often an obstacle, can see the benefits of a more intensive 
programme like this. “A lot of the kids have deep anger issues or problems 
focusing,” she says. “Maybe having half an hour just to focus on themselves so 
they get awareness and grounding, might have some impact.”

Related: How two minutes of mindfulness can calm a class and boost attainment  
<http://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/teacher-blog/2014/jun/03/mindfulness-class-students-education>

And it could help reduce costs later. “Young people are incredibly stressed,” 
says Michael Matania who teaches mindfulness meditation to young people in 
London through a programme calledMindkit <http://mindkit.org.uk/>. “There’s an 
explosion of mental health problems among young people and it’s going to be 
incredibly expensive to treat in the future. It’s much cheaper to focus on 
prevention and building resilience, and mindfulness is the single best tool 
that you could possibly give them.”

As for Visitacion Valley middle school, the area around it is still violent, 
but now the children are not as affected by it. “We might get verbal 
disagreements, but the kids are able to talk through it and move on instead of 
punching each other,” says O’Driscoll, adding that the last fist fight at the 
school was three years ago. “It’s very peaceful here now.”


 *The name of one student has been changed.

 * This article was amended on Wednesday 25 November to clarify that 
Visitacion Valley middle school funds Quiet Time mostly through private 
donations to CWAE. 
The international lessons in education series 
<http://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/series/international-lessons-in-education>
 is sponsored byeTwinning 
<https://www.etwinning.net/?utm_source=Guardian&utm_medium=Website&utm_content=Guardian%20Sponsored%20by%20sentence&utm_campaign=Guardian%20Sponsored%20by%20sentence>
, which is managed by theBritish Council 
<https://www.britishcouncil.org/etwinning?utm_source=Guardian&utm_medium=Website&utm_content=Guardian%20Sponsored%20by%20sentence&utm_campaign=Guardian%20Sponsored%20by%20sentence%20British%20council%20eTwinning>
 in the UK. All content is editorially independent except for pieces labelled 
“brought to you by”. Find out morehere 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
