
Super-florist Nikki Tibbles combined hard graft with an intuitive sense of 
style to build her world-renowned business Wild at Heart. At home in London, 
she offers a glimpse into a typical day and reveals the secrets to how she 
unwinds after dealing with such a busy diary.

I wake at 7am, shower then head outside to walk my four dogs Smith, Tia, 
Ronnie and Lenny. That’s my hour of peace. Then I’ll have a couple of bananas 
and a black Earl Grey tea. I’ve turned over a new leaf on nutrition – no more 
madeleines for breakfast or biscuits for lunch.

Nikki's feel-good tips 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/labs/2016/may/estee-lauder/nikki.html> 
Two mornings a week I have a personal training session in the park – I can’t 
bear gyms. Then I’ll head to the Wild at Heart office, near the flower market 
in Battersea. Today, I’m interviewing a prospective new team member. It’s vital 
they understand our philosophy. Whatever we produce, we always stand back and 
ask: “How can we make this better?” I never want a signature look, but our work 
is always abundant, luxurious and a little overgrown.


At 11.30am, I’m in a briefing with a high-profile client and her wedding 
planner at The Dorchester. We recently worked on the flowers for Guy and Jacqui 
Ritchie’s wedding and bringing what they wanted to life in the most beautiful 
environment was an honour. More back-to-back Wild at Heart meetings follow. I 
always work through lunch but I try to take nourishing snacks with me, such as 
fruit and nuts, and my new favourite thing, feta, avocado and tomatoes. As a 
vegetarian I’m mindful of striking a healthy balance. This afternoon, after a 
meeting out of town, I’m seeing an expert who’s helping me with my diet.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j2zf%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j2zf%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F294ca47c12cca1500285010d95d95dee9cc3c45c%2F0_185_2779_1668%2F2779.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20growing%20passion%20for%20improvement&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j2zf%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A+growing+passion+for+improvement&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j2zf%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F294ca47c12cca1500285010d95d95dee9cc3c45c%2F0_185_2779_1668%2F2779.jpg>
 ‘The dogs sleep on my bed, of course.’ Photograph: Victoria Adamson 
Sometimes my working day blends into the evening. Tonight I have an industry 
event, so I head off to Kensington Palace, changing into my gold shoes for a 
subtle hint of glamour. On other evenings, I’ll relax at home with friends and 
the dogs in London. Alternatively, I’ll spend time at the house I rent in 
Petworth, West Sussex. I love to escape the city when I can and like to clear 
my head by walking and cooking. The house itself is a 20-acre place and I plan 
to make room for rescue donkeys, horses and pigs.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j2zf%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j2zf%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F272227e294412c39cbe478f7e1a3d976fb7c4dfa%2F182_1345_1545_927%2F1545.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20growing%20passion%20for%20improvement&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j2zf%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A+growing+passion+for+improvement&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j2zf%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F272227e294412c39cbe478f7e1a3d976fb7c4dfa%2F182_1345_1545_927%2F1545.jpg>
 ‘I apply Estée Lauder Advanced Night Repair so I look fresh in the morning.’ 
Photograph: Victoria Adamson 
Evenings are often reserved for Wild at Heart Foundation work, the animal 
protection charity I co-founded with Nadine Kayser. The foundation is supported 
by 10% of Wild at Heart’s profits and our goal is to reduce the global stray 
dog population. We recently opened our first neutering clinic in Romania, with 
centres in Bosnia, Cyprus, Lesbos and Puerto Rico to follow in 2016. I’m so 
proud of what we’ve achieved and am excited about the challenges ahead.


At 10.30pm I take a final walk with the dogs, then jump in the shower. 
Skincare is important, so regardless of how busy my day is I never compromise 
on my night-time routine. Whether I’m home late after a work event or getting a 
rare early night in Sussex, I always apply Estée Lauder Advanced Night Repair 
so I look fresh in the morning, ready to do it all over again. In bed I catch 
up on work emails and Instagram, and then read – I’ve got a thing for crime 
novels and cookbooks – or dive into some, mostly Icelandic, TV drama. The dogs 
sleep on my bed, of course. Lights out at 1am.

