
The rooms in Alan Kitching <http://www.thetypographyworkshop.com>’s home are 
arranged like one of his letterpress prints. Some are stacked, some are wedged, 
some aren’t in the right place. One dominates, while others bow out. But each 
room, like each letter, makes an impact and has a purpose.

From the outside, it’s obvious this isn’t an ordinary home: three large, 
shop-style window panels showcase Kitching’s iconic prints – word-based images 
in big, bold type. A fourth is given over to local notices: jumble sales and 
student art shows. “That was Celia’s idea,” Kitching says. “She was more 
gregarious than me.” Celia Stothard, his late wife, bought the property 19 
years ago. She chose it for its flexibility: a place for them to live and hold 
talks, exhibitions and performances. She was a designer and artist, too, as 
well as a jazz singer.

The building is a former alehouse in Kennington, south London, buttressed up 
against a courthouse (local folklore has it that Charlie Chaplin used to come 
here to fetch jugs of ale for his mother). Storage rooms cascade off the back 
of the ground floor, where Kitching runsthe Typography Workshop 
<http://www.thetypographyworkshop.com/#>, into a cellar crammed with his 
extensive, 19th-century type collection. Upstairs, a high-ceilinged mezzanine 
has a reading nook reachable only by the swivel of a library ladder.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ht4b%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ht4b%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa89d338c4fb914872582d27f363d6565eebee4cd%2F0_582_4749_2849%2F4749.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A-Z%20living%3A%20an%20inside%20look%20at%20typographer%20Alan%20Kitching's%20home&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ht4b%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A-Z+living%3A+an+inside+look+at+typographer+Alan+Kitching%27s+home&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ht4b%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa89d338c4fb914872582d27f363d6565eebee4cd%2F0_582_4749_2849%2F4749.jpg>
 Kitching in his workshop. Photograph: Suki Dhanda for the Guardian 
The printing craft lends itself well to interior decoration. Plan chests 
double as tabletops. An old iron printing press (from Kitching’s 
apprenticeship) is as much machine as objet d’art. Wooden type blocks are 
simply pleasing to look at. And then there are the prints themselves: 
Kitching’s book and magazine covers, work for commercial and private clients, 
design competition pieces all adorn the walls.

Before the couple moved in, the building housed a mail-order fashion company. 
“The place was full of people packing T-shirts and frocks,” he says. “There 
were no cooking facilities. At first we lived very primitively.” Stothard’s 
studio was upstairs and Kitching’s downstairs, and they’d communicate via notes.

That work-focused ethos is reflected in the layout. Given the size of the 
house, the kitchen, bathroom and bedroom are tiny. “Most kitchens are too big,” 
Kitching says. “They’ve got the thing [island] in the middle, cupboards all 
over the place. I’ve been in houses where it looks well designed, but you have 
to walk around all the time.” His galley kitchen has utensils hanging from 
hooks, with all ingredients within two steps’ reach of a small worktop. “I like 
constrained living, because it frees you from having to think about it all too 
much.” He favours shallow cupboards, where everything’s on display. “It’s about 
utility, no fuss.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ht4b%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ht4b%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcbbb9dd354c20e2772993fc7c03e7ef3b404ef0%2F0_0_3617_4823%2F3617.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A-Z%20living%3A%20an%20inside%20look%20at%20typographer%20Alan%20Kitching's%20home&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ht4b%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A-Z+living%3A+an+inside+look+at+typographer+Alan+Kitching%27s+home&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ht4b%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcbbb9dd354c20e2772993fc7c03e7ef3b404ef0%2F0_0_3617_4823%2F3617.jpg>
 The tiny kitchen. Photograph: Suki Dhanda for the Guardian 
Kitching, now 75, grew up in a two-up, two-down in Darlington. On leaving 
school, he wanted to be a poster artist, but that was deemed “a bit odd” in the 
big railway town, so he took up the closest thing, an apprenticeship as a 
typesetter. Print jobs followed, and as a technician at Watford School of Art, 
he met the Modernist designerAnthony Froshaug 
<http://www.historygraphicdesign.com/the-age-of-information/the-international-typographic-style/173-anthony-froshaug>
, who became a mentor. In the 1970s, Kitching established himself as a graphic 
designer and lived with his first wife, Rita, in Richmond, where they brought 
up two sons. But Rita died young, from breast cancer, and after her death he 
moved the boys into central London and redirected his practice to making 
typographical art prints.

These days, he spends most of his time in his bright ground-floor studio. On 
the sills lies a sun-bleached “cabinet of curiosities”: two fossilised frogs, a 
mini boomerang, an Eiffel Tower figurine, all put there for passing children to 
gawk at. “Three- and four-year-olds stop and say, ‘Look at this! What’s that?’ 
I can hear them; they can’t see me. You hear all these conversations outside: 
people on their phones, coming out of the court having an argument.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ht4b%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ht4b%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbdfcb3e2b51bf20061b7d748ce7db6ea73947968%2F0_0_3614_4811%2F3614.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A-Z%20living%3A%20an%20inside%20look%20at%20typographer%20Alan%20Kitching's%20home&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ht4b%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A-Z+living%3A+an+inside+look+at+typographer+Alan+Kitching%27s+home&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ht4b%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbdfcb3e2b51bf20061b7d748ce7db6ea73947968%2F0_0_3614_4811%2F3614.jpg>
 Kitching established himself as a graphic designer in the 1970s. Photograph: 
Suki Dhanda for the Guardian 
Kitching’s workshop is behind the studio, with clear plastic panels for a 
roof. “It’s like working outside in daylight.” Hanging from the drying racks 
are rough poster designs for his forthcoming Somerset House retrospective. 
Surfaces teem with rollers, rags and pots of paint. It is a bit cold, he 
admits, but “I don’t really notice it. My assistants do, but I tell them to put 
on more jumpers.”

Celia passed away five years ago, aged 61, but she’s still everywhere in the 
house: prints by her, paintings of her, newspaper cuttings she stuck on the 
wall. And, while Kitching enjoys his own company, he says he’d rather have 
someone with him. “We’d always meet for coffee at 11 and have dinner together.” 
He recently had in some schoolchildren to create a mural for the Southbank. 
“Celia would have been beside herself: it was the perfect project for what she 
was trying to do with this place. In a way, I’m trying to fulfil her wishes.”

Does he see himself growing older here? “I couldn’t leave London,” he says. 
“I’ve got so used to the convenience. I like to be in close contact, if you 
like.” And in this house? “Everything I need is here. Plus, everywhere else 
I’ve lived has been conventional and I wouldn’t want to go back to that life – 
you know, carpets and Hoovers.” He laughs. “Work comes first, living comes 
second. I haven’t got time for vacuuming.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ht4b%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ht4b%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32acf731e372e190dba5bc23ecd7697e8da9567b%2F0_2207_3619_2171%2F3619.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A-Z%20living%3A%20an%20inside%20look%20at%20typographer%20Alan%20Kitching's%20home&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ht4b%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A-Z+living%3A+an+inside+look+at+typographer+Alan+Kitching%27s+home&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ht4b%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32acf731e372e190dba5bc23ecd7697e8da9567b%2F0_2207_3619_2171%2F3619.jpg>
 The entrance with its panelled windows, from behind which Kitching can see and 
hear the goings-on outside. Photograph: Suki Dhanda for the Guardian 



House rules

First piece of furniture An old farmhouse chair from an antique shop in 
Richmond in 1969.

Change in neighbourhood The estate agents used to be very low-key.

Interior design hero Norman Potter 
<https://hyphenpress.co.uk/authors/norman_potter>: he had an honest, minimal 
approach to design, always conditioned by the space.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ht4b%2Fsfb%23img-6&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ht4b%2Fsfb%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d54364e6e1e1320d3def913a53748155b47b72f%2F0_0_2496_1497%2F2496.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A-Z%20living%3A%20an%20inside%20look%20at%20typographer%20Alan%20Kitching's%20home&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ht4b%2Fstw%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A-Z+living%3A+an+inside+look+at+typographer+Alan+Kitching%27s+home&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ht4b%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d54364e6e1e1320d3def913a53748155b47b72f%2F0_0_2496_1497%2F2496.jpg>
Biggest extravagance The Wrington Collection of theatrical type that we bought 
from an old printers’ in Somerset.

Last home purchase An espresso machine.

Most treasured possessions A wooden pencil box my father made for me; and a 
picture of Celia sitting in our studio.

One thing you would change I’d add a veranda because there’s no garden. But I 
think it’s too late now.

• Alan Kitching Special Edition: A Life In Letterpress 
<http://www.laurenceking.com/en/alan-kitching-special-edition-a-life-in-leterpress/>
 is published by Laurence King on 7 April.An exhibition 
<http://pickmeup.somersethouse.org.uk/#/> runs at Somerset House, London WC1, 
from 21 April-2 May, as part of its Pick Me Up festival.
