
Under the guise of “reviewing” the Freedom of Information Act 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2000/36/contents> (FoIa), there is a fear 
among journalists that the government is determined to water it down.

Concern that the government is up to no good has grown more intense with each 
passing month sincethe government announced its review in July 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/freedom-of-information-new-commission>.

There have been rumours that the cross-party commission selected to consider 
the operation of the FoIa is heeding advice from Westminster, Whitehall and the 
Local Government Association, plus other public bodies such as the NHS, to curb 
the effectiveness of the act.

They complain that people who use the FoIa to discover what is being done in 
their name - such as journalists, NGOs and members of the public (aka citizens) 
- are being overly inquisitive.

Therefore, it inhibits politicians and bureaucrats from carrying out their 
tasks with the discretion they believe to be necessary. It is also proving 
costly to service increasing numbers of inquirers, especially in dealing with 
those who make what the public bodies regard as trivial requests.

Journalists counter that government, local and national, remains overly 
secretive. And this culture, which has long been custom and practice in 
Britain, also infects all public bodies and institutions.


What’s more, those organisations have gradually found ways to frustrate the 
workings of FoIa and the greatest need is to strengthen the act to ensure it 
leads to greater transparency.

All hail Labour deputy leader Tom Watson for leading the calls on that front 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/oct/29/freedom-of-information-act-tom-watson-foi>
 in parliament andTory MP David Davis and a dozen of his colleagues 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/30/tory-mps-will-oppose-watering-down-freedom-of-information-act>
 who are prepared to defend the act.

And tribute, a great tribute, should be paid to Dominic Ponsford, the editor 
of the Press Gazette, for mounting a campaign “Hands off FOI”, which resulted in
41,000 signatories to a petition calling on the government to make it more 
effective 
<http://www.pressgazette.co.uk/content/41000-signatures-400-pages-evidence-press-gazette-submission-urges-government-not-weaken-foi>
.

Now these efforts to prevent the dilution of the act have been bolstered by an 
intervention from the Daily Mail’s editor-in-chief,Paul Dacre 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/pauldacre>.

First, he made a written submission to the review commission, in which he 
called for greater openness in governmentand said the desire to keep things 
secret by default was incompatible with the digital age. 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/09/daily-mail-editor-paul-dacre-freedom-of-information>

Then, on Thursday, he used his newspaper to go on the offensive with a 
campaigning front page: “Just who do they think they are? 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3353660/Public-sector-chiefs-unite-attempt-crush-FOIs.html>
 You pay their wages. But the so-called public servants who run councils, the 
NHS and police are uniting to keep you in the dark about their greed, 
incompetence and corruption.” The article began:

“Public sector bureaucrats yesterday united in a ‘sinister’ attempt to crush 
the public’s right to know about scandals in the NHS, police, town halls and 
education.

The bosses – paid billions by the taxpayer – made a series of extraordinary 
claims that elderly care and children’s services would suffer unless the 
Freedom of Information Act is curbed.

This is despite the vital role the legislation has played in exposing 
corruption, incompetence, ill treatment and ‘fat cat’ pay and perks that drains 
vast sums from the Health Service, policing and council budgets.”

And it turned inside to a spread giving various examples of authorities, such 
as the NHS, police, universities and local councils, that are seeking to curb 
the working of FoIa.

In addition, there was a full-length leading article, The insidious plot to 
curb your right to know 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-3353676/DAILY-MAIL-COMMENT-insidious-plot-curb-right-know.html>
, which argued that “no law has been more effective in exposing the dirty 
secrets of officialdom and the political class to the public.”

It pointed to the revelations that have emerged via FoIa requests, such as 
MPs’ expenses fiddling... ambulance delays... pay and perks for town hall 
officers, police bosses, NHS chiefs and vice-chancellors.

“Such scandals,” said the editorial, “would never have come to light without 
the 2000 act that gave legal force to the public’s right to know... almost 
every day the act unearths a fresh example of incompetence, waste or greed.”

The Mail scorns the argument that FoIa costs too much: “The truth is that the 
FoI Act can save many times more than it costs to administer. Indeed, across 
Whitehall, the bill for processing requests amounted to just £5.7m last year.

“That’s £700,000 less than the cost of ministerial limousines and one fiftieth 
of the annual bill for the government’s 3,650 press officers and spin doctors, 
almost as many as all the journalists in Fleet Street put together.”

And I applaud the paper’s further point that much of the information 
discovered through Foia - maybe all of it - “should have been freely available 
on the authorities’ websites”.

There lies the truth of the matter. If only all public bodies were transparent 
then there wouldn’t be any need for the thousands of FoIa requests.

I concede that some reporters have indulged in fishing expeditions and some 
have put in ridiculous requests. But this is a minority sport that is being 
used by the secrecy propagandists to support their arguments.


I do accept, however, that there are problems to consider. Should all internal 
emails - say, between university lecturers about their students, or local 
authority officers about the behaviour of members of staff - be available?

In such cases, I think it incumbent on the requester to argue an overwhelming 
public interest case to see such correspondence. Some of my journalistic and 
academic colleagues disagree, contending that nothing should be off limits.

Whatever the case, it is clear that the FoIa has been increasingly beneficial 
to society. It has enabled the exposure of really important material and any 
watering down of its provisions will deny citizens their right to know what is 
done in their name. Transparency should be our watchword.

So I am at one with Paul Dacre, Dominic Ponsford, Tom Watson and David Davis 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/daviddavis> on this issue. I don’t think 
that particular political amalgamation has ever happened before.
