
A message of comfort from Doctor Who
When Thomas Goodall’s grandmother died in November 2014, the then 
nine-year-old was devastated, his autism making it especially hard for him to 
deal with his emotions. It was a personal video message from Peter Capaldi, in 
character as Doctor Who – Thomas’s favourite programme – that gave him the 
courage to attend the funeral and begin to accept his feelings.

 “Sometimes sad things happen to us,” Capaldi told Thomas, who had written a 
letter to the actor. “You should know that we’re on your side too,” he added in 
reassurance.

 Thomas’s father, Ross, posted the video online and it went viral, attracting 
supportive comments that further boosted his son’s confidence.

Related: Musical Wicked to be adapted for autistic audiences 
<http://www.theguardian.com/tmi/2016/apr/15/musical-wicked-to-be-adapted-for-autistic-audiences>

Something sweet
Axel Newell, a severely autistic 12-year-old from Hove, was distraught when 
food allergies meant he could no longer order his favourite drink on his 
regular trips to his favourite café in their local Waitrose. However, a caring 
staff member saved the day.

 Heloise Crafer took the time to experiment with different ingredients to make 
the perfect replacement for his frothy milk.

Describing how they regularly face abuse from intolerant members of the 
public, Axel’s mother Catherine said she wanted to highlight the difference 
even a small gesture such as this can make: “I want to show the nice things 
people can do,” she said. “These little things can make our lives so much 
better.”


The customer isn’t always right
Restaurant owner Mike Jennings was appalled when a table of customers at his 
restaurant Grenache in Manchester refused to be served by a new staff member 
who is autistic. Andy, 45, combines his career as a waiter with his 
responsibilities as a registered carer for his elderly mother, who suffers from 
Alzheimers. Boss Mike and his partner Karen were so upset by the way Andy was 
treated that they made a public statement on the restaurant’s Facebook page, 
asking anyone else who felt that way about Andy not to book a table.

“I try not to take it personally,” Andy told the Manchester Evening News, 
before adding, heart-breakingly, “because it has happened so many times in the 
past.” Even so, he says he was delighted that his bosses were “so supportive”.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t9jp%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t9jp%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2b23653a83e67b05382b71f0179f6d1229e05ce%2F0_267_3828_2296%2F3828.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eight%20heartwarming%20stories%20about%20the%20kindness%20of%20strangers&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t9jp%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eight+heartwarming+stories+about+the+kindness+of+strangers&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t9jp%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2b23653a83e67b05382b71f0179f6d1229e05ce%2F0_267_3828_2296%2F3828.jpg>
 Arran, Vickie and Euan Sutherland at Soccerworld in Dundee, where the manager 
helped to introduce an autism-friendly soft play area. Photograph: Donald 
MacLeod 
Playing nice
A bad experience for one mum led to a Dundee play centre reaching out to the 
local community. Vickie Sutherland had taken her children to Soccerworld, but 
hadn’t anticipated the harsh reaction to her autistic son Arran. Just two at 
the time, Arran had taken his clothes off, “which was quite a normal thing for 
Arran to do [then],” prompting other parents to complain. Vickie was ordered to 
leave, struggling with her two children, as other families looked on 
unsympathetically.

However, the manager of the play centre later proved more helpful, and worked 
with Vickie to introduce a new autism-friendly soft play area. The safe space 
for children and their parents proved a hit and is full every week. “Instead of 
negative comments, it would be lovely if people were kinder to each other,” 
says Vickie.

Pint-sized grocer
Connor Mason’s favourite place is his local supermarket – he’s so fond of it 
his mum Sarah helps him recreate the store in their own home so he can play 
cashier. The seven-year-old was diagnosed with autism as a toddler and finds 
comfort in familiar routines and spaces that make him feel safe. The friendly 
staff at Sainsbury’s went the extra mile to make sure he feels at home by 
making Connor his own uniform and name badge – an experience mum Sarah likened 
to him winning the lottery.

“To say he was over the moon is an understatement,” she told the Dorking 
Advertiser. She added: “It can be so difficult – people can be really 
judgmental.” Connor made kindly store manager Jim Ryan a handwritten thank-you 
card, which is kept in the store.


The dancing barista
Sam Forbes, a 17-year-old high-school student from Toronto, said that finding 
work in a Starbucks coffee shop – as part of a local scheme to help young 
people with disabilities into employment – had given his life “real meaning” 
for the first time.

 With the steadfast support of manager Chris Ali, Sam has turned the unusual 
movements caused by his autism into a dance he can perform while preparing 
drinks, earning him internet fame as well as a delighted coffee-drinking 
clientele.

 Chris makes sure to dance along with Sam, cementing even further the sense of 
inclusion that means so much to him.
 James Williams spent months earning Mason Davies’ trust. Photograph: James 
Williams 
The surprise birthday party
Glenn Buratti, from St Cloud, Florida, was heartbroken when none of the 16 
classmates invited to his sixth birthday party last year showed up.

Recounting her son’s terrible disappointment on social media, Glenn’s mother 
was quickly inundated with offers to come along and celebrate from local 
families.

Around 25 adults and 15 children joined Glenn – who has epilepsy and autism – 
and his family, bringing gifts, eating cake and playing on a bouncy castle. The 
message was also seen by local police and firemen, who arrived to visit Glenn 
with gifts and vehicles for him to sit in.

“He just loved it,” his mother told ABC News, adding a message for all 
parents: “When you are thinking about something as simple as a birthday party, 
think about the child who is sitting there waiting for his friends to show up.”

A truly mobile hairdresser
After a bad early experience left her four-year-old son Mason terrified of 
haircuts, Denine Davies, from Port Talbot in Wales, was thrilled to find a 
barber prepared to go the extra mile to help.

 James Williams spent months patiently getting to know Mason, whose autism 
results in limited speech and anxiety. The family visited Williams’s salon, Jim 
the Trim, several times, to familiarise Mason with both him and the setting. 
When the little boy lay on the floor to play on his mother’s phone, Williams 
spotted an opportunity, lying beside him to quickly and unobtrusively trim his 
hair for the first time in more than two years.

 “It got to the point where we all thought we’d never get round to giving 
Mason a proper cut,” the barber told Walesonline. “It was such a great feeling 
knowing I’d finally gained his trust.”

Is someone close to you autistic, or are you autistic yourself? We’d like to 
hear about the unsung heroes who may have helped in a difficult public 
situation. Send your stories toAutism.Heroes@theguardian.com 
<mailto:Autism.Heroes@theguardian.com>

Discover how you can help: meet 10-year-old Alex 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/tmi/2016/apr/01/autism-and-the-overload-effect>, 
star of the National Autistic Society’sToo Much Information film 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/tmi/2016/apr/01/experience-the-world-through-an-autistic-boys-eyes-video>

To find out more about autism, the person, and what to do visit 
autism.org.uk/tmi <http://www.autism.org.uk/tmi>
