
The claim

The pound has been falling on the foreign exchange markets as opinion polls 
have suggested that the result of theEU referendum 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> on 23 June is too close to 
call. According to the Treasury’s worst-case forecast, sterling could drop by 
15% after a Brexit vote.

While accepting that there might be some short-term turbulence in the currency 
markets should Britain decide to end its 43-year relationship with the EU, 
leading members of the leave camp have said that the pound has held reasonably 
steady since David Cameron called the referendum and that a fall in the value 
of sterling would actually be good for the economy. “If sterling were to fall a 
few percentage points after Brexit, so what?”Nigel Farage told the Andrew Marr 
Show. 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/eu-referendum-nigel-farage-brexit-economy-pound-sliding-vote-leave-a7078271.html>

Who is right?

It is a reasonable assumption that the pound would fall in the event of a 
Brexit vote, as it did after the UK left the exchange rate mechanism onBlack 
Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/sep/13/black-wednesday-20-years-pound-erm>
 in September 1992. There would be uncertainty about the UK’s economic future 
and what sort of trade agreement, if any, it would come to with its former EU 
partners. Some investors would take fright and remove their money from the UK. 
This would lead to a weaker pound.

The reason sterling has remained broadly flat since February is that for the 
past four months the financial markets have assumed that the remain side will 
win. Now that the risk is being taken more seriously, the pound has started to 
fall.

But the leave side are right when they say that the eventual level of sterling 
will depend on how well the economy does. If the economy thrives after Brexit, 
the pound will eventually rise on the foreign exchanges, as it did in 2012 and 
2013 when UK growth was much stronger than that in the struggling eurozone.

It is also true that sterling’s weakness is not just about Brexit. The recent 
peak for the pound was in 2014; since then it has been on a downward trend due 
to concerns about the unbalanced state of the economy, and in particular the
size of the UK’s current account deficit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/31/a-vulnerable-economy-the-true-cost-of-britains-current-account-deficit>
, which reached 7% of GDP in the final three months of 2015.

In the past, a current account deficit of that size has led to a drop in the 
pound, so it is probable that in a year or two’s time the currency will be 
weaker whatever the result of the referendum.

A cheaper currency helps rebalance the economy by making UK goods and services 
less expensive on global markets and making imports into the UK dearer. There 
would be a boost to exports but imports would be reduced, thereby narrowing the 
trade gap. It would be more expensive to take holidays abroad, but foreign 
tourists would get more pounds for their euros and dollars on their trips to 
the UK.

The downside of a falling currency is that more-expensive imports normally 
lead to higher inflation. UK exporters who buy-in raw materials or components 
from abroad would find that some of the competitive boost from a cheaper pound 
would be blunted. Firms that don’t export at all would see costs rise.

Verdict

Everything hangs on how the Bank of England reacts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/12/bank-of-england-keeps-interest-rates-on-hold-as-brexit-fears-bite>
 in a post-Brexit world. If the Bank is worried about the risk of recession, it 
might see a fall in the value of sterling as helpful, because it would boost 
growth. But prolonged panic-selling of the pound might force Threadneedle 
Street to raise interest rates to dampen inflationary pressure and to 
discourage capital flight.
