
“If there’s consent is it paedophilia?”; “She’s gonna be a porn star at 12”; 
“Doing those dishes: what a bitch”.

These are just a few of the graphic and abusive tweets directed at 12-year-old 
Valentina Schulz <https://twitter.com/mchef_valentina>, a contestant on the 
Brazilian television programme Junior MasterChef in Brazil.

But, while the flood of misogynistic comments was horrifying, the response of 
Brazilian women and girls was moving and powerful 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/11/brazil-explicit-tweets-junior-masterchef-star-online-campaign-against-abuse-sexual-harassment>
.

Using the hashtag #primeiroassédio 
<http://thinkolga.com/2015/10/26/hashtag-transformacao-82-mil-tweets-sobre-o-primeiroassedio/>
 (first harassment, in English), they stood alongside Schulz and used the 
moment as an opportunity to raise awareness about sexism, harassment and sexual 
violence, creating a wave of more than 82,000 stories across social media 
platforms. As women shared tales of being followed, harassed, assaulted and 
seeing men expose their genitals deliberately in front of them, an analysis of 
over 3,000 of the tweets found that the average age at which girls started to 
have such experiences was just nine years old.

The hashtag was particularly pertinent in a country where a recent study 
<http://www.ipea.gov.br/portal/images/stories/PDFs/nota_tecnica/140327_notatecnicadiest11.pdf>
 found that of the 527,000 people raped each year 89% are female, and 70% are 
children or adolescents.Ipea <http://www.ipea.gov.br/portal/>, the Brazilian 
institute of applied economics which carried out the study, estimates that only 
10% of rape cases are reported.

As well as starting a discussion about an endemic problem, the hashtag also 
had a wider effect,inspiring another campaign 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/agora%C3%A9ques%C3%A3oelas> that saw women taking 
over the blogs and columns of influential male writers for a week, highlighting 
media inequality alongside other women’s issues.

This is just one of several recent examples where women around the world have 
stood together and declared “enough is enough”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ebpq%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ebpq%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01deaf7496b0fb0ef52c4027ded7f2741e987823%2F0_0_938_563%2F938.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20harassment%20of%20a%20Brazilian%20child%20unified%20the%20country's%20women&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ebpq%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+the+harassment+of+a+Brazilian+child+unified+the+country%27s+women&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ebpq%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01deaf7496b0fb0ef52c4027ded7f2741e987823%2F0_0_938_563%2F938.jpg>
 Tania Reza (left) on A Toda Maquina. Photograph: A Toda Maquina 
In Mexico, women started a nationwide outcry against sexual harassment in the 
workplace after a male TV presenter attempted to lift his female colleague’s 
skirt and touch her breasts on music programme A Toda Maquina 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/blogs-trending-34679077>. After the female 
presenter, Tania Reza, stormed off the set, her male co-host turned to the 
camera and said: “Excuse me, but my colleague is a bit hormonal.” After 
peoples’ initial shock wore off, it was the women who raised their voices in 
protest who ensured issues of discrimination and harassment in the workplace 
remained a talking point for days afterwards.

Mexican women have also shared some of their stories of workplace harassment 
with theEveryday Sexism Project <http://everydaysexism.com/>. One woman reports 
being told by her employers about “the power of the miniskirt”. Another was 
asked, in an important business meeting, “Why do you work so hard 
intellectually, if you are a good looking woman?” A university student aiming 
for a high-flying career in medicine was told by her professor: “Calledita, te 
ves mas bonita.” (“You look prettier when you shut up.”)

Meanwhile, a new campaign #HerVoice <http://www.withhervoice.org/> has seen 
nine Indian non-governmental organisations (NGOs) come together to demand 
government action and raise public awareness of sexual violence against women. 
Speaking about her support for the campaign, activistPriti Patkar told the 
Independent 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/asia/hervoice-ministers-and-human-rights-lawyers-join-ngos-in-petition-demanding-end-to-sexual-violence-a6728766.html>
: “Nobody wants to hear her and nobody wants to be confronted with the facts. 
It is an uncomfortable truth.” The campaign is calling on the government to 
enforce existing rape laws, and campaigners also want to see better 
rehabilitative aftercare for victims.

In the UK where, on average, 85,000 women are raped or subjected to sexual 
assault by penetration every year, around 404,000 are subjected to sexual 
offences 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/214970/sexual-offending-overview-jan-2013.pdf>
, and one infour women experiences domestic abuse 
<http://www.womensaid.org.uk/domestic_violence_topic.asp?section=0001000100220036>
, cuts, reductions and closures are having a demonstrable impact on frontline 
support services. The closure of charityEaves 
<http://www.eavesforwomen.org.uk/news-events/news/closure-of-eaves-another-nail-in-the-coffin-for-the-women-s-sector>
, which has supported victims of violence since 1977, and the threatened 
closure of Rotherham’s only support group for women from ethnic minorities who 
have experienced violence,Apna Haq 
<https://you.38degrees.org.uk/petitions/keep-apna-haq-open-in-rotherham>, are 
just two recent examples . But here, too, women are fighting back, witha rally 
in support of Apna Haq planned in London this Saturday 
<http://thewomensresourcecentre.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/Rally-Poster-11.pdf> 
and amarch to protest cuts to domestic violence services organised by Sisters 
Uncut later in the month <https://www.facebook.com/events/1390062737959697/>.

The sheer scale of violence against women internationally remains vast – the 
UN estimates that worldwideone in three women will be raped, beaten or abused 
by an intimate partner in her lifetime 
<http://www.un.org/en/women/endviolence/pdf/VAW.pdf>. So it is powerful and 
heartening to see people responding to devastating events with clever, moving 
and determined protests and campaigns. Women and girls are using their voices 
and stories to raise awareness and protest. The battle is far from over, but 
the inspiring campaigns of women around the world make me feel empowered to 
keep on fighting.
