
My mum, recently retired, was dumped by a man last summer after a decade 
together. She was devastated. In the autumn, she met a man online, and now they 
are selling their houses and buying a rural idyll 90 miles away from her 
family. I’ve just had a baby and a relationship breakup. She is the main carer 
for my sister, and shares caring responsibility for my disabled grandma. She 
says she will drive down once a week to spend a few hours with us all.

I’ve tried to advise caution. Although her new chap is lovely, solvent and 
agreeable, she barely knows him and to be throwing her finances (shaky at best) 
and emotions into a relationship that is only six months old seems to me, and 
the rest of her friends and family, to be madness.

She won’t take any advice, and is acting as if this is all perfectly normal. I 
fear she is living in a fantasy that will come crashing down, leaving her miles 
from support and financially tied to a virtual stranger. Am I to stand by and 
watch her make a huge mistake, or shall I continue to try to make her see that 
this may not be a good idea?

• When leaving a message on this page, please be sensitive to the fact that 
you are responding to a real person in the grip of a real-life dilemma, who 
wrote to Private Lives asking for help, and may well view your comments here. 
Please consider especially how your words or the tone of your message could be 
perceived by someone in this situation, and be aware that comments that appear 
to be disruptive or disrespectful to the individual concerned will be removed.

• If you would like fellow readers to respond to a dilemma of yours, send us 
an outline of the situation of about 150 words. For advice from Pamela 
Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your 
concerns.

• All correspondence should reach us by Wednesday morning. Email: 
private.lives@theguardian.com <mailto:private.lives@theguardian.com> (please 
don’t send attachments).
