
Psychologists may be the only researchers barred, on principle, from 
encountering the thing they’re meant to be studying. If anatomy’s your passion, 
cut up a corpse; if you want to understand Polynesian religious rituals, get on 
a plane. But you’ll never get inside other people’s mental experience. Not that 
people don’t make impressive efforts: inone recent study 
<http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/17522439.2015.1028972> (which I 
found viathe Research Digest blog 
<http://digest.bps.org.uk/2016/02/you-hear-voice-in-your-head-when-youre.html>
), the New York University researcher Ruvanee Vilhauer investigated the “inner 
voice” many people claim to hear when they’re reading. Around 80% of us believe 
we hear such a voice, she concluded. For many, it’s their own voice; for 
others, it’s the voices of characters in the book; some report that they hear 
text messages in the voice of the sender. Perhaps one day there’ll be brain 
implants with customised voices, just as you canhave Snoop Dogg do your satnav 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Kgjy-k5mOqA>. Although I hope not.

Beyond the experience of reading, this inner voice is a staple of writings on 
self-help and spirituality. The cause of all our misery, the theory goes, is 
the constant commentary from a voice that tells us we’re worthless, or that 
others should treat us differently. Happiness results from changing what the 
voice says, or learning to quieten or ignore it, usually via cognitive therapy 
or meditation. (Some experts speculate thatthe other kind of inner voices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/blog/2013/nov/08/voices-head-language-mind>
 – those reported by people with schizophrenia – are actually the same thing, 
mistakenly interpreted as originating outside the self.) Still, you’d be 
forgiven for thinking this raises more questions than it answers. Such as: what 
do you mean by “inner voice”? It’s not only that different people may have 
different experiences; it’s that we might not even have the language to figure 
that out.

Consider the only example I’m in a position to consider: me. I’ve often 
suspected that my inner world is less verbal than most people’s. “In case you 
hadn’t noticed, you have a mental dialogue going on inside your head that never 
stops,” Michael A Singer writes inhis bestseller The Untethered Soul 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/untethered-soul-2.html>. A familiar refrain, 
but it doesn’t feel true for me. Is that because my thoughts are more visual? 
Possibly, yet based on talking with others, I fear my “mind’s eye” is a pitiful 
organ, too: the pictures it generates are dim and colourless, while theirs are 
sharp and bright. None of these sensory metaphors – talking, seeing – describe 
how thinking feels to me. Maybe I’m weird. Or maybe I’m normal, but lack the 
words to convey it.

Related: Want to get things done? Stop thinking, start doing 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/11/idea-debt-procrastination-oliver-burkeman>

Spend much time thinking along these lines, and you’ll be struck by the 
dizzying truth that there’s an unbridgeable chasm between your mind and 
everyone else’s. You’ll never know how those to whom you’re closest really 
experience the world. Take emotional intensity: what if their idea of 
“incredibly happy” is your idea of “mildly pleased”, or vice versa? Who could 
tell? Human interaction is a matter of yelling between mountaintops, through 
driving rain, in different languages, with socks over our heads. Picturethat in 
your mind’s eye. If you even have one.

 * oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com <mailto:oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com>
