
The winner’s curse <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Winner%27s_curse>, a finding 
based on economic theory, should concern brands. It’s the idea that the winner 
of an auction tends to pay more for the goods than they’re worth. And it’s 
worrying because more media than ever is bought via auctions. Two of the 
fastest growing media, programmatic display and paid search, are auction-based. 
The global spend on these media (pdf 
<http://www.zenithoptimedia.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/Adspend-forecasts-September-2015-executive-summary1.pdf?mc_cid=85cd21944b&mc_eid=86d41fa20c>
) was over $106bn (£75bn) in 2015 according to ZenithOptimedia.

The phrase “winner’s curse” dates back to the 1950s when a spate of oil 
companies significantly overpaid at an auction for Alaskan drilling rights. 
Some paid so far over the odds that they went bust. Economists, such asRichard 
Thaler <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richard_Thaler>, investigated the problem 
and came up with an elegantly simple explanation.

Thaler, one of the world’s most renowned economists, believes that during an 
auction each bidder makes a private valuation of the goods and then bids up to 
that amount. Due to a phenomenon known as the wisdom of the crowds the average 
of all those valuations is reasonably accurate. After all, averaging out the 
valuations will balance out the errors that each bidder makes. But of course, 
if the average valuation is accurate, then the winning bid – the most 
optimistic in its valuation – must be inflated.

Related: Why context is everything for brands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/may/10/context-brands-reach-message>

So how can brands buying avoid unwittingly overpaying? 

If the world zigs, then zag

Auctions are here to stay. Brands can’t ignore them. Instead they need to 
adapt their bidding tactics by creating a contrarian set of metrics to identify 
their audience.

Most brands judge the value of an impression by looking for signals about age 
or income. Say, targeting 18–34s or ABC1 25–54s. However, since this method is 
commonplace, any brand that uses it will enter highly competitive auctions. And 
the more participants there are in an auction, the more accurate the average 
bid and the harder it is to avoid the winner’s curse.

However, since so many brands are formulaic in their targeting approaches, 
there are plenty of under-exploited opportunities for canny brands. One such 
approach is to target a broader range of people, but focus on reaching them at 
opportune moments. This is a sensible approach as there’s plenty of evidence 
that people’s receptiveness to ads varies from one context to another.

The power of context

The exact context each brand should target will vary, but in our research we 
have spotted a number of common themes:

 * People are more receptive to ads when they’re in a good mood 
<http://mediatel.co.uk/newsline/2015/10/14/how-should-brands-react-to-facebooks-new-reaction-emojis/>
. 
 * Funny ads 
<http://wallblog.co.uk/2016/03/04/should-tv-planning-be-more-theatrical/> 
become funnier when they’re watched in groups. 
 * Consumers splash out on discretionary items far more after they have been 
paid. 
 * People are prone to switching brands when their life has been destabilised 
by abig event 
<https://www.warc.com/Blogs/Windows_of_opportunity_How_Konrad_Lorenzs_Nobel_winning_work_can_be_applied_to_advertising.blog?ID=2155>
, like moving house or getting married. 
The list goes on.

Best of all, these contexts are easily identifiable and able to target due to 
the data captured when consumers are online. Facebook, for example, can target 
ads to those who have just moved house or got married. So the digital 
transformation which exacerbates the winner’s curse also provides a solution.

Brands that use these contextual signals to identify their audience, rather 
than relying on tired, demographic data, will gain a competitive advantage by 
avoiding the winner’s curse.

Richard Shotton is head of insight at Zenith 
<http://www.zenithoptimedia.co.uk/>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.


All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Paid for by” – find out morehere 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
