
Art nouveau was the curvilinear, nature-inspired style that dominated 
everything from jewellery to architecture at the start of the 20th century. As 
it spread throughout Europe and across the Atlantic it followed two main 
strands: the curvy, whiplash decoration that flowed out of Paris-Brussels and 
the more linear, geometric style seen in Vienna and Glasgow. East European 
centres such as Prague, Riga and Budapest merged art nouveau with their own 
local traditions and the outstanding buildings of the era are found in those 
cities. By 1915, the craze for art nouveau had been crushed by the advent of 
the first world war and the arrival of a new style, art deco.

Over the last 100 years the demolition of art nouveau structures has been 
ruthless. French architect Hector Guimard’s innovative Parisian concert hall 
was pulled down as early as 1905 and only three of his roofed entrances to the 
Paris metro remain. While Barcelona, Vienna, Munich and Subotica claim stunning 
yet isolated art nouveau buildings, other cities have managed to preserve the 
style as part of their dominant architectural heritage.

Prague
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hqv9%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hqv9%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c2cf965558a11a6bb298b8579eef88b47f42e0f%2F543_0_5004_3000%2F5004.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20of%20the%20best%20European%20cities%20for%20art%20nouveau&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hqv9%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10+of+the+best+European+cities+for+art+nouveau&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hqv9%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c2cf965558a11a6bb298b8579eef88b47f42e0f%2F543_0_5004_3000%2F5004.jpg>
 Entrance foyer of the Municipal House. Photograph: Petr Prager/Getty Images 
Prague’s art nouveau credentials are based around one man: Alphonse Mucha 
<http://www.muchafoundation.org/>. Ironically, he barely set foot in his Czech 
homeland until the style was waning. Mucha’s sassy artwork was used to 
advertise cigarette papers, champagne and Sarah Bernhardt plays, and propelled 
him (reluctantly) to the forefront of the movement. While Mucha was away in 
Paris and the US, it was left to architects, Ohmann, Bendelmayer and Dryák to 
promote Prague’s art nouveau and they did so by combining floral motifs and 
looping metalwork with a more traditional neo-baroque look. TheHotel Central 
<http://www.kkhotels.com/en/prague/hotel-central> (rooms from €125 a night) was 
one of the city’s first art nouveau structures and is still open for business 
today. As for Mucha, there’s amuseum dedicated to him in the Kaunicky Palace 
<http://www.mucha.cz/index.phtml?S=home&Lang=EN>, his symbolist murals adorn the
Municipal House <http://www.obecnidum.cz/en/>, and the Zbiroh castle 
<http://www.zbiroh.com/en/exposition/> nearby is where he painted a series of 
giant works about the Slav people.

Budapest
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hqv9%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hqv9%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F202c1d5ea0860d0551e0ac3ef91c583c9539d857%2F0_247_3701_2220%2F3701.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20of%20the%20best%20European%20cities%20for%20art%20nouveau&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hqv9%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10+of+the+best+European+cities+for+art+nouveau&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hqv9%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F202c1d5ea0860d0551e0ac3ef91c583c9539d857%2F0_247_3701_2220%2F3701.jpg>
 Post Office Savings Bank. Photograph: Alamy 
Art nouveau in Budapest took slightly different turns to the styles prevalent 
in other European cities. Ödön Lechner, regarded as the greatest of the 
period’s Hungarian architects, adopted oriental forms including delicate floral 
imagery and lacquered finishes to his minarets (using local tiles) as a nod to 
the Asiatic origins of the Magyar people. The roof of hisPost Office Savings 
Bank 
<http://budapestgolocal.blogspot.co.uk/2011/11/art-nouveau-wonders-in-budapest-9.html>
 resembles a Persian textile. Lechner’sInstitute of Geology 
<http://budapest.travel/places/164>, the Török bank 
<http://bungamanggiasih.com/szecesszio-budapest-torok-bankhaz/> and school on 
Dob Utca are typical of the merging of the sinuous early art nouveau with 
Hungarian national romantic traditions. It is celebrated at theBedö Ház, a 
Szecesszió museum <http://www.magyarszecessziohaza.hu/mainen.php>, which has a 
coffee shop on the ground floor. Stay at theHotel Gresham Palace 
<http://www.fourseasons.com/budapest/> (rooms from €330 a night), overlooking 
the Danube, which is named after the founder of London’s Royal Exchange and 
with 179 bedrooms is one of the largest art nouveau buildings in the world.

Glasgow
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hqv9%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hqv9%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05725af39b91e991f91ad1ef9a3e1f8b97253a7b%2F0_341_5120_3072%2F5120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20of%20the%20best%20European%20cities%20for%20art%20nouveau&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hqv9%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10+of+the+best+European+cities+for+art+nouveau&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hqv9%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05725af39b91e991f91ad1ef9a3e1f8b97253a7b%2F0_341_5120_3072%2F5120.jpg>
 The Charles Rennie Mackintosh-designed Willow Tearooms. Photograph: Alamy 
With less whiplash, less decorative ornamentation, less feathery flamboyance 
and naturalistic carving, Glasgow offers a different form of art nouveau. 
Charles Rennie Mackintosh’s designs are celebrated for their elegance, geometry 
and angularity and with his wife Margaret Macdonald, her sister Frances and 
Herbert MacNair, together known as “The Four”, was commissioned to design the 
architecture and interior furnishings of a handful of buildings in and around 
Glasgow. At that time, the city was a thriving yet grubby shipbuilding port, so 
the moneyed class would have welcomed the temperance of theWillow Tearooms 
<http://www.willowtearooms.co.uk/> in Sauchiehall Street. Mackintosh and 
Macdonald turned Glasgow’s tearooms into salons of taste using a refined, 
linear style, touches of Japonism, purples, creams and leaded-glass decoration. 
Other art nouveau buildings includeScotland Street School 
<http://www.glasgowlife.org.uk/museums/scotland-street/pages/default.aspx/> and 
theGlasgow School of Art 
<http://www.gsa.ac.uk/support-gsa/the-mackintosh-appeal/how-to-support-the-mackintosh-appeal/>
 –damaged by fire in May 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/may/23/glasgow-school-of-art-fire-library>
, it is planned to reopen in 2018.

Turin
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hqv9%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hqv9%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F284e21f60af350bc8a8b53f13c30df484cc774bf%2F0_32_3236_1942%2F3236.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20of%20the%20best%20European%20cities%20for%20art%20nouveau&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hqv9%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10+of+the+best+European+cities+for+art+nouveau&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hqv9%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F284e21f60af350bc8a8b53f13c30df484cc774bf%2F0_32_3236_1942%2F3236.jpg>
 Pietro Fenoglio’s Casa Fenoglio-Lafleur. Photograph: Alamy 
A vision of speed and flowing movement was fundamental to the designs 
established in art nouveau and its era coincided with the firing up of the 
Italian automobile industry. Fiat (1899) and Lancia (1906) started production 
in the back streets of Turin. Fiat’s original blue-floral logo and Lancia’s 
whiplash (characteristic curves), twirling lettering were typical of the 
movement’s regard for dynamism. Italians termed their own variation of art 
nouveau Stile Liberty, and after Turin’s international exhibition of decorative 
arts in 1902, the city was its undisputed capital. Visit thefirst Fiat factory 
<http://www.lifeinitaly.com/italian-cars/fiat-history.asp> on Corso Dante and 
then go to Borgo Pô to see some Stile Liberty villas: architect Pietro 
Fenoglio’sCasa Fenoglio-Lafleur 
<http://www.italianways.com/casa-fenoglio-lafleur-a-flower-in-turin/> and Villa 
Scott (both 1902), thePalazzina Rossi 
<http://www.arteliberty.it/to_palazzina_rossi.html> on Via Passalacqua and, 
best of all,Casa Maffei <http://www.italialiberty.it/scheda/casamaffei/> on 
Corso Montevecchio, which has flamboyant, double-tiered balcony railings and a 
semi-naked woman riding an eagle stuck onto the facade.
• italialiberty.it 
<http://www.italialiberty.it/wp-content/uploads/2013/12/Art-Nouveau-a-Torino.pdf>

Brussels
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hqv9%2Fsfb%23img-6&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hqv9%2Fsfb%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f27972e26daa4f5da268145ea45154cdec77066%2F0_166_4405_2643%2F4405.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20of%20the%20best%20European%20cities%20for%20art%20nouveau&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hqv9%2Fstw%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10+of+the+best+European+cities+for+art+nouveau&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hqv9%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f27972e26daa4f5da268145ea45154cdec77066%2F0_166_4405_2643%2F4405.jpg>
 The Belgian Comic Strip Center. Photograph: Ludovic Maisant/Corbis 
King Leopold II’s beautification of a vibrant Brussels in the late 19th/early 
20th century coincided with the spectacular emergence of art nouveau. Belgian 
architects Victor Horta, Henry van de Velde and Paul Hankar created buildings 
where new techniques in manufacturing meant an end to conventional room space, 
where the underlying structure was often exposed and light could enter through 
glass roofs onto botany-inspired ironwork, gold mosaics and wavy door handles.
Horta’s Hôtel Tassel <http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/1005>, completed in 1894, 
is considered Europe’s first true art nouveau building. It’s the perfect place 
to start a tour, followed by theHôtel Solvay <http://www.hotelsolvay.be/>, La 
Maison Cauchie <http://cauchie.be/?lang=en_us>, Square Ambiorix, the Hôtel Van 
Eetvelde <http://www.greatbuildings.com/buildings/Hotel_van_Eetvelde.html> and 
theBelgian Comic Strip Center <https://www.comicscenter.net/en/home>, before 
ending at theHorta Museum <http://www.hortamuseum.be/> via the Musical 
instruments Museum <http://www.mim.be/en>, all important art nouveau buildings. 
Diehard fans should take a peek atStoclet House 
<http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/1298/>, too, but Josef Hoffmann’s masterpiece is 
still occupied by the Stoclet family and not open to the public.

Nancy, France
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hqv9%2Fsfb%23img-7&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hqv9%2Fsfb%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc33bbf77b2828450c233217cb545a84e99b14d5%2F0_149_4241_2546%2F4241.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20of%20the%20best%20European%20cities%20for%20art%20nouveau&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hqv9%2Fstw%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10+of+the+best+European+cities+for+art+nouveau&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hqv9%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc33bbf77b2828450c233217cb545a84e99b14d5%2F0_149_4241_2546%2F4241.jpg>
 Bedroom furniture designed by Louis Majorelle. Photograph: Dave Bartruff/Corbis
Three of the biggest names in art nouveau, Gallé, Daum and Majorelle had their 
glassware and furniture manufacturing plants in Nancy. They were part of a 
dynamic and artistic business culture that had its origins in the annexation of 
Alsace-Lorraine to Germany after the Franco-Prussian war (1870-71) when 
artists, intellectuals and industrialists fled to Nancy. Forty years on, their 
offspring were enjoying long lunches under the sculpted ferns and stained-glass 
windows of theBrasserie L’Excelsior <http://www.brasserie-excelsior.com/en/>. 
Today, the 1911-built cafe is the centrepiece of Nancy’s art nouveau design 
with a full assortment of teased ironwork, ornate mouldings, copper sconces and 
the combination of rare woods and handcarved masonry, which came to be 
associated with the movement. Take a stroll alongside the pretty, coloured 
facades of the rue Félix Faure with their intertwined plant designs and 
embellished lettering. Other art nouveau gems include thevilla Majorelle 
<http://www.ecole-de-nancy.com/web/index.php?page=maison-d-artiste-en>, the 
Chambre de Commerce, Graineterie, theÉcole de Nancy museum 
<http://www.ecole-de-nancy.com/web/> and villas in the Saurupt estate.
• nancy-tourisme.info 
<http://www.nancy-tourisme.info/2015/08/05/10-lieux-art-nouveau-incontournables-a-voir-a-nancy/>

Darmstadt, Germany
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hqv9%2Fsfb%23img-8&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hqv9%2Fsfb%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa984bb7a070c919e97fbd6016e02ea046a70da9e%2F0_0_5255_3151%2F5255.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20of%20the%20best%20European%20cities%20for%20art%20nouveau&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hqv9%2Fstw%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10+of+the+best+European+cities+for+art+nouveau&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hqv9%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa984bb7a070c919e97fbd6016e02ea046a70da9e%2F0_0_5255_3151%2F5255.jpg>
 Russian orthodox church of Mary Magdalene, at Mathildenhöhe. Photograph: Alamy 
Art nouveau buildings tend to be dotted around urban centres but in Darmstadt, 
30km south of Frankfurt, there is an entire colony. It was the brainchild of 
Grand Duke Ernst Ludwig von Hessen, the province’s ruler (and Queen Victoria’s 
grandson), who commissioned seven artists and architects to design and build 
private houses and workshops in the modern Jugenstil vein at Mathildenhöhe, on 
a hill above the city. His artists’ colony opened in 1899, each building a 
complete work of art, inside and out. But after the colony’s final exhibition 
in 1914, it began to dissolve. Artists departed, the Wedding Tower and 
Exhibition Buildings left empty. Today, visitors can roam around the Vortex 
garden and visit some of the refurbished buildings and a permanent exhibition 
in theMathildenhöhe museum <http://www.mathildenhoehe.eu/>. The colony is also 
a reminder of how uninspiring architecture has become in the “modern” Darmstadt 
next door.

Riga, Latvia
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hqv9%2Fsfb%23img-9&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hqv9%2Fsfb%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F918b26faf1d3bd79034896e5577250561731a981%2F0_84_5760_3459%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20of%20the%20best%20European%20cities%20for%20art%20nouveau&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hqv9%2Fstw%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10+of+the+best+European+cities+for+art+nouveau&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hqv9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F918b26faf1d3bd79034896e5577250561731a981%2F0_84_5760_3459%2F5760.jpg>
 Interior from Riga’s Art Nouveau Museum. Photograph: Massimo Borchi/Corbis 
Riga has over 700 art nouveau buildings, more than any other European city. 
The movement’s golden age coincided with the city’s rapid economic growth and 
within three years of the industrial and handicraft exhibition of 1901, art 
nouveau had become the only style of construction. One of the main streets, 
Alberta iela, has rows of Jugendstil houses. Designed by Mikhail Eisenstein, 
the Amphora building on Elizabetes iela is a showcase of art nouveau with 
floral motifs, stained glass, sky-blue tiles, sculpted knockers, peacocks and 
stern female faces peering out of the top floor. The other great architect of 
the period was Konstantins Pēkšēns, whose former home is now theRiga’s Art 
Nouveau Museum <http://www.jugendstils.riga.lv/eng/muzejs>, where staff wear 
period costume. Nearby is theSienna art cafe  <http://www.sienna.lv/>(makslas 
kafejnica) on Streinieku iela, with its elegant drawing room complete with 
floral-design crockery, screens, chandeliers and large sugary desserts.

Helsinki
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hqv9%2Fsfb%23img-10&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hqv9%2Fsfb%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc48c6006b05095b4adfdf7a360de470d44826417%2F0_242_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20of%20the%20best%20European%20cities%20for%20art%20nouveau&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hqv9%2Fstw%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10+of+the+best+European+cities+for+art+nouveau&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hqv9%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc48c6006b05095b4adfdf7a360de470d44826417%2F0_242_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Statues holding spherical lamps at the entrance to Helsinki railway station. 
Photograph: Alamy 
When art nouveau ideas began to be incorporated into Nordic architecture, 
Finland was planning its independence from Russia. This sense of anticipated 
liberation led to a strong desire to include authentic Finnish traditions and 
rural mythology in a national romantic style. Art nouveau quickly became the 
country’s architectural redeemer and there are still around 600 buildings in 
Helsinki, many built from solid granite. The Wilkman House,Pohjola insurance 
building <http://www.asergeev.com/pictures/archives/compress/2015/1625/23.htm> 
and the stock exchange all display the characteristic rough-hewn facades 
combined with Finnish flora and fauna. Therailway station, Helsingin 
päärautatiesema 
<https://fi.rail.cc/helsingin-p%C3%A4%C3%A4rautatieasema/helsinki/rautatieasema/10293/60>
, designed in 1909 and with two pairs of grim-faced statues lighting up the 
street outside, is the most celebrated building in the city. Visit theAschan 
Café Jugend <http://www.aschan.fi/jugend/cafe-jugend.html>, constructed as a 
banking hall in 1904, for live music and to gaze at the tree murals over a fish 
soup.

Aveiro, Portugal
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hqv9%2Fsfb%23img-11&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hqv9%2Fsfb%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3490b6e2078dc8152e82a3fbdf639032bba7960c%2F0_114_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20of%20the%20best%20European%20cities%20for%20art%20nouveau&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hqv9%2Fstw%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10+of+the+best+European+cities+for+art+nouveau&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hqv9%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3490b6e2078dc8152e82a3fbdf639032bba7960c%2F0_114_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Art nouveau house facade in central Aveiro. Photograph: Alamy 
Halfway between Porto and Coimbra, Aveiro is a floating city full of art 
nouveau treasures. Aveiro’s economy still comes from seaweed, salt and 
ceramics, and it was the revenue from these, plus the wealth of returning 
emigrants who had grown rich in Brazil at the end of the 19th century, that led 
to requests for extravagant new residences. Take a tour on one of the 
gondola-stylemoliceiros to the Rossio district; try the local ovos moles 
delicacies in one of the bars where Aveiro’s particular style ofarte nova 
includes pale-shaded tiles, ironwork balconies and floral mouldings.The Museu 
de Arte Nova <http://www.visitcentrodeportugal.com.pt/art-nouveau-museum/> is 
in the Casa Major Pessoa on Rua Dr Barbosa Magalhães and its first-floor 
tearoom, the Casa de Chá, turns into a cocktail lounge serving caipirinhas in 
the evening – its floral designs and tiled birdlife motifs masked by mood 
lighting after dark.
