
So is it all Whitstable's fault? Can we pinpoint the current revival of the 
Kent coast back to the late 1990s, when fishermen's cottages up and down Island 
Wall were reclaimed and repainted by DFLs (the Down-From-Londons), and 
boutiques sellingobjets began to pop up along Harbour Street?

Perhaps. But arts-led developments are deep-rooted along this stretch of 
coast: in Margate, where the kernel for the Turner Contemporary gallery can be 
traced right back to 1994; in Folkestone, where the Creative Foundation, led by 
entrepreneur Roger De Haan, was taking hold at the turn of the millennium; and 
across many smaller coastal towns and villages, from Broadstairs to Dungeness, 
where artists have settled because of the quality of the light, following the 
late Derek Jarman, who moved there in the mid-1980s.

Yet it's indisputable that in the past decade this spirit of change has 
quickened, and dispersed, unleashing a plethora of art projects, stylish B&Bs, 
foodie corners and kitsch attractions.

"In the five years I've been living here, there's a new, exciting energy about 
the place," says Marina O'Loughlin, Metro food critic and co-author of the 
Discover Thanet guide. "There's a sense of heightened enthusiasm and 
possibilities even in places that were pretty depressed."

If – as the saying goes – regeneration begins with poetry and ends in 
commerce, it's worth observing, too, that much of what makes this coast special 
has long been there: beaches to rival those in Cornwall or Devon (or even, in 
the case of Botany Bay, the Algarve), miles of White Cliffs, Margate's 
enigmatic Shell Grotto, a sparkling marina in Ramsgate, the bleak beauty of 
Dungeness (the only place in the UK classified as a desert), Folkestone's 
Coastal Park, Deal's ancient conservation area.

What's next for the Kent coast? Folkestone to become the new Brighton? The 
renaissance of Dover, still largely depressed? A greater migration still of 
city types, armed with creative ideas and disposable income, to every town 
connected via High Speed 1? And lest we forget, other "cool" happenings in the 
lesser-known resorts this summer include festivals in both Herne Bay (
hernebayfestival.co.uk <http://hernebayfestival.co.uk>, 20-28 August) and 
Sandwich (sandwichfestival.org.uk <http://sandwichfestival.org.uk>, 21-29 
August), a Venetian Fete in Hythe (venetian-fete.com <http://venetian-fete.com>
, 17 August), and cinema in the grounds of both Walmer Castle and Richborough 
Roman Fort (17 August and 4 September, tickets atwhereisthenomad.com 
<http://www.whereisthenomad.com>).

Here's the best of what to see and do around the coast:

Whitstable
 The Front Rooms 
Skip the peeling Hotel Continental, with its functional bedrooms and inflated 
prices, and head to The Front Rooms (01227 282132,thefrontrooms.co.uk 
<http://thefrontrooms.co.uk>, doubles from £110), an icily cool boutique B&B 
with attached contemporary art gallery.

The town has arty connections galore (the sixth biennale festival is in 2012, 
whitstablebiennale.com <http://www.whitstablebiennale.com>), so start your 
exploration at the Horsebridge Centre (horsebridge-centre.org.uk 
<http://horsebridge-centre.org.uk>) – and don't miss picking up an irreverent 
badge or postcard from artist Sadie Hennessy's beach hut gallery (
sadiehennessy.co.uk <http://sadiehennessy.co.uk>).

Whitstable boasts dozens of decent eateries but avoid the average fare at the 
tourist-only Oyster Company (01227 276856,whitstableoystercompany.com 
<http://whitstableoystercompany.com>) and book early for one of these: The 
Sportsman, the famous Michelin-starred beachside pub in Seasalter (01227 273370,
thesportsmanseasalter.co.uk <http://www.thesportsmanseasalter.co.uk>), tiny but 
perfect Wheelers (01227 273311), whose pea-green parlour holds just four tables 
(BYO wine), or praised newcomer Salt Marsh (01227 272955,salt-marsh.com 
<http://salt-marsh.com>).

Margate
 BeBeached cafe. Photograph: Nico Lewis 
Who'd have guessed at just how successful the Turner Contemporary (
turnercontemporary.org <http://www.turnercontemporary.org>) would be for the 
town? Only six weeks in and they'd hit two-thirds of their annual target 
(150,000) for visitors: our tip is to combine your visit with a locally sourced 
dinner (£18 two courses, £23 three, every Friday/Saturday until 10pm) in the 
cafe, where you can watch the sun set over the Harbour Arm.

Galleries and vintage stores now pepper the old town, in particular King 
Street – my fave is Etcetera (etcetera-online.co.uk 
<http://etcetera-online.co.uk>). And for somewhere to stay, the gorgeous "rough 
luxe" decor of The Reading Rooms (01843 225166,thereadingroomsmargate.co.uk 
<http://www.thereadingroomsmargate.co.uk>, doubles from £150), in nearby Hawley 
Square, has rightly been heaped with praise since it opened in 2009. If its 
three rooms are booked, try the Walpole Bay Hotel in Cliftonville (01843 221703,
walpolebayhotel.co.uk <http://www.walpolebayhotel.co.uk>, doubles from £85).

Margate is fast becoming a food destination: there's Michelin-starred modern 
Indian cooking at Ambrette (01843 231504,theambrette.co.uk 
<http://theambrette.co.uk>), and the wonderful Lifeboat pub (
thelifeboat-margate.com <http://thelifeboat-margate.com>) serves real ales and 
Broadstairs pies. BeBeached cafe (bebeached.co.uk <http://www.bebeached.co.uk/>
) at the end of the pier is a great spot for a sundowner. Don't miss the town's 
longstanding, pre-hipster attractions, such as the Shell Grotto (
shellgrotto.co.uk <http://shellgrotto.co.uk>) and nearby RG Scott's antiques 
emporium (scottsmargate.co.uk <http://scottsmargate.co.uk>). To embrace the 
town's contemporary identity, make for Blink Margate, a huge live collaboration 
between musicians and 100 local people on 27 August (blinkmargate.org 
<http://blinkmargate.org/>).

Deal
 Cafe on Deal Pier. Photograph: Richard Saker 
Deal, like Whitstable, has long been a destination for those in the know, with 
a sizable artistic and gay community (legendary resident Charles Hawtrey's 
plaque adorns a house on Middle Street). Its rebuilt pier-end glass cafe won a 
Riba award for architecture in 2009 (although my advice is to eat elsewhere), 
and the Astor Theatre, also revived in 2009 (theastor.org 
<http://www.theastor.org>) hosts arthouse cinema, live music and surreal 
seaside variety shows like the acclaimed Private Widdle Social Club (
privatewiddlesocialclub.co.uk <http://privatewiddlesocialclub.co.uk>).

The granny's parlour feel of the Black Douglas cafe (blackdouglas.co.uk 
<http://blackdouglas.co.uk>), run by descendants of Oscar Wilde's lover, Bosie, 
is a magnet for the town's most bohemian denizens, especially on Thursday to 
Saturday evenings, when it serves pizza and wine, often accompanied by live 
music or readings. Top tip, however, is the semi-clandestine Dining Club, taken 
over in July by Gary Rhodes-endorsed chef Scott Roberts (BYO wine, five-course 
set menus at £27.50, apply for membership atthediningclub.net 
<http://thediningclub.net>).

Deal even boasts one of the world's Top 10 B&Bs in Number One (01304 364459, 
numberonebandb.co.uk <http://numberonebandb.co.uk>, doubles from £75), 
according toTripadvisor 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/blog/2011/jan/19/tripadvisor-bed-and-breakfast-england>
. There's plenty of live music in the town's pubs, especially on Sunday 
afternoons: local heroes Smugglers Records host their first festival 2-4 
September in nearby Little Mongeham (smugglersrecords.com 
<http://www.smugglersrecords.com/smugglers-festival-2011/>).

Ramsgate
 Eddie Gilbert's restaurant. Photograph: Karen Robinson 
Ramsgate is the most foodie of the Thanet towns, and with its royal marina and 
water-facing alfresco cafes, flirts successfully with that semi-mythical beast: 
continental cafe culture. For Regency glamour, plus unparalleled views over the 
harbour, book a veranda room at the Royal Harbour Hotel (01843 591514,
royalharbourhotel.co.uk <http://royalharbourhotel.co.uk>, doubles from £98). 
Top dining tips include the much-acclaimed Eddie Gilbert's, above a 
fishmonger's on King Street (01843 852123,eddiegilberts.com 
<http://eddiegilberts.com>), and the arguably more glamorous Age & Sons (01843 
851515,ageandsons.co.uk <http://ageandsons.co.uk>), a three-storey conversion 
in a courtyard behind the seafront, with all-day deli, cocktail bar and 
upstairs restaurant specialising in local fish.

In recent years Ramsgate has clambered on board the arts bandwagon, and this 
year's second annual "Summer Squall" (ramsgatearts.org 
<http://ramsgatearts.org/a-summer-squall>) runs from 26-29 August: highlights 
include an installation in Ramsgate Harbour which will bring a 65-year-old 
steam tug back to life through sound, and the 1950s 22-seat Vintage Mobile 
Cinema.

Broadstairs
 Hotel Belvidere Place 
"This is a community thing," says charismatic self-styled "Queen of 
Broadstairs" Jilly Sharpe about her hit boutique hotel Belvidere Place (01843 
579 850,belvidereplace.co.uk <http://belvidereplace.co.uk/>, doubles from 
£120), as we discuss the ins and outs of running a B&B. And the dark, moody, 
art-filled interior, with its well-heeled, grown-up community of guests and 
locals (Jilly hosts bespoke arts events too) splendidly juxtaposes the town's 
more twee charms of secondhand bookshops and polite, curving bay. In fact, 
while the hotel has injected a much-needed dose of hip, it's worth remembering 
that Broadstairs boasts one of the liveliest festival calendars along the Kent 
coast (Folk Week ends 12 August,broadstairsfolkweek.org.uk 
<http://broadstairsfolkweek.org.uk>, and the Food Festival runs from 30 
September to 2 October,visitthanet.co.uk <http://www.visitthanet.co.uk>).

Avoid the tourist restaurants along Albion Street and book dinner at the 
reliable Peen's (01843 861289); for daytime coffee and cake, it's worth seeking 
out the quirky Festival Of Britain-themed Oscar's Festival Cafe (
oscarsfestivalcafe.co.uk <http://oscarsfestivalcafe.co.uk>, formerly the Oscar 
Road Cafe).

Folkestone
 Cornelia Parker's Mermaid with the model for the statue. Photograph: Andy Hall
Folkestone is the town which will see the most change in the coming years. 
It's less than an hour on the high-speed train from St Pancras, and large 
enough to cultivate Brighton-sized areas of cool. Much of its revival is owed 
to the De Haan family (founders of Saga holidays) whose Creative Foundation has 
rebooted the steep-cobbled Creative Quarter around Tontine Street and The Old 
High Street with affordable rents in previously boarded-up shops (see a list of 
galleries, cafes and shops on creativefoundation.org) – and funded the 
Riba-award-winning Quarterhouse arts centre (quarterhouse.co.uk 
<http://www.quarterhouse.co.uk>). Folkestone is not as hyped as Margate, and 
attracts a steady flow of students to its University Centre, part of Canterbury 
Christ Church University. Its second Triennial is, alongside the Turner, this 
summer's must-visit (folkestonetriennial.org.uk 
<http://www.folkestonetriennial.org.uk> ends 25 September).

The town's change of fortune seems underlined by the recent opening of 
ex-Ramsay chef Mark Sargeant's iconic glass Rocksalt restaurant (01303) 212070,
rocksaltfolkestone.co.uk <http://rocksaltfolkestone.co.uk>) in the harbour (it 
also boasts four stylish rooms at £75-85 a night), and the more casual 
Smokehouse fish and chips cafe (thesmokehousefolkestone.co.uk 
<http://thesmokehousefolkestone.co.uk>).
