
Does your house smell pine fresh? If so, you might want to open a window. This 
week, the country’s biggest household cleaning manufacturer began publishing 
every ingredient it uses, in response to fears that the chemicals we use in our 
homes could be harming us.

Fragrances such as limonene (which smells like lemon) and pinene (which smells 
of – yes, you’ve guessed it – pine) are used in an increasing number of 
products. But they create small amounts of formaldehyde – a carcinogen. While 
this might not be a problem in the majority of homes, for clean-freaks living 
in modern, energy-efficient homes, there can be a serious buildup.

Related: Household chemicals' 'cocktail effect' raises cancer concerns for 
watchdog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/may/10/household-chemicals-cancer-concern-watchdog>

Alastair Lewis, professor of atmospheric chemistry at York University, says 
the decision by SC Johnson topublish a list of ingredients in products such as 
Mr Muscle and Glade air fresheners <http://www.whatsinsidescjohnson.com/gb/en>, 
was helpful for scientists trying to track why high concentrations of 
formaldehyde are found in some homes. Lewis points out that while pinene is 
naturally occurring, and cleaning products are heavily tested and regulated, 
there has been little research on the effects of the secondary chemicals they 
produce, because it was always assumed they would disperse quickly.

But according to the charity Chem Trust <http://www.chemtrust.org.uk/>, which 
looks at the damage caused by manmade chemicals, there are many more hidden 
pollutants in our homes. Michael Warhurst, an environmental chemist at the 
organisation, says: “When people think of the dangers of chemicals, it is often 
cleaning products or cosmetics that spring to mind, but actually the biggest 
worries are chemicals in things such as packaging or furniture.” So what other 
dangers are lurking in our homes?

Pizza boxes

While the chemicals in plastic packaging are regulated, cardboard packaging is 
not. ADanish NGO randomly tested three pizza boxes 
<http://kemi.taenk.dk/bliv-groennere/test-unwanted-chemicals-found-pizza-boxes> 
and found chemicals from the recycled material they were made from, alongside 
chemicals suspected of being carcinogenic.


Till receipts

Thermal receipt paper can contaminate your hands with hormone-disrupting 
bisphenol A (BPA) <http://www.chemtrust.org.uk/bisphenol-a-bpa/>, which can 
then be absorbed into your body. BPA is a hormone that has been linked to a 
wide range of medical problems, from cancer to diabetes, says Warhurst. 
Receipts can also be recycled, and then turn up in packaging such as pizza 
boxes.

Carpets

Carpets can be covered in brominated flame retardants to make them less 
flammable, some of which can be hormone disrupters, according to Warhurst.


Microwave popcorn

Denmark’s largest retailer, Coop, stopped selling this because it couldn’t 
find a way to get rid of the fluorinated chemicals in the packaging. The 
chemicals are linked to certain cancers, hormone disruption, organ problems and 
lower birth weights.

Pasta 

The German NGO Foodwatch found 
<http://www.foodpackagingforum.org/news/mineral-oils-in-food> mineral oils in 
rice, pasta and cornflakes thanks to cardboard packaging. Mineral oils can 
accumulate in the body, and are said to damage the liver, heart valves and 
lymph nodes.

