
Do “the parents, the governors and the headteacher” really end up “in full 
control” of schools when they become academies, as David Cameron told 
parliament during prime minister’s questions last week? The claim was made in 
response to a question by Caroline Lucas, the Green party’s MP, asking why 
residents near her Brighton constituency, who had rejected the academisation of 
Hove Park school, would see their views count for nothing with all schools now 
forced to become academies.

The very next day the latest white paper on education was published 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/17/parent-governor-role-scrapped-schools-teacher-qualifications>
, which included a promise that academies would no longer have to have any
parent governors 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/commentisfree/2016/mar/17/axing-parent-governors-is-a-cynical-move-and-a-disaster-for-schools>
. This would be the culmination of years of policymakers, perhaps led by the 
private equity tycoon who is now in control of state-funded schools as 
academies minister,Lord Nash 
<https://www.moderngovernor.com/lord-nash-governments-focus-for-governance/#sthash.D0gk6GSN.jb24eIXY.dpbs>
, saying English school boards should be more businesslike.

The government consistently blocked Labour moves, during the recent 
parliamentary passage of the Education and Adoption Act, to ensure parents were 
consulted in cases where schools were facing academisation.

The white paper also favours multi-academy trusts: academy chains whose 
governance rules allow conventional school governors to have little or no 
power, with an outside sponsor able to appoint all decision-makers.

No parent got to vote on this plan as a whole, as it wasn’t in the Tory 
manifesto. This seems a strange form of parental and governor control.

Consultants? Not exactly


When is money spent on “education consultancy” not actually spent on education 
consultants? The answer, it seems, is when it is categorised as such in the 
accounts of academy trusts.

We were contacted last week by a member of the public who was concerned that 
the 2014-15 accounts of two small-ish trusts listed spending almost £2m between 
them on “educational consultants” in the past two years, yet both now cutting 
back on staff.

We contacted the trusts, which provided details showing, they argued, that the 
vast bulk of this money, though listed under “education consultants”, had not 
been spent on consultants as conventionally understood. Instead, the 
expenditure included Duke of Edinburgh award fees, youth counselling, careers 
advice, IT support and “alternative provision” courses for pupils. It looks as 
if many outside services are now being classed as “consultancy”.

This seems significant, given that two weeks ago the chief inspector, Sir 
Michael Wilshaw, criticised seven leading academy trusts for spending £8.5m on 
“consultants”. We mentioned thislast week 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/15/golden-goodbye-payments-academy-soar-harris>
, too. Does he, and do we, need to delve further into the accounts?

A Bright future ends 

A well-known director of education at an academy trust who has featured 
regularly inthese pages 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/oct/13/schools-harris-academy-teachers-ofsted>
 has stepped down.

David Hopkins, a former national director of school standards under Labour, 
who was paid £140,000-£145,000 in 2013-14 as director of education at the 
Stockport-based Bright Tribe Trust, left at the end of December, Companies 
House records reveal. He combined his role with anidentical position 
<http://alat.org.uk/2015/02/05/professor-david-hopkins-alats-director-of-education/>
 at Bright Tribe’s partner academy chain, the Adventure Learning Academy Trust, 
which runs schools in Cornwall, from which he has also resigned.

Bright Tribe said: “Prof David Hopkins helped to establish Bright Tribe Trust 
and brought invaluable educational expertise and a wealth of experience. David 
then reduced his role to two weeks a month [in 2014-15] in an advisory capacity 
and has now left the trust to pursue other interests.”

As reported two weeks ago 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/08/boy-autism-expelled-from-school>
, Bright Tribe’s 2014-15 accounts are being published late this year. The chain 
said the Education Funding Agency agreed to this delay as the trust’s auditors 
worked with the EFA to “enhance” the accounts. Bright Tribe said last week the 
figures would be published “imminently”.

Future expansion 

Meanwhile, we learn that Future Academies, the Westminster chain sponsored by 
Nash and his wife, Caroline, is to take over a well known comprehensive in 
nearby Hammersmith and Fulham. The four-school Future is to incorporate Phoenix 
high school, formerly run by high-profile headSir William Atkinson 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2009/apr/07/william-atkinson-teaching-awards>
. We understand the move had to be approved by Nicky Morgan, the education 
secretary, rather than Nash himself, given his position as academies minister. 
Hammersmith and Fulham council did not wish to comment.

UTC loses some spurs 

A prominent university technical college (UTC) has applied for government 
permission not to accept pupils into year 10 next year as it seems to be 
focusing on sixth form provision. The move by the Tottenham UTC, sponsored by 
the Premier League football club, was said by the college to be a result of its 
drive to offer students an “improved curriculum” and to ensure it had a 
“sustainable and successful future”. It said it would still be offering a key 
stage 4 (GCSE and equivalent courses) curriculum next year, though presumably 
only for year 11s.

There have been concerns about pupil numbers at some UTCs, and three have 
announced closures inthe last year 
<http://schoolsweek.co.uk/ministers-to-review-university-technical-colleges-in-wake-of-black-country-closure/>
. Cameron’s white paper promises a UTC “within reach of every city”. But we 
wonder if the demand is really there.
