
Sir Cliff Richard <https://www.theguardian.com/music/cliff-richard> has said 
there “must have been illegal collusion” behind events that culminated in a 
police raid of his home being broadcast live on BBC News.

The singer said on Wednesday he was considering taking legal action for the 
“gross intrusion” into his privacy which saw him named as part of a criminal 
investigation without ever being charged.

Richard has described how, while in Portugal in August 2014, he discovered 
with horror that footage of detectives searching his Berkshire home was being 
broadcast live on television.

Related: BBC defends Cliff Richard coverage after star attacks 'intrusion' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/21/bbc-richard-coverage-helicopter-police-raid>

The BBC <http://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> has apologised for causing him 
distress as a result of the coverage that he earlier said made him feel like he 
was “going to die”.

South Yorkshire police have also apologised over their handling of the 
investigation afterthe Crown Prosecution Service decided to drop the case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/16/cliff-richard-will-not-face-charges-over-sexual-abuse-claims>
.

Richard indicated to ITV’s Good Morning Britain that he may seek compensation 
in the courts.

He said: “There must have been illegal collusion. I’ve never known, I don’t 
think, investigations take place with lighting and cameras and special angles 
for the helicopter – it just seems ridiculous.

“I feel I have every right to sue because, if nothing else, definitely for 
gross intrusion of my privacy.”

Related: Cliff Richard inquiry was mired in controversy from the start 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/16/cliff-richard-inquiry-was-mired-in-controversy-from-the-start>

The veteran entertainer said he felt like “collateral damage” resulting from 
the wave of police investigations into high-profile sex abuse allegations 
sparked by the Jimmy Savile scandal.

Those under investigation for sexual crimes should not be named unless charges 
are brought, he told the programme.

Richard said he understood why children who make allegations are granted 
anonymity.

However he added: “My accusers were all men, grown-up men who were probably in 
their 40s and into their 50s. I don’t see why they should be protected.”
