
Black and Asian students and those from disadvantaged areas face an uphill 
battle to be accepted at the universities of their choice, compared with their 
white and better-off peers, according to new statistics released by the British 
higher education clearing house, Ucas.

The figures, which reveal data about applications by 18-year-old students 
broken down by sex, ethnicity and social background at individual universities, 
show thatblack and Asian students fail to win undergraduate places 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/feb/11/universities-told-to-raise-numbers-of-working-class-and-black-students>
 with the same rate of success at the bulk of British universities as white 
students with similar qualifications.

Black students were particularly badly off in the admissions results, with the 
data for 2015 showing that 108 out of 132 universities offered a lower 
proportion of places than expected, using a Ucas forecast based on their 
predicted A-level grades and the courses to which the students applied.

In contrast, more than 100 universities offered a higher proportion of places 
to white applicants than their qualifications and courses would appear to 
justify. Just 13 universities out of the 132 offered fewer places than expected 
to white applicants. Some of the widest gaps in offers appeared at universities 
with comparativelyhigh rates of black and Asian students enrolled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/mar/28/britains-universities-still-failing-black-asian-students>
.

Les Ebdon, the director of the Office for Fair Access to Higher Education, 
said: “Some universities will clearly be very challenged by this data, and I 
expect them to work hard to understand the discrepancies between applications 
and offers made for certain groups. I do not accept that an applicant’s 
ethnicity or where they come from should be a barrier to attending university.”

University officials and representatives from Ucas cautioned against drawing 
hasty conclusions, arguing that the gap between expected successful 
applications and offers was the result of a variety of causes that could not be 
explained by the published data alone.

Related: Universities told to raise numbers of working-class and black students
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/feb/11/universities-told-to-raise-numbers-of-working-class-and-black-students>

But Peter Lampl, the chairman of the Sutton Trust, which campaigns for social 
mobility through education, said: “It’s seriously concerning to see such a 
strong correlation between your background and your chance of getting an offer, 
particularly at our leading universities.

“We must not get complacent about inequalities of access. We need to see a 
renewed effort from universities, government and schools to improve outreach 
work, subject choices and attainment for those from less advantaged 
backgrounds.”

Among universities, such as those belonging to the research-intensive Russell 
Group, the data showed similar patterns oflower offers to black and Asian 
applicants 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/sep/18/ethnic-minority-students-less-likely-to-win-university-places>
, compared with those from white backgrounds.

Both Imperial College London and Glasgow University had wide gaps of more than 
six percentage points between the offers made to black students and the 
expected proportion of offers, given the A-levels predicted for those students 
who applied. But a few institutions, such as the London School of Economics, 
bucked the national trend and extended offers to ethnic minority students at 
rates higher than their application data would suggest.

The Russell Group’s director general, Wendy Piatt, said the data showed “no 
evidence of bias within the admissions system” because the figures failed to 
take into account key information used in the admissions process, such as 
personal statements or interview performance.

Related: Why are Britain's universities still failing black and Asian 
students? | Aaron Kiely 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/mar/28/britains-universities-still-failing-black-asian-students>

“Ensuring our doors are wide open to talented and able students from all 
backgrounds really matters to us. The root causes of under-representation are 
complex and a much wider range of factors need to be taken into account to 
fully understand the problem,” Piatt said.

Russell Group universities – including Oxford and Manchester – have accepted 
increasing numbers of black British undergraduates in recent years, rising from 
1,690 in 2010 to 2,740 in 2015.

The new details were voluntarily released by Ucas after recent pressure by the 
government, including apublic campaign by David Cameron 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/feb/04/david-cameron-oxford-brasenose-college-admits-fewest-state-school-applicants>
 calling on universities to be more transparent in their admissions processes. 
But the last tranche of figures is unlikely to satisfy the government, which is 
adding a requirement that all universities publish more admissions data.

Jo Johnson <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/jo-johnson>, the universities 
minister, gave a cautious welcome to the publication of the figures, but will 
warn in a speech on Thursday that universities need to do more in providing 
clear guidance for future students.

“We want students to make informed choices between institutions and courses – 
and this is especially important for those from disadvantaged and 
under-represented backgrounds,” Johnson is to tell the Higher Education Policy 
Institute’s conference in London.

“I’m pleased that Ucas is today publishing data from around 100 universities 
on a voluntary basis. This is something the prime minister called for in 
January and it’s heartening to see the sector respond constructively.

Related: University of Oxford rebuts Cameron's claims over student diversity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jan/31/university-of-oxford-rebuts-camerons-claims-over-student-diversity>

“But this is only a voluntary data release, and there are around a hundred 
institutions that were not covered. That’s why we are legislating to introduce 
a new transparency duty to cover all institutions.”

The figures also showed wide gaps in successful applications from students in 
areas where few people go on to higher education. Analysis by the Sutton Trust 
and by theWonkhe higher education thinktank <http://wonkhe.com/>, showed that 
some institutions, such as Imperial College, were less likely to offer places 
to those from the least-educated areas, despite their qualifications.

The Sutton Trust said students applying from those areas were less likely to 
receive offers at any university, but that the effect was more pronounced at 
the most selective institutions.

Dame Julia Goodfellow, president of lobby group Universities UK and 
vice-chancellor of the University of Kent, said: “Publishing more data will not 
necessarily solve some of the longstanding problems in access to and 
participation in higher education. It will, however, allow universities to 
identify issues and solutions specific to their own institutions.”
