
Sometimes when I look into a child’s eyes I see anxiety as they decide to tell 
me they want to kill themselves. They might be worried at my possible reaction; 
will I show disapproval, be upset? Instead, I feel a deep sadness; how can 
somebody so young have reached the point in their lives when they think this is 
the only option left?

I am an outreach child and adolescent mental health nurse in the north of 
England. I act as the first response following a suicide attempt in a young 
person. I carry out a risk assessment, arrange follow up support, then decide 
if a young person is safe to go home, or needs a place of safety.

Ninety-eight children under 15 killed themselves in the UK from 2005 to 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/04/female-suicide-rate-in-england-highest-for-a-decade-in-2014-figures-reveal>
, according to figures from the Office of National Statistics. These figures 
don’t include the number of children who have attempted suicide or who have 
suicidal thoughts. According to a 2013 report from the mental health charity
MindFull <http://mindfulluk.tumblr.com/>, based on a YouGov survey of more than 
2,000 young adults, one in five children has symptoms of depression and nearly 
a third (32%) have thought about suicide before the age of 16.

As part of my job, I manage the strong emotions among parents, while they are 
waiting in A&E, not knowing if their child is going to live or die. I remember 
a child who took an overdose after breaking up with their first love. The child 
woke up at home, realised they were still alive so took another overdose. I 
could not tell the parents if their child was going to live. They were in shock.

Some parents blame themselves; “Was I a bad parent?”, others might blame the 
school, bullying and so on. Some parents tell me that they are going to punish 
their child for the upset they have caused; some flatly refuse to take their 
child home. I have had to politely point out that this is a criminal offence; 
you can’t wilfully abandon a child. At times like these, I’m forced to swallow 
my sense of disbelief and outrage.

It gets hard when I have to find a place of safety for the child. They may 
have symptoms of a severe mental illness, or the risk of further attempts is 
very high. Some young people have told me they were angry that their attempt 
did not work, and will try again. This time, they inform me, using a more 
violent method. I have seen some children who try many times to complete 
suicide, or at least act it out, which is obviously still very risky. At this 
point I might try and get them a bed on a mental health unit.

 The biggest problem for me is the attitude of other medical staff. Once, when 
I was trying to implement a safety plan in a busy emergency department – 
calling social services, child psychiatrists – a senior A&E doctor overheard 
what I was saying. He berated me for listening to a child who had said that 
wanted to kill themselves, telling me that it is up to the person what they do, 
so why was I trying to help. He was not even involved in the case. I wondered 
if he had forgotten that this was a 12-year-old child. The fact that they were 
saying such things, even for effect, as he suggested, still merited action. If 
this is the only way a child can get attention, then there must be something 
wrong.

When I call A&E to see if there is anyone for me to see, I sometimes get the 
response; “No thank you, we have no naughty children today”. I remember a nurse 
telling me very loudly for the whole ward to hear: “Hurry up and get that 
teenager out of here, they are taking up a bed”. This particular teenager had 
been repeatedly raped by her mother’s boyfriend and the resulting court case 
was the next day. They could not face being re-traumatised so had decided that 
death was the better option.

Related: The secret clinical psychologist's diary: 'We review some horrific 
life histories' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/26/the-secret-clinical-psychologists-diary-we-review-some-horrific-life-histories>

It is the system, however, that causes me the greatest stress. The lack of 
adolescent mental health beds 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline/2014/dec/01/mental-health-psychologist-resources-nhs>
 across the country has been well publicised. I remember one time, a few years 
ago, I was working with a young person who had presented at A&E with a long 
history of suicidal thinking, a terrible family history and clinical 
depression. I called the child psychiatrist who agreed that they were at very 
high risk. I spent more than a week trying to find a bed, anywhere, in England 
for them. They spent a few days in a cubicle in A&E, then on surgical wards and 
other places; each night they had a different bed. I remember NHS England 
suggesting that there were no beds anywhere in England at one time. The NHS had 
just run out of places. Does the public know just how close to the edge the 
health service is?

• In the UK, the Samaritans 
<http://www.samaritans.org/welisten?gclid=CL6A_b-l68sCFYZuGwodhR4HuQ> can be 
contacted on 116 123. In the US, theNational Suicide Prevention Hotline 
<http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/gethelp.aspx> is 1-800-273-8255. In 
Australia, the crisis support serviceLifeline <https://www.lifeline.org.au/> is 
on 13 11 14.

If you would like to write a blogpost for Views from the NHS frontline 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline>, 
readour guidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2014/aug/12/highs-lows-nhs-write-guardian>
 and get in touch by emailinghealthcare@theguardian.com 
<mailto:healthcare@theguardian.com>.


Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
