
Following changes to the way sales of social housing are regulated under the 
Housing and Planning Act 2016, some housing associationshave raised concerns 
<http://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/jun/08/charity-commission-red-tape-strangle-housing-associations>
 that they are now subject to the requirements of the Charities Act.

We know that some registered providers of social housing that are companies 
and registered charities are considering converting to become community benefit 
societies, with the aim of becoming exempt charities.

Related: Charity Commission red tape may strangle our housing associations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/jun/08/charity-commission-red-tape-strangle-housing-associations>

Of course it’s reasonable for charities to be concerned about the potential 
for increased governance and transaction costs. However, any charity 
considering converting to community benefit society status will need to balance 
these against the inevitable, potentially substantial, costs of conversion.

The likely impact of these changes has been overstated because of 
misunderstandings about how the Charities Act framework operates. Once the 
changes take effect, we expect most disposals by registered charities that are 
also registered providers of social housing will be eligible for 
self-certification under theCharities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/charities> Act. Self-certification is not 
onerous; it involves taking appropriate professional advice but does not 
require an order from the commission. The steps to be taken in order to 
self-certify are, on the whole, basic steps that you would expect responsible 
charity trustees to be taking.

Charities also need to remember that, whether their charity is registered with 
us or is exempt, they must comply with charity law. Any decisions they take 
must be in the charity’s best interests and in furtherance of its charitable 
purposes. Conflicts of interest need to be managed appropriately. Transactions 
with “connected persons” – such as individuals with a close personal or 
business connection to the charity or its trustees – may require consent from 
the commission whether a charity is registered or exempt.

None of this is bureaucratic red tape. The legal framework supports trustees 
in making responsible and well-informed decisions about charity property, and 
provides safeguards to deal with conflicts of interest and protect the 
interests of charity beneficiaries.

These are important principles to ensure that organisations which benefit from 
charitable status operate in a way which sustains public confidence, and that 
charitable assets are properly protected.

Sarah Atkinson is director of policy and communications at the Charity 
Commission

Join the Guardian Housing Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/housing/register/> to read more pieces like 
this. Follow us on Twitter (@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/GuardianHousingNetwork/?ref=hl> to keep up with the 
latest social housing news and views.
