
I was 16 in October 1940 when I first started reading the Manchester Guardian 
in the library of North Manchester municipal high school. My introduction to 
the paper was the inadvertent consequence of a decision made by the dour and 
strict Scottish headmaster, James Crawford Burnett, who finally agreed to allow 
sixth-form pupils unsupervised use of the library for private study. Otherwise 
this very elderly correspondent might not have become a daily reader of your 
paper. On leaving school I entered Sheffield University to read chemistry and 
in late 1944 emerged with a modest degree. After service in the Royal Navy as 
an instructor officer, followed by some three years industrial research, I 
embarked upon a full-time teaching career.

I have taught chemistry and occasionally physics in just about every type of 
secondary school at all levels. Most of my appointments were at schools in 
rock-solid Lancashire towns such as Accrington, Oldham and Ashton-under-Lyne. 
After retirement I held part-time lecturing posts in FE colleges.

Since my late eighties I have given some 40 talks with experiments on 
scientific topics and great 20th century scientists throughout the Greater 
Manchester region. At the age of 91, I am still engaged in this activity, 
addressing clubs and groups of senior citizens. I donate my fees/expenses to 
medical charities and local hospices. I attend extramural classes on history, 
politics and current affairs. They reinforce my radical leftwing outlook, first 
installed when I came across my father’s volumes of Gollancz’s Left Book Club 
of the 1930s. Sometimes your paper’s editorials, along with Polly Toynbee’s 
articles, help to maintain the flame… not always so, but thank you.

• If you would like to be interviewed in this space, send a brief note to 
good.to.meet.you@theguardian.com <mailto:good.to.meet.you@theguardian.com>
