
As someone who works on global issues you might not be surprised that I look 
favourably on theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>. 
However, I am not instinctively swayed by claims that it is the only route to 
peace, prosperity and influence. My decision to support staying in the EU comes 
from asking: What really matters to the world? And what is the best instrument 
to achieve progress?

Related: Why we urgently need more collaboration to solve long-term 
humanitarian crises 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/24/humanitarian-development-agencies-collaboration-urgent-collaborating>

There is urgency to achieve the sustainable development goals 
<http://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/sustainable-development-goals/> 
agreed last September in New York: reducing poverty and inequality, improving 
life chances for all, fighting climate change, and ensuring greater 
accountability and responsiveness of states and institutions.

The goals represent an extraordinary challenge to national and global 
governance. They will require close coordination of economic policy in ways the 
G20 has just begun to grasp. They will need deeper collaboration among 
countries on environmental issues, such as at the climate talks in Paris, and 
they will need concerted international action on peace and security, requiring 
new determination by the Security Council and wider UN membership.

The EU does not come empty-handed to the table. There are shared values – 
however frayed they currently appear –enshrined in treaty 
<http://ec.europa.eu/archives/lisbon_treaty/index_en.htm>. There are pooled 
resources in the EU budget offering economies of scale. There are shared 
institutions, including well-establisheddevelopment 
<https://ec.europa.eu/europeaid/home_en> and humanitarian 
<http://ec.europa.eu/echo/index_en> agencies at EU level. And there is trust 
created partly in those long days and nights spent shaping consensus. These 
assets deliver real benefits for the UK, in four main ways.

The EU has a robust framework for dealing with human rights abuses and 
instruments which contribute to peace-building

First, the UK has been influential in shaping consensus at EU level – on aid 
and trade for example – and can justly point to its role in the EU as an 
opportunity to amplify influence. At the climate talks in Paris, the EU led a
High Ambition Coalition 
<http://www.businessgreen.com/bg/opinion/2439215/eu-climate-commissioner-how-we-formed-the-high-ambition-coalition>
 in tandem with a core group of developing countries with which it has a 
long-term partnership. This alliance between the EU and the 79 countries of the 
Africa, Caribbean and Pacific Group represented a new platform for global 
deal-making, cutting across the old dividing line of the G7 and the G77.

Second, EU institutions help the UK extend the geographical span of its aid 
programmes, reaching countries that, otherwise, would be hard for us to help 
such as those in the Sahel. Every pound the UK routes through Brusselsis pooled 
with another £6 from other member states 
<http://ec.europa.eu/budget/mff/index_en.cfm>. This larger pool contributes 
directly to saving lives and building the long-term foundations for 
development. The EUdeploys its development and humanitarian resources 
<https://ec.europa.eu/europeaid/sites/devco/files/2015-annual-report-web_en.pdf>
 in some 150 countries and territories, from small islands such as Vanuatu to 
countries of sub-continental size, such as India.

Excluding energy, the EU imports more from the poorest countries than the US, 
Canada, Japan and China ​combined

Third, the EU provides services to the UK that other international 
organisations cannot. It has a robust framework for dealing with human rights 
abuses, recently displayed in thecurtailment of official aid 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/15/eu-suspends-aid-to-burundi-government>
 to the Government of Burundi, as well as a range of instruments which 
contribute to peace-building, for example military and police missions. The EU 
should certainly not be thought of as an alternative to Nato. However, at the 
end of 2015, there were 17 EU military and police missions – six of which were 
military in locations such as Kosovo, Palestine and the Central African 
Republic. All this is important at a time when UK development policy is 
pivoting to fragile states –thenew UK aid policy 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/478834/ODA_strategy_final_web_0905.pdf>
 announced late last year specifies that half of all aid will be spent in these 
difficult environments.

Fourth, the single market and the trade relations that accompany it provide 
development benefits. Excluding energy, the EU importsmore from the poorest 
countries <http://ec.europa.eu/trade/policy/in-focus/new-trade-strategy/> than 
the US, Canada, Japan and China combined. EU trade policy offers special access 
to these countries on the basis of free trade for “everything but arms”. Its 
trade treaties have strong human rights clauses, including forced and child 
labour. EU trade policy protects the UK from a race to the bottom in its 
dealings with the poorest countries.

Related: The humanitarian system: 'A mammoth machinery losing track of what it 
is for' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/22/humanitarian-aid-system-power-concentrated-hands-of-few-losing-track>

There is, of course, far more to do. The UK is a strong proponent 
<https://www.parliament.uk/business/publications/written-questions-answers-statements/written-statement/Lords/2016-05-11/HLWS695/>
 of reform in the EU on all aspects of development and humanitarian policy. Our 
reform agenda reflects our purposes, but is also rooted in the unparalleled 
knowledge to be found in UK universities, research centres, think tanks, and 
NGOs, as well as the private sector. For this reason, our engagement in the EU 
serves UK interests, but also benefits the EU.

The more we invest in the EU, the more successful we are likely to be in our 
efforts to achieve the global goals. We have to believe in the power of 
collective action and in the possibilities the EU can offer. I do, and that’s 
why I will be voting to remain.

Simon Maxwell is chair of the European Think Tanks Group <http://www.ettg.eu/>
. He tweets at@SimonMaxwell001 <https://twitter.com/SimonMaxwell001>. 

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
