
You might think that gender inequality today has more to do with social 
obstacles than legal ones. Like companies paying a young graduate less than the 
salary negotiated by her male classmate. Or women doing more unpaid household 
work than their male partners. You would be wrong.

Related: Rwanda's gender gap: banks must stop failing female entrepreneurs 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/aug/25/rwanda-gender-gap-banks-failing-female-entrepreneurs>

A recent World Bank survey <http://wbl.worldbank.org/> of 173 countries found 
that no fewer than 155 still had at least one law impeding women’s economic 
opportunities. Women face gender-based job restrictions in 100 countries, often 
confining them to low-paying activities, more often than not in the informal 
sector. In 18 countries the law gives husbands the right to prohibit their 
wives from working outside the home.

These legal differences have long-lasting economic and social consequences. 
Gender <https://www.theguardian.com/world/gender> based job restrictions tend 
to be associated with wider wage gaps and lower employment rates for women. And 
where girls’ future earning potential is limited, families may choose to send 
their brothers to school instead.

Laws matter. With effective implementation and enforcement, good laws can 
nudge forward positive changes in social and cultural mores. Legislating 
parental leave – for fathers as opposed to only for new mothers – has been 
shown to promote a more equitable division of childrearing responsibilities. 
Legal changes to human resources procedures, and reinforcing equal pay for 
comparable work, could help offset cultural biases that work against women who 
ask for a raise. Research shows thatmore equal laws boost women’s participation 
in the workforce <https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/sdn/2015/sdn1502.pdf>.

In 18 countries​,​ the law gives husbands the right to prohibit their wives 
from working outside the home.

And it’s not just about the workplace. Women 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> in several countries face extra 
documentation hurdles when trying to get a national identity card. Beyond 
making it tougher to access public services or contracts with others, no proof 
of ID means no chance of getting a bank loan to start or expand a business. 
Inheritance and marital property laws affect women’s access to financial 
institutions – access to property tends to make for greater equality within the 
household.

The economic cost of gender inequality is staggering. The McKinsey Global 
Institute recently estimated 
<http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/growth/how_advancing_womens_equality_can_add_12_trillion_to_global_growth>
 that if women participated in the economy identically to men, with equal wages 
and labour force participation, it would add up to $28tn to global GDP by 2025: 
a 26% increase over business as usual, equivalent to adding a new United States
and China to the world economy.

Related: Women on the beat: how to get more female police officers around the 
world 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jul/28/women-police-afghanistan-pakistan-india>

A more modest scenario, under which countries match the gender parity progress 
of their best-performing regional neighbour, would add $12tn to the global 
economy – about the collective economic weight of Japan, Germany, and the UK.

The implications are no less revolutionary for individual households. Literate 
mothers have healthier children. When women earn an income, they spend a higher 
proportion of it than men do on their children’s health, education and 
nutrition.

Governments can’t credibly claim to be concerned about stagnant growth and 
ageing workforces unless they are actively seeking to empower women 
economically. One way they can speed up progress towards gender-equal economic 
opportunity is to change laws that are holding women back. Another would be to 
direct agreater share of public procurement contracts to female-owned businesses
 
<http://www.intracen.org/uploadedFiles/intracenorg/Content/Publications/Women%20procurement%20guide-final-web.pdf>
.

If fuller inclusion for women makes for more robust economies, the reverse is 
also true. Healthy economies and abundant opportunities for productive work 
make it possible for women to command the incomes they need to invest in 
themselves and their families.

In developing countries, where large numbers of people are engaged in 
low-productivity subsistence work, tapping into international trade and 
investment can generate more productive, better paying jobs. That’s why the 
International Trade Centre works to help businesses in developing countries 
connect to world markets. Butour surveys from developing countries 
<http://ntmsurvey.intracen.org/home> suggest that only about a fifth of 
businesses that trade across borders are run by women. Moreover, since these 
businesses tend to be on the smaller side, they find it harder to clear 
regulatory hurdles in foreign markets.

Related: Legal barriers prevent women's empowerment in more than 170 countries 
| Clár Ní Chonghaile 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/09/legal-barriers-women-equal-rights-opportunities>

Earlier this year, we brought together thought leaders from governments, the 
private sector, international organisations, and civil society to identify 
means to economically empower more women. The result was acall to action 
<http://www.intracen.org/one-million-women-call-to-action/> to connect one 
million female entrepreneurs to markets by 2020. It sets out a framework for 
companies, governments, and other organisations to make specific, measurable 
pledges that contribute to this goal. Multinationals, for instance, can pledge 
to source more from suppliers owned or run by women. Signatories urge lawmakers 
to guarantee women’s rights to own property and businesses, to enter into 
contracts, to access finance, and to inherit.

Technology is making it easier for women to connect to business opportunities 
<http://www.intracen.org/news/Kenyas-GBC-team-is-the-winner-of-the-2015-WVEF-Tech-Challenge/>
 around the world. Legal obstacles must not be allowed to stand in their way. 
That’s not just because it’s economically smart. It’s because discrimination 
shouldn’t be the law.

Arancha González is executive director of the International Trade Centre. ITC 
and the government of Kenya will arrange the firstInternational Forum on Women 
in Business <http://www.intracen.org/womeninbusiness> in Nairobi on 14 December.
The Guardian Global Development Professionals Network is media partner for the 
event.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development/> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
