
Magic and Kiss FM owner Bauer has acquired radio group Orion Media 
<http://www.orionmedia.com/radio-brands/free-radio/> in a deal which could 
potentially be worth more than £40m.


Bauer <http://www.theguardian.com/media/bauer>, which also owns some of the 
UK’s best-selling magazines including Heat, Grazia and Bella, will pick up a 
portfolio of stations in the Midlands that includes Gem 106 and Free Radio.

“Free Radio and Gem are influential radio stations in one of the UK’s fastest 
growing regions,” said Paul Keenan, chief executive of Bauer Media. “It feels a 
very important part of the country in our city network of stations. I am 
excited about the growth prospects we see in economies of Birmingham and the 
West Midlands and Derby, Leicester and Nottingham in the East Midlands. We see 
these stations as complementary.”

The amount of the deal was not revealed but Orion thought to have sold for 
about £40m.

Orion’s underlying profits – earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and 
amortisation – were just £1.91m in 2014, according to the company’s most recent 
publicly available accounts.

However, the business attracted a number of bidders and a high sale price 
because of the scarcity of valuable radio assets in the UK not already 
controlled by a major group.


“We are happy with the economics of the deal,” said Keenan, who would not 
reveal the price paid. “Orion is a really strongly rooted local ad platform and 
business. Its audience delivery is really strong and growth prospects look 
excellent. The fit with Bauer is fantastic.”

The deal could see Bauer, which already handles Orion’s national radio 
advertising sales, face an investigation by competition regulators.

Related: Bake Off star Mel Giedroyc joins Magic Radio ahead of digital launches
 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/29/bake-off-star-mel-giedroyc-magic-radio-patsy-kensit>

“This acquisition essentially brings into our business a local radio operation 
in the Midlands,” said Keenan. “We have one FM licence in the region that we 
broadcast Absolute Radio on. Absolute is essentially a national service; Orion 
is a significant local platform. From a competition standpoint, my view is 
there is no change in the competition landscape.”


 Orion Media was formed in 2009 by Phil Riley with backing from private equity 
group Lloyds Development Capital, which took a 49.9% stake.

The station’s management is set to benefit from the sale with Riley holding a 
17% stake and Adrian Serle, the chief executive, owning 3%.

The group reported revenues of £15.7m and a pre-tax loss of £1.06m in the year 
to 30 September 2014.


“Orion has established market-leading status for audiences and revenues in 
each of its markets, something our teams should be immensely proud of,” said 
Serle, who is expected to leave the business after a transition period with 
Bauer. “We are extremely confident that the business will continue to thrive 
under Bauer’s ownership.”

Bauer has been on the acquisition trail since Capital-owner Global Radio, the 
biggest commercial radio group in the UK,won the £70m bidding war 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/jun/25/gmg-radio-sold-global-50m> for 
Smooth owner GMG Radio in 2012, then the third-biggest group in the UK.

Having been outbid, Bauer has looked to build scale by buying smaller players 
includingpaying £22m for Absolute Radio  
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/jul/29/bauer-media-buys-absolute-radio>
and several million fordigital radio station Planet Rock 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/feb/06/planet-rock-bauer-media>, both in 
2013.

