
A new building comes with every kind of pitfall: planning restrictions, cost, 
the limitations of the materials, the whims of the client. Or rather, a 
full-size building does. If you make something small enough, you can be as 
adventurous as you like. Sheds, bothies and even kennels can be the perfect 
place for architects and designers to experiment.

This is the thinking behind Nanotecture: Tiny Built Things, a book that 
collects 300 examples of envelope-pushing smaller structures. Some are 
permanent, others were temporary installations, some are downright bizarre. All 
are eye-catching.

“Before I went into publishing I trained as an architect,” says Rebecca Roke, 
who compiled the book, “and I’ve always been interested in how small-scale 
things allow you to focus on detail and materiality. When a building doesn’t 
have to house hundreds of people or make complex functions work, it can have a 
certain playfulness. The scale isn’t a barrier to creativity, and small 
actually engenders a chance to be experimental and accessible.”

Her favourite is Martín Azúa <http://www.martinazua.com/>’s model for 
inflatable instant housing (pictured above), a kind of gold cube made from 
metallised polyester. “One of the themes of the book is how to provide 
emergency housing for humanitarian situations, or urban homelessness. It’s 
playful, but it also points at how to solve that very real and ignored problem.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hj6q%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hj6q%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe522637e6d7705d18d86a2689a7d84cceac79e53%2F94_148_1513_1506%2F1513.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nanotecture%3A%20shrinking%20structures&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hj6q%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nanotecture%3A+shrinking+structures&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hj6q%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe522637e6d7705d18d86a2689a7d84cceac79e53%2F94_148_1513_1506%2F1513.jpg>
 Mirror image: The Lookout, by Angus Ritchie and Daniel Tyler/Processcraft, 
Loch Lomond and Trossachs. Photograph: Ross Campbell 
There are examples of nanotecture all over the world, from Japan to the Lake 
District. Some are (very) glorified garden sheds, others are more esoteric 
creations: benches that loop the loop, or portable country retreats. “It’s not 
necessary to have an enormous holiday home,” says Roke. “It is possible to do 
more with less. I hope the book is inspirational about what you can do with all 
kinds of materials. Timber is the most common, but everything from Ikea cubes 
to plastic pool noodles have been used.”

For one project in the Lake District, the artist Steve Messam 
<http://www.stevemessam.co.uk/> made a bridge out of 20,000 sheets of red 
paper. ForAntón García-Abril <http://www.ensamble.info/#!about/cxas>’s Trufa 
(meaning truffle), a holiday home in Spain, concrete was poured over hay bales 
and allowed to set. The resulting shape was dug up and sliced open before a cow 
called Paulina was introduced to eat the remaining hay over the course of a 
year.

Animals are a recurring theme. Cat chalets sit alongside avant-garde kennels. 
“It’s something that people find whimsical, but it also makes sense with the 
scale. The premise was to engage a wider audience in architecture.”

Nanotecture: Tiny Built Things by Rebecca Roke (£14.95, Phaidon) is published 
on 28 March. To buy a copy for £11.96, visitbookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/377248/>
