
There’s a case to be made, from things like Google search figures, that Robert 
Frost’s poemThe Road Not Taken <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/173536> – 
you know, the one about two paths diverging in a wood – is the most popular in 
modern history. (It recently turned 100; that wood is probably a Starbucks 
now.) Yet people still can’t agree what it means. On the surface, it’s a 
fridge-magnet cliche on the importance of taking risks and choosing the road 
less travelled. But many argue it slyly mocks that American belief in the 
individual’s power to determine his or her future. After all, the narrator 
admits that both paths look roughly similarly well-travelled. And how could he 
be sure he took the right one? He’ll never know where the other led. Looking 
back at our life histories, we tell ourselves we faced important dilemmas and 
chose wisely. But maybe only because it’s too awful to admit we’re stumbling 
mapless among the trees, or that our choices don’t make much difference.

Two psychologists, Karalyn Enz and Jennifer Talarico, throw light on these 
matters ina new study 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/acp.3176/abstract> with a title 
that nods to Frost: Forks In The Road. They sought to clarify how people think 
about “turning points” versus “transitions” in life. A turning point, by their 
definition, is a moment that alters your future – deciding to leave a job or 
marriage, say – but often isn’t visible from the outside, at least at first. 
“Transitions” involve big external changes: going to university, marrying, 
emigrating. Sometimes the two go together, as when you move to a new place and 
realise it’s where you belong. (“New Yorkers are born all over the country,” 
Delia Ephronsaid 
<http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2012/04/delia-ephrons-21-questions.html>, 
“and then they come to New York and it hits them: oh, that’s who I am.”) But 
it’s turning points we remember as most significant, Enz and Talarico conclude, 
whether or not they also involve transitions.

The distinction is useful: it underlines how the most outwardly obvious life 
changes aren’t always those with the biggest impact. Hence the famous “focusing 
illusion <https://edge.org/response-detail/11984>”, which describes how we 
exaggerate the importance of single factors on happiness: you switch jobs, or 
spouses, only to discover you brought the same troublesome old you to the new 
situation. Before it became a joke, “midlife crisis 
<https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/face-it/201104/midlife-crisis-myth-or-reality-in-search-new-name>
” referred to a turning point that happens because your circumstancesdon’t 
change, when your old life stops feeling meaningful. Turning points can be 
triggered by mundane things – the offhand remark that makes you realise you’re 
in the wrong life – or by nothing at all.

Related: Why you should discriminate... if you do it well 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/27/prejudice-discrimination-the-reality>

If, that is, our decisions really matter to begin with. In an entertaining 
recent book 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/23/books/review/the-road-not-taken-by-david-orr.html>
 on The Road Not Taken (“the poem everyone loves and almost everyone gets 
wrong”), David Orr argues that Frost is intentionally ambiguous on that. The 
poem isn’t a trite homily about seizing your destiny. But nor is it a warning 
that it’s pointless to try. Rather, it’s both: a reminder that we must grapple 
with seemingly crucial decisions,and that they might not matter, and we’ll 
never know if we chose well. Oh, and not to be a downer, but nobody gets out of 
those woods alive anyway.

• oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com <mailto:oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com>
