
Take me there: Neubau, Vienna

Why go?
With its Christmas markets and cosy coffee houses, Vienna 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2012/dec/23/christmas-vienna-food-drink> is 
the perfect city for a winter weekend. But if you overdose on twee, head into 
bohemian Neubau. Known as the 7th district, it's where you'll find the coolest 
cafés, bars and shops.

What to do
The Museums Quartier <http://www.mqw.at/en/> is a sprawling arts centre, home 
to galleries such as the excellentLeopold Museum 
<http://www.leopoldmuseum.org/en>, dedicated to Austrian modernism and Egon 
Schiele 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2011/may/16/egon-schiele-women-review>
, and Mumok (mumok.at <http://www.mumok.at/?L=1>), the modern art museum. In 
winter the MQ courtyard becomes a Christmas market, with designer stalls, 
curling lane, ice bar and DJs. Browse the indie shops on Neubaugasse and 
Gumpendorfer Strasse. Don't missTongues <http://tongues.at/home.php?il=6&l=deu> 
(tongues.at <http://tongues.at/home.php?il=6&l=deu>), a record store-cum-deli 
andSaint Charles Apothecary  <http://www.saint.info/>(saint.info 
<http://www.saint.info/>), which makes its own products.

Where to eat
When it comes to fusion cuisine Austro-Persian might sound odd, but locals 
can't get enough of dishes such as roast suckling pig with coriander dumplings 
atHirsch und Kamel <http://hirschundkamel.at/> (Stuckgasse 6; hirschundkamel.at 
<http://hirschundkamel.at/>). For a modern spin on the Viennese kaffeehaus head 
toCafé Leopold <http://cafe-leopold.at/> – coffee and cakes by day, DJ sets by 
night (cafe-leopold.at <http://cafe-leopold.at/>).

Where to stay
The 25hours Hotel <http://25hours-hotels.com/> has colourful, quirky rooms 
with a circus theme, and the rooftop bar doubles up as one of Neubau's hippest 
hangouts, with stunning views and regular DJ sets (from €100,25hours-hotels.com 
<http://25hours-hotels.com/>)

Insider tip
Actor and style blogger Carola Pojer (viennawedekind.blogspot.com 
<http://viennawedekind.blogspot.co.uk/>) recommends the café bar Liebling 
(Zollergasse 6) for Makava Ice Tea, "flowers on vintage tables, cosy sofas, 
lots of candles and recycled lamps".

Lighting up the sky: how we switched on to the aurora borealis
 Northern lights over cabins at the Ice Hotel in Jukkasjarvi, Sweden. 
Photograph: Peter de Clercq/Alamy 

Heading north to the Arctic in search of the aurora borealis used to be a 
niche activity – something to be found on the wish list of only the most well 
heeled and well travelled. But in the last two years, northern lights holidays 
have become one of the fastest-growing sectors of the travel industry. This is 
partly due to increased affordability – the launch of low-cost and charter 
flights to Nordic countries has helped to bring the price down – and also to a 
surge in solar activity, with Nasa experts predicting spectacular aurora 
displays this winter.

Arctic adventure specialist Discover the World has increased the number of 
direct flights from Heathrow to Kiruna in Swedish Lapland by 30% at peak times 
this winter to keep up with demand. It has also introduced several new 
holidays, including a self-drive package which combines a stay at the Icehotel 
with Abisko National Park (famed for some of the best aurora sightings in the 
world) and the chance to explore the Lofoten Islands in Norway (
discover-the-world.co.uk <http://discover-the-world.co.uk>).

Tour operator Simply Sweden has added a new collection of Lapland holidays, 
under the brand Simply Northern Lights, with three nights at the Lyngen Lodge 
in Norway from £1,495pp, including flights (simplynorthernlights.co.uk 
<http://simplynorthernlights.co.uk>). And in Finland the Mighty Fine Company is 
offering the Muotkan Maja Wilderness Lodge as the base for a four-night winter 
escape, with dog sledding, cross-country skiing and snowshoeing from £1,225pp (
mightyfinecompany.com <http://mightyfinecompany.com>).

Four places to stay in Madeira
 Catch a wave: Madeira Surf Camp 

Madeira Surf Camp, Porto da Cruz Laid-back surfers' hostel in the attractive 
village of Porto da Cruz. This coast has some of the island's best surf breaks, 
but even if you're not here for the waves, it's a great budget option, with 
dorms, private rooms, a communal kitchen and a roof terrace with a record 
player and a stack of vinyl. From €20pp per night for a dorm bed and from €30 
for a private room sleeping 2 (madeirasurfcamp.com <http://madeirasurfcamp.com>)

Quinta Das Vinhas Inn, Calheta This 17th-century farmhouse is surrounded by 
vineyards in the southwest of Madeira. Choose between B&B in the old house or 
self-catering in one of 14 cottages. Flagstone floors, beamed ceilings and 
azulejo tiles add rustic charm, and there's a small pool. Meals are served 
around the farmhouse table in the evenings. B&B from €65 per night. Cottages 
sleeping 2-3 from €525 per week (qdvmadeira.com <http://qdvmadeira.com>)

The Vine, Funchal
With its sleek, dark interiors and sexy rooftop infinity pool, this 
cutting-edge hotel in the capital, Funchal, is a radical new departure for 
stuffy old Madeira. As the name suggests, this place is all about the wine, 
from the grapey palette of purple, green and brown to the vinotherapy 
treatments in the underground spa and the impressive wine cellar. Doubles from 
€126 (hotelthevine.com <http://hotelthevine.com>)

Quinta da Casa Branca, Funchal
If the budget won't stretch to a night at Reid's Palace, the grand-dame of 
Funchal hotels, then this place makes a satisfying alternative: low-key 
elegance, good service and a great location in beautiful botanical gardens a 
20-minute walk from the city centre – if you can tear yourself away from the 
sun-trap swimming pool. From €150 for a garden room with terrace (
quintacasabranca.com <http://quintacasabranca.com>)
