
If you’re yawning while you’re reading this you are either already bored (how 
rude) or tired. And if you’re tired, you’re also likely to feel frustrated, 
impulsive and a bit miserable. Sleepiness is also often accompanied by finding 
it hard to remember things, an inability to concentrate and a tendency to bump 
into things. Thank goodness there’s a cure – even on the busiest of days. It’s 
the midday nap.

A small study in the journal Personality and Individual Differences 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0191886915003943> of 40 
volunteers aged between 18 to 50 who’d all had the same average amount of sleep 
found that those who had an hour’s afternoon nap spent longer on an impossible 
task without getting frustrated than those who didn’t nap. But who wants to get 
better at coping with an impossible task? What this translates to in ordinary 
life is that napping not only reduces tiredness, but the impulsive 
decision-making and short-temperedness that goes along with it.

The nap, arguably, is underused in modern life, especially among grumpy, tired 
people. Previous research has found it increases “positive emotions”, “energy”, 
“motivation” and “joy”. So should everyone go back to being a toddler and have 
a kip after lunch?

The solution

Naps commonly last between 30 and 90 minutes and it’s estimated that regular 
naps are taken by between a third to two-thirds 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21075238> of people worldwide. Studies show 
naps are more effective than caffeine in increasing alertness and improving 
verbal memory.Even a brief nap of 7 to 10 minutes 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21075238> (nodding off) can have immediate 
benefits lasting up to three hours. However, longer naps, of two hours, can 
lead to sleep inertia producing feelings of disorientation, especially if you 
had a high sleep “debt” before you nodded off. Between 1pm and 4pm is the time 
most conducive to napping – Japanese research puts the best time to nap at 2pm, 
for 20 minutes. This produced the greatest feelings of alertness and well being 
for the longest time.

A review of napping in pilots (called strategic napping) 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10607214> found that those who took naps 
(yes, sometimes in the cockpit, according to the research) during the cruising 
phase of long-haul flights improved their alertness and performance. Fatigue in 
pilots can manifest itself in poorer reaction times and reduced awareness of 
peripheral vision.One review article in Sleep Medicine 
<http://www.sleep-journal.com/article/S1389-9457(15)00727-3/abstract> did find 
a relationship between daytime napping and an increased risk of dying from any 
cause but the authors point out that sick people are more likely to take 
daytime naps anyway, so don’t let this put you off. It’s more of a concern that 
you’ll snore or dribble in front of colleagues.
