
Denis O’Brien, Ireland’s largest media owner, is being investigated by the 
country’sCriminal Assets Bureau 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Criminal_Assets_Bureau> (CAB), the agency that 
identifies money gained through serious crime.

The Irish Times, citing “a source with knowledge of the matter”, reported on 
Friday 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/news/crime-and-law/cab-seeks-to-question-denis-o-brien-on-tribunal-findings-1.2490189>
 that the CAB will seek to interview O’Brien about the findings of the Moriarty 
tribunal.

In its report, published in March 2011 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moriarty_Tribunal>, that tribunal concluded that 
a mobile phone licence granted to a consortium led by O’Brien had been secured 
on its behalf by the then communications minister, Michael Lowry,f 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michael_Lowry>ollowing payments made to him by 
O’Brien.

Both O’Brien and Lowry have strenuously denied the tribunal’s findings, saying 
they are wrong, and have challenged their authenticity.

According to the Irish Times’s front page story, the CAB has interviewed “a 
number of relevant witnesses” (but not including Lowry).

The agency has gathered information in the Isle of Man 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/isle-of-man> and Spain, where transactions 
mentioned in the tribunal’s report took place.


CAB’s remit involves investigating the suspected proceeds of criminal conduct. 
If such assets are identified, the agency can seize them.

Tribunal reports and evidence gathered by tribunals cannot be used as evidence 
in court so CAB, in investigating matters covered by the Moriarty tribunal, has 
to gather its own evidence.


Ireland’s Sunday Business Post also carried a front page article by its 
political editor, Pat Leahy, in which he reported that the CAB was studying 
documents about the matter that had not been seen by the tribunal.
 The Sunday Business Post’s front page story Photograph: Public Domain 
Regarded as Ireland’s richest man, O’Brien’s great wealth stemmed from his 
obtaining of the Esat Digifone mobile phone licence, which he subsequently sold 
off.

He is the largest shareholder in Independent News & Media (INM), the company 
that owns theIrish Independent 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/irish-independent>, the Irish Daily Star, the 
Sunday World and Dublin’s Evening Herald plus 14 regional titles and, north of 
the border, the Belfast Telegraph.

O’Brien’s Communicorp group owns Ireland’s two major national commercial radio 
stations, Newstalk and Today FM, plus three regional stations.


He also has widespread non-media assets in Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>, including in water, gas, hotels 
and football. His global interests include mobile phones in the Caribbean and 
aircraft leasing. For tax reasons, he lives in Malta.
