
Dementia has been described as a ticking timebomb that could affect more than 
a million people in the UK by 2025.

There are already 850,000 people living with dementia in the UK. This figure 
could rise to more than one million by 2025 and to more than two million by 
2050.

An estimated 21 million people in England have a close friend or family member 
living with dementia. So directly or indirectly, it will soon affect every one 
of us.

Perhaps that’s why dementia is now considered the most feared health condition 
for people over the age of 55; more than any other major disease, including 
cancer.

As well as the health and social costs of dementia, there is growing concern 
about the economic costs, particularly at a time of tightening budgets.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hhqz%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hhqz%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbdb6596bfb6f29bb35827ebbd8f3a83b75e4b02e%2F0_20_960_577%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tackling%20dementia%3A%20what's%20good%20for%20the%20heart%20is%20good%20for%20the%20brain&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hhqz%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tackling+dementia%3A+what%27s+good+for+the+heart+is+good+for+the+brain&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hhqz%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbdb6596bfb6f29bb35827ebbd8f3a83b75e4b02e%2F0_20_960_577%2F960.jpg>
 An estimated 21 million people in England have a close friend or family member 
living with dementia Illustration: Public Health England 
Alzheimer’s Society estimates that the annual cost of dementia to society in 
the UK is £26.3bn. This corresponds to an average cost per person of £32,250 
annually. This is made of a cost of £5,300 in healthcare and £12,500 in social 
care costs.

The latest edition of Public Health England’s Health Matters 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/health-matters-public-health-issues>
, a resource which brings together evidence of effective – and cost-effective – 
interventions to tackle major public health problems, focuses on midlife 
approaches to reduce dementia risk.

We must change our mindset and move away from thinking that dementia is simply 
an inevitable part of ageing.

 This resource for health professionals and local authorities makes the case 
for action in midlife to promote healthy lifestyles that can reduce the risk of 
dementia. We know that people are more likely to live well in their older years 
if they live healthily in earlier life, particularly during midlife.

It follows the launch of PHE’s new One You <> campaign, which is the first 
campaign to focus on the health of adults. One You aims to encourage adults, 
particular those in middle age, to take control of their health to enjoy 
significant benefits now, and in later life.

There is now enough evidence to justify considered action on dementia risk 
reduction in much the same way as we have been addressing heart disease and 
type 2 diabetes.

It is now believed that what’s good for the heart is also good for the brain. 

Modifying cardiovascular risk factors have contributed to a large decline in 
deaths from heart disease and stroke over the past 50 years.

The same could be the case for dementia. Studies suggest that up to a third of 
dementia cases may be attributable to potentially modifiable lifestyle risk 
factors.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hhqz%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hhqz%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7429684c6f299844f16afa5f8487b23a7aae0dd6%2F0_0_960_640%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tackling%20dementia%3A%20what's%20good%20for%20the%20heart%20is%20good%20for%20the%20brain&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hhqz%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tackling+dementia%3A+what%27s+good+for+the+heart+is+good+for+the+brain&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hhqz%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7429684c6f299844f16afa5f8487b23a7aae0dd6%2F0_0_960_640%2F960.jpg>
 Clinical commissioning groups and local authorities have a big role to play in 
promoting dementia risk reduction. Illustration: Public Health England 
This edition of Health Matters outlines the actions that can help to lower 
their risk of dementia such as:

• stopping smoking

• becoming more active

• reducing excessive alcohol consumption

• improving diet

• losing weight if necessary 

People have a real opportunity to manage their health better by attending the 
NHS Health Check <http://www.healthcheck.nhs.uk/>. This is for adults in 
England aged 40 to 74 and is an ideal opportunity for GPs, pharmacists and 
nurses to offer advice to promote a healthier lifestyle.

The NHS Health Check presents an opportunity to take regular measurements of 
cholesterol levels, blood glucose, and blood pressure, issues that could lead 
to or enhance the risk of dementia. In particular the risks are heightened for 
people with diabetes or pre-diabetes, so ensuring they take advantage of these 
free health checks is significant.

There is a big role to play in promoting dementia risk reduction for clinical 
commissioning groups (CCGs) and local authorities and this is outlined in 
Health Matters.

Using PHE’s dementia profile tool 
<http://fingertips.phe.org.uk/profile-group/mental-health/profile/dementia>, 
for example, can help CCGs and local authorities identify local risk factors 
for dementia such as smoking prevalence, physical inactivity, excess weight and 
alcohol-related hospital admissions. This will help to prioritise efforts to 
reduce such risk factors.

Read the dementia edition of Health Matters for more advice on ways to lower 
the risk of dementia, as well as ways to keep your brain active and challenged 
throughout life to help protect against dementia.

Visit the Health Matters collection page 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/health-matters-public-health-issues> 
to view previous editions and to sign up to the e-bulletin.

Content on this page is produced and paid for by Skills for Health 
<http://www.skillsforhealth.org.uk/>
