
BBC Radio 3 <http://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-3> will hope to show that 
broadcasting is for the birds with a new series of programmes in which birdsong 
is paired with classical music.


A group of musicians will venture into the Sussex woods to make music with 
nightingales, while Radio 3 breakfast show listeners will be introduced to a 
new bird’s song each weekend, paired with a piece of music. Later in the summer,
Radio <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> 3 will return to the 
Aldeburgh festival in Suffolk and broadcast a complete performance of 
Messiaen’s birdsong-inspired Catalogue d’Oiseaux, set alongside the myriad 
examples of birdsong along its famous coast.

The new season of programmes follows the success of Radio 4’s acclaimed Tweet 
of the Day 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/apr/24/tweet-david-attenborough-bbc-radio-birdsong>
 programme, which is broadcast every day before the Today programme. Birdsong 
also proved popular in the early days of digital audio broadcasting (DAB) radio 
when it was used to fill in spare capacity on the new platform, at one time
attracting an estimated 500,000 listeners a week 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/jun/02/birdsong-radio-channel>.

Radio 3 said it was “slow radio” in the style of “slow TV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/apr/03/norway-nrk-slow-tv-relaxation>
”, the Norwegian small-screen phenomenon that was adopted to award-winning 
affect by BBC4 and willreturn later this year 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/29/slow-tv-ronseal-ad-channel-4-bbc4-yorkshire-dales>
 with a two-hour uninterrupted bus trip across the Yorkshire Dales.

Related: Gently does it: from canal trips to birdsong, BBC4 to introduce 'slow 
TV' 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/may/01/gently-does-it-from-canal-trips-to-birdsong-bbc4-to-introduce-slow-tv>

The station broadcast an extended clip of a dawn chorus on 1 May to celebrate 
International Dawn Chorus Day.

The unlikely nightingale duet will feature singer and folksong collector Sam 
Lee, fiddler Alice Zawadzki, saxophonist Rachel Musson and Hyelim Kim, who 
plays the taegum – a flute-style instrument made of bamboo.

Alan Davey, controller of Radio 3, said: “BBC Radio 3 wants to connect people 
with remarkable music and culture, and one way we can do that is to encourage 
people to discover a different pace and to reconnect with both music and the 
world around them in a distinctive and beautiful way.”

In 2007 a BBC2 documentary asked Why Birds Sing 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2007/feb/13/broadcasting.bbc>, featuring 
Peter Gabriel and Jarvis Cocker.
