
As of August 2015, at least 5.5 million people in the UK 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/aug/18/uk-gym-membership-spending-up-by-44-per-cent>
 had an active subscription to a gym, with monthly prices ranging as widely as 
from £15 per month, or £180 a year, to up to£100 per month, or £1,200 a year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/jan/04/buyers-guide-gym-membership>. As 
well as purchasing new gymwear and any additional paraphernalia, in 2012 UK 
consumers spent£385m on vitamins, minerals and dietary supplements 
<http://store.mintel.com/vitamins-and-supplements-uk-september-2012?cookie_test=true>
, all money spent in the pursuit of good health and fitness.


Yet during the 2014-15 seasonal influenza season, only 50% 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/429612/Seasonal_Flu_GP_Patient_Groups_Annual_Report_2014_15.pdf>
 of those aged six months to under 65 years in an at risk category received 
their free flu jab, a tried and tested method of keeping us healthy which 
requires no more exertion then popping to our GPs or booking a visit to a 
community pharmacy. For frontline health care workers,this figure was only 
54.9%. 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/429606/Seasonal_Influenza_Vaccine_Uptake_HCWs_2014_15_Final_V2.pdf>
For the price of about four or five cups of coffee from a high street cafe, 
those not in an at risk group can dramatically reduce their likelihood of 
becoming confined to their beds for a week or more, and enduring a considerable 
degree of discomfort. For those in an at risk group, receiving a free flu jab 
can diminish the likelihood of catching a vaccine preventable disease that can 
cause potentially life threatening complications.

But for too many, immunisation is “just for kids”; a few jabs for toddlers and 
school children and a begrudged necessity when travelling to certain parts of 
the world. It is not viewed as the one aspect of a healthy lifestyle that 
doesn’t require us to abstain from a vice, work up a sweat or check a label for 
a food’s fat and calorie content.

 David Sinclair. Photograph: ABPI 
We know that adult vaccination is cost effective. Of the seven vaccine 
preventable diseases examined by the Supporting Active Ageing Through 
Immunisation (SAATI) coalition in the 2013 report,Adult Vaccination: A Key 
Component of Healthy Ageing 
<http://www.ilcuk.org.uk/index.php/publications/publication_details/adult_vaccination_a_key_component_of_healthy_ageing>
, influenza alone costs theUK economy more than £1 bn pounds per year 
<http://www.hrmagazine.co.uk/article-details/flu-costs-the-british-economy-1-35-billion>
 in lost productivity due to staff sick leave. Analysis from the Netherlands 
has concluded that every one euro invested in adult vaccination commencing at 
the age of 50 years would yieldmore than four euros of future economic revenue 
for Government 
<http://www.adultimmunisation.eu/uncategorised/adult-immunisation-is-cost-effective/>
. However, at a time when the NHS is committed to achieving an efficiency 
saving of £22bn between 2015 and 2020, immunisation is “just for kids” in the 
minds of far too many.

We need to create a social norm around life course immunisation to end the 
perception that vaccination is just for kids. There is a role for employers, 
government, healthcare professionals and individuals.


We must ensure vaccination is accessible and as such the delivery of jabs 
through pharmacy has to be part of the solution. Pharmacies tend to be open 
more convenient hours than general practitioners and their high street location 
is attractive. For many healthy people, a trip to the pharmacy happens much 
more often than a trip to the GP. Let’s offer everyone eligible for flu 
vaccination a voucher which they can use in their GP or their pharmacy. And it 
would be great to see more employers paying for the flu vaccine for their staff.

 Dave Eaton. Photograph: ABPI 
We must ensure that every contact matters and when people go into hospital or 
their GP surgery for other conditions, they should be asked if they are up to 
date on their vaccinations. The health service could introduce “declination 
forms” to encourage people to think twice before refusing a vaccine, and it 
could lower the age at which people qualify for free flu jabs to 50 (if only to 
reiterate the message that immunisation really isn’t just for kids).


We should ensure that health and social care workers see vaccination as 
important. And we have to find a better way to ensure social care workers 
actually get the flu vaccination, which is recommended to them but not 
reimbursed.


We need to create a more informed “consumer”. As children we have our red 
vaccination books which remind us what vaccinations we have had. In adulthood 
we don’t have anything similar. I imagine not many adults remember when they 
last had their tetanus jab for example.


And finally, it is important to ensure that policymakers are aware of the 
benefits of adult immunisation. TheInternational Longevity Centre – UK 
<http://www.ilcuk.org.uk/> has created the European adult immunisation hub 
<http://www.adultimmunisation.eu/> to provide the resources necessary to 
convince policymakers across Europe of the case for investing in adult 
immunisation. The hub is regularly updated with research, social media 
resources, case studies and interviews with medical practitioners and 
healthcare professionals.


David Sinclair and Dave Eaton are members of the International Longevity Centre

Content on this page is produced and paid for by the ABPI 
<http://www.abpi.org.uk/Pages/default.aspx>.
