
I have written several items in the past about Mail Online 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/mail-online> ripping off other 
writers/publications and also running pictures without photographic/copyright 
approval.

But I thought the Daily Mail’s website editors had put all that behind them by 
cleaning up their act. Sadly, it appears otherwise.

Two days ago, Martin Fletcher, a former foreign and associate editor of the 
Times, emailed me with a truly astonishing example of Mail Online misbehaviour.

Fletcher, now a freelance - and, incidentally, named last month as broadsheet 
feature writer of the year 
<http://www.pressawards.org.uk/page-view.php?pagename=citations-2015> - 
returned from a trip to Iraq with a story, for the Times, aboutthe desecration 
of British war graves in Basra and Amara 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/britains-war-graves-left-dusty-and-dishonoured-8x3czvj9s>
.

His article was posted on the Times’s website and within hours was 
“repackaged” by Mail Online. Its staffer, Euan McLelland, was even given a 
byline for his clumsy rewriting (wrong age and wrong name of the central 
figure) of Fletcher’s original.

The Mail’s version, once published here 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3557034/Thousands-war-graves-Iraq-marking-soldiers-killed-World-War-site-football-pitches-fairground-left-crumble.html>
, has been taken down following Fletcher’s protest to the Mail about his piece 
being plagiarised.

His complaints to Mail Online’s editor, Martin Clarke 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/martin-clarke>, and to the journalist, 
McLelland, elicited no response. But he has since heard from Scott Langham, the 
site’s deputy managing editor, with an email of breathtaking insouciance. He 
wrote:

“I have now had an opportunity to look into your concerns: our story followed 
yours in the Times, and we included a link back to it in the piece, which 
includes your byline.

“In the circumstances, we had no wish to cause concern. We will pay the 
invoice you have submitted at the earliest opportunity, with no admission of 
liability.”


Note that no admission of liability. What? No liability for pilfering a piece 
of work by a journalist who had produced a piece of original journalism?

Fletcher had financed his own trip, organised a fixer and transport, and 
risked his life in a notoriously unstable country. Yet a desk-bound Mail Online 
“journalist” had simply rewritten his article.

As Subscribe blogger Liz Gerard reveals 
<http://www.sub-scribe.co.uk/2016/04/taking-stand-against-mail-onlines.html>, 
McLelland had been a busy boy on his Mail Online shift by producing several 
other articles that night.

This isn’t proper journalism, as Fletcher told me. It is plunder plain and 
simple. And his is not an isolated case. He said:

“I’ve had a huge response from numerous fellow journalists whose work has been 
likewise abused by Mail Online. I am incensed by Mail Online’s dishonesty and 
its debasement of honest journalism.”

Who can genuinely disagree with him?
