
Alsace runs west to east from the pine-clad Vosges mountains through some of 
the most beautiful vineyards in France, to the mighty Rhine river and the 
border with Germany. Changing hands several times over the centuries between 
France and Germany has only strengthened the independent character of this 
fiercely traditional region, where a unique dialect is still the most popular 
spoken language.

I don’t think I have ever travelled through any other part of France where 
visitors are given such a genuinely warm welcome, both in the vineyards (Alsace 
is one of the world pioneers of wine tourism) and the mountains, where an 
outdoor holiday can take in biking, boating, trekking and fishing. The food is 
out of this world and distinct from other French regions. A foaming beer is 
just as popular as a glass of wine, and specialities include not just foie gras 
andescargots but juicy ham hock with steaming choucroute, pike-perch poached in 
riesling and spicy gingerbread.
Alsace map 
<http://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/09/travel_alsace_map/giv-30080Ze7fhn1hHL2l/>
The main towns


What to see and do
The region’s capital is Strasbourg, particularly famous for being the seat of 
several European institutions and its magnificent red sandstone Gothic 
cathedral, the world’s tallest building between 1647 and 1874, now celebrating 
its millennium (its first stone was laid in 1015). The interlocking waterways 
and brightly painted half-timbered houses ofLa Petite France, the historic 
leather-tanning district, is a picturesque must-see, but be prepared for crowds 
of visitors. More offbeat, and quieter, is theMusée Alsacien 
<http://www.musees.strasbourg.eu/index.php?page=musee-alsacien>, an enchanting 
maze of rooms illustrating Alsace’s unique culture, and theCave Historique des 
Hospices de Strasbourg <http://www.vins-des-hospices-de-strasbourg.fr/>, a 
14th-century wine cellar beneath the modern city hospital, which boasts a 
barrel of the world’s oldest wine, miraculously preserved since 1472.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c36z%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c36z%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F4%2F1441364705841%2F4e3aa4c4-9c9a-4cf4-81aa-ee8665024e5c-2060x1377.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holiday%20guide%20to%20Alsace%2C%20France%2C%20including%20Strasbourg&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c36z%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holiday+guide+to+Alsace%2C+France%2C+including+Strasbourg&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c36z%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F4%2F1441364705841%2F4e3aa4c4-9c9a-4cf4-81aa-ee8665024e5c-2060x1377.jpeg>
 Strasbourg, with the city’s Gothic cathedral, once the world’s tallest 
building, in the background. Photograph: F1 Online/Rex Features 
Mulhouse, 100km south of Strasbourg (off the above map), is the region’s 
second city, best known for its vast transport museumsCité de l’Automobile 
<http://www.citedelautomobile.com/> (hosting the world’s biggest collection of 
Bugattis among hundreds of vintage and racing cars) andCité du Train 
<http://www.citedutrain.com/en>, and is primarily an industrial town. Between 
the two cities isColmar, whose ancient centre is criscrossed by romantic lanes 
and canals. The town is an architectural goldmine of gothic, renaiissance and 
baroque mansions and churches. Foodies should not miss the ornate covered 
market.

Where to eat
 La Maison des Tanneurs. Photograph: Alamy 
Most of Strasbourg’s traditional winstube (winebars) have been transformed 
into restaurants, the perfect place to sample local specialities. Cross the 
river Ill, just outside the historic centre, to eat atAu Pont du Corbeau (mains 
from €17, 21 Quai Saint-Nicolas, +33 3 8835 6068), whose menu ranges from 
escargots and homemade goose foie gras togrumbeerekiechle – tasty potato 
pancakes with crunchy smoked bacon. In La Petite France,La Maison des Tanneurs 
(mains from €22, 42 rue du Bain aux Plantes, +33 3 8832 7970,
maison-des-tanneurs.com <http://www.maison-des-tanneurs.com/>) serves an 
unforgettablechoucroute, steaming fermented cabbage topped with a vast pig’s 
knuckle, salted pork and assorted sausages, though vegetarians will be relieved 
to discoverPur etc (mains from €7, 122 Grand Rue, +33 9 8378 3879, pur-etc.fr 
<http://www.pur-etc.fr/>), whose chefs work directly with local farmers. Colmar 
has plenty of atmospheric winstube, like the watersideBrenner (mains from €15, 
1 rue Turenne, +33 3 8941 4233,wistub-brenner.fr <http://www.wistub-brenner.fr/>
), but the best address to mix with the locals is the opulentBrasserie Le 
Théâtre (mains from €18, 1 rue des Bains, +33 3 8929 2929, 
restaurantletheatre.net <http://www.restaurantletheatre.net/>).

Where to drink

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c36z%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c36z%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F4%2F1441367019778%2F34fa3a68-9841-4de9-ac6a-2116a1877624-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holiday%20guide%20to%20Alsace%2C%20France%2C%20including%20Strasbourg&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c36z%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holiday+guide+to+Alsace%2C+France%2C+including+Strasbourg&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c36z%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F4%2F1441367019778%2F34fa3a68-9841-4de9-ac6a-2116a1877624-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Troquet des Kneckes. Photograph: John Brunton 
With Strasbourg’s big student population there are many cheap and cheerful 
bars.Au Brasseur (22 rue des Veaux, aubrasseur.fr <http://www.aubrasseur.fr/>) 
is a buzzing microbrewery with artisan beers, such as chocolate malt, while
Troquet des Kneckes (112 Grand Rue, on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/Troquetkneckes>), “the catapult bar”, has just 
opened, with flea market sofas and armchairs, free table football and a big 
selection of Alsace wines. For live music and clubbing, finish the night atFat 
Black Pussycat (3 rue Klein, on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Fat-Black-Pussycat/322881494487044>). Colmar 
may be quieter but there is a great atmosphere in the bustlingBistrot des Halles
 (13 rue des Ecoles), right in the middle of the food market, and for an 
after-dinner drink, pop into the cosy bar ofSchwendi Bier und Winstub (23 Grand 
Rue).

Where to stay

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c36z%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c36z%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F4%2F1441365050376%2F6e277828-fcf7-47e5-bf82-1439c6d5e609-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holiday%20guide%20to%20Alsace%2C%20France%2C%20including%20Strasbourg&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c36z%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holiday+guide+to+Alsace%2C+France%2C+including+Strasbourg&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c36z%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F4%2F1441365050376%2F6e277828-fcf7-47e5-bf82-1439c6d5e609-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Hotel Graffalgar 
The funkiest place to stay in Strasbourg is Hotel Graffalgar (doubles from 
€90, breakfast €8,graffalgar-hotel-strasbourg.fr 
<http://www.graffalgar-hotel-strasbourg.fr/>), where graffiti artists have 
decorated each room, ranging from an Escher-like hommage to Stanley Kubrik in 
room 203 to the psychedelic bordello of 303.Hotel Suisse (doubles from €87 B&B, 
hotel-suisse.com <http://www.hotel-suisse.com/fr/>) is perfectly placed 
opposite the cathedral and Room 33 has a view of the towering pink spire. 
Colmar’sHotel Le Colombier (doubles from €126, breakfast €14, 
hotel-le-colombier.fr 
<http://www.hotel-le-colombier.fr/uk/hotel-4-etoiles-colmar-site-officiel.php>) 
is a chic boutique property, while the picturesque half-timberedHotel Saint 
Martin(doubles from €95 B&B, hotel-saint-martin.com 
<http://www.hotel-saint-martin.com/>) offers much more traditional, homely 
Alsace decor.

The wine route

What to see and do
 The medieval Haut-Koenigsbourg, an imposing hilltop chateau. Photograph: 
Lionel Lourdel/Photononstop/Corbis 
Founded in 1953, this is the oldest wine route in France 
<http://www.alsace-wine-route.com/>, stretching over 150 miles (in the shadow 
of the Vosges, roughly from the west of Mulhouse to the north of Strasbourg) 
with more than 1,000 vignerons welcoming visitors to their cellars for a free 
wine tasting. In September and October the tourism offices of villages along the
wine route 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2012/oct/03/alsace-wine-route-top-10-guide-france>
 organise half-day excursions for tourists to join in the grape harvest.

The Alsace wine villages have a fairytale quality with their brightly painted 
cottages, medieval ramparts and distinctive stork nests delicately balanced on 
church spires. The most beautiful – Riquewihr, Eguisheim, Kaysersberg and 
Bergheim – are very popular with visitors over the summer, so autumn’s a good 
time to visit, but there are plenty of quieter hamlets such as Saint-Hippolyte 
and Katzenthal waiting to be discovered. For a cultural break from eating and 
drinking, visit the medievalHaut-Koenigsbourg 
<http://www.haut-koenigsbourg.fr/en/>, an imposing hilltop chateau, or drive up 
to the mysticMont Sainte-Odile, a seventh-century abbey which has its own hotel 
for visitors who want to stay the night (doubles from €86, breakfast €9.80,
mont-sainte-odile.com <http://www.mont-sainte-odile.com/>). A great stop-off 
for anyone travelling with kids is the bewitchingGingerbread Museum (
paindepices-lips.com <http://www.paindepices-lips.com/>), in Gertwiller, where 
master baker Michel Habsiger has created a museum dedicated to Hansel and 
Gretel filled with a cornucopia of retro toys. His boutique is a wonderland of
gingerbread <http://www.paindepices-lips.com/boutique/les-pains-d-epices-1/> and
paver varieties <http://www.paindepices-lips.com/boutique/les-paves-3/>.


 * Guide to the Alsace wine route 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2012/oct/03/alsace-wine-route-top-10-guide-france>

Where to eat

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c36z%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c36z%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F4%2F1441366492777%2F53608922-595b-4182-8be5-395ec0605f29-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holiday%20guide%20to%20Alsace%2C%20France%2C%20including%20Strasbourg&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c36z%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holiday+guide+to+Alsace%2C+France%2C+including+Strasbourg&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c36z%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F4%2F1441366492777%2F53608922-595b-4182-8be5-395ec0605f29-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Les Petites Casseroles. Photograph: John Brunton 
There are plenty of Michelin-starred dining rooms, such as Olivier Nasti’s 64° 
Le Restaurant (9-13 rue du General de Gaulle, +33 3 8947 1017,lechambard.fr 
<http://www.lechambard.fr/en/>), but the bill in these splash-out restaurants 
is usually going to add up to more than €100 a head. A much better bet is to 
join the locals in awinstub. Between Strasbourg and Colmar, check out Molseim’s 
Caveau de la Metzig (mains from €12, 1 Place de l’Hôtel de Ville, +33 3 8838 
2624,restaurant-la-metzig.fr <http://www.restaurant-la-metzig.fr/>), housed in 
a 16th-century butcher’s guildhall, or the livelyLes Petites Casseroles (mains 
from €15, 128 rue du Général Gouraud, +33 3 8804 7021) in the centre of 
Obernai. Look out for dishes such asflammekuechen, the Alsace take on pizza, a 
wafer-thin flatbread smothered with creamy fromage blanc and bacon, and
baeckeoffe, a slow-baked casserole of lamb, beef and pork. South of the wine 
route, the sleepy village of Nierdermorschwihr has several great addresses. 
Among them isCaveau des Chevaliers de Malte (mains from €12, 127 rue des Trois 
Epis, +33 3 8927 0978,caveau-chevaliers.fr <http://www.caveau-chevaliers.fr/>), 
perfect for plump escargots in garlicky butter or veal tripe braised in 
riesling.

Where to taste wine

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c36z%2Fsfb%23img-6&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c36z%2Fsfb%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F4%2F1441366249244%2F4da60eb8-b065-46c2-a887-51d87cc2faf3-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holiday%20guide%20to%20Alsace%2C%20France%2C%20including%20Strasbourg&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c36z%2Fstw%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holiday+guide+to+Alsace%2C+France%2C+including+Strasbourg&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c36z%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F4%2F1441366249244%2F4da60eb8-b065-46c2-a887-51d87cc2faf3-1020x612.jpeg>
 Christian Beyer at the Emile Beyer vineyard 
Choice is not the problem when it comes to tasting wine, though be prepared 
for lengthy sessions, as each vigneron will open up a dozen whites – sylvaner, 
riesling, gewürztraminer, pinot blanc – the region’s distinctive red, a light 
pinot noir, and bubbly crémant d’Alsace. A good place to start understanding 
these complex vintages is one of the big co-operative cellars, like theCave de 
Turckheim (cave-turckheim.com <http://www.cave-turckheim.com/>), which has 
unbeatable prices as well as high quality, or just turn up at the vineyards of 
two historic winemaking families:Maison Emile Beyer (emile-beyer.fr 
<http://www.emile-beyer.fr/>) and Hugel et Fils (hugel.com 
<http://www.hugel.com/>). Alsace has an outstanding selection of organic, 
biodynamic and “natural”, no-sulphite vignerons. Two to track down areDomaine 
Weinbach (appointment only, + 33 3 8947 1321, domaineweinbach.com 
<http://www.domaineweinbach.com/>), for an incredible pinot gris, or the Domaine
Albert Seltz(appointment only, +33 3 8808 9177, albert-seltz.com 
<http://albert-seltz.com/>), where the eponymous, exuberant owner has raised 
the humble sylvaner grape into an exquisite grand cru.

Where to stay

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c36z%2Fsfb%23img-7&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c36z%2Fsfb%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F4%2F1441366059187%2F61b24910-5934-454d-8405-40d87c0ff8fc-2060x1382.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holiday%20guide%20to%20Alsace%2C%20France%2C%20including%20Strasbourg&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c36z%2Fstw%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holiday+guide+to+Alsace%2C+France%2C+including+Strasbourg&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c36z%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F4%2F1441366059187%2F61b24910-5934-454d-8405-40d87c0ff8fc-2060x1382.jpeg>
 Au Canon 
The Route des Vins is lined by friendly, affordable winemaker B&Bs, the 
perfect places to let vignerons explain their wines over a relaxed tasting. 
Dambach-la-Ville is a sleepy village off the beaten track andAndré Ruhlmann 
(doubles €62 B&B,ruhlmann-schutz.fr 
<http://www.ruhlmann-schutz.fr/uk/ruhlmann.html>) loves to whisk his guests on 
a tour of vineyards that have been in his family since 1688.Au Canon (doubles 
from €45 B&B,aucanon.com <http://www.aucanon.com/>) sits by the ancient 
ramparts and steep vineyards that enclose the hamlet of Andlau. It used to be 
the local bistrot, but Madame Nicolas has converted it into a cosy B&B, while 
her son, a creative young chef, prepares gourmet private dinners for guests who 
book them in advance. Staying at theButterlin family’s chambres d’hôte (doubles 
from €65 B&B,gites-kientzheim <http://www.gites-kientzheim.com/>) is like 
stepping back in time, with ancient cot-like beds in snug wood-panelled rooms. 
The owners have plenty of suggestions for cellars to visit along the pretty 
cobbled streets of Kientzheim, where every inhabitant seems to make wine. For 
travellers preferring the comfort of a hotel, most villages have several 
old-fashioned auberges, such asHotel Hassenforder (doubles from €70, breakfast 
€7.50,roger-hassenforder.com 
<http://www.roger-hassenforder.com/en/hotel-in-kaysersberg/>), right in the 
heart of Kaysersberg.

Vosges national park

What to see and do

 Walking in the Vosges. Photograph: Alamy 
The Vosges mountains run through Alsace from the summit of the 1,400-metre 
Grand Ballon in the south, then north along the hair-raising bends of the Route 
des Crêtes, the Petit Ballon and Col de la Schlucht – regularly featuring in 
stages of the Tour de France – up to the border with Germany. Here, the crowds 
that follow the wine route thin out, and the low mountains, lakes, waterfalls 
and forests are a paradise for walking and biking, hang-gliding, canyoning and 
horse riding. Then, when the winter snows arrive, this ranks as the best region 
in France for cross-country skiing. A favourite waterfall to walk to is just 
outside Le Hohwald, 40 minutes’ drive south-west of Strasbourg, where a sign 
for “Cascades” leads along a thick forest path where the river Andlau cascades 
down a steep waterfall.

Not all the attractions are outdoor, as at Sainte-Marie-aux-Mines there is a 
breathaking trip down an ancient silver mine, while the Vallée de Villé is 
lined with artisan distilleries that make fruit brandies. AtDistillerie 
Nusbaumer (jos-nusbaumer.com <http://www.jos-nusbaumer.com/en/>) the tasting 
room is usually packed – be sure that someone acts as designated driver.

Where to eat and drink

 Ferme Auberge du Kahlenwasen 
This is the land of the ferme-auberge where every pine-clad valley has signs 
directing travellers to working farms with rustic restaurants. Just outside Le 
Hohwald, the Deissler family raises cows at theFerme Auberge Lindenhof (mains 
from €12, 11 route du Kreutzweg, +33 3 8808 3198,ferme-auberge-lindenhof.fr 
<http://www.ferme-auberge-lindenhof.fr/>) and the roadside diner offers 
delicious dishes such as succulent roast veal with a creamy wild mushroom sauce 
and Alsatianspaetzle egg pasta.

In the region where Munster cheese is produced, the Ferme Auberge Kahlenwasen 
(mains from €7, Luttenbach-près-Munster, +33 3 8977 3249,on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/Kahlenwasen?ref=hl>) sits on a 1,000-metre-high 
plateau across from the Petit Ballon, and Madame Lochert prepares rustic 
recipes including a wonderful dessert – fresh, milky Munster floating in 
home-brewed kirsch. At the village of Soultzeren, a narrow track through thick 
forest comes out at the breathtakingFerme Auberge du Lac de Forlet (mains from 
€8, Lac des Truites, Soultzeren, +33 3 8977 4922). It overlooks a stark glacial 
landscape and what locals call “trout lake” but, rather than fish, it does 
simple omelettes and cured ham because no one fishes in the lake anymore.

Where to stay

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c36z%2Fsfb%23img-8&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c36z%2Fsfb%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F4%2F1441365279072%2F4568cb66-9fbc-4ee3-98e2-320a0cb53e48-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holiday%20guide%20to%20Alsace%2C%20France%2C%20including%20Strasbourg&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c36z%2Fstw%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holiday+guide+to+Alsace%2C+France%2C+including+Strasbourg&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c36z%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F4%2F1441365279072%2F4568cb66-9fbc-4ee3-98e2-320a0cb53e48-1020x612.jpeg>
 Hostellerie La Cheneaudière 
Auberge du Mehrbächel (doubles from €65, breakfast €9.50, 
auberge-mehrbachel.com <http://www.auberge-mehrbachel.com/>) is perfect for 
exploring the nature trails of the Grand Ballon. The chalet-style rooms have 
cosy rustic decor and the chef’s speciality is locally caught trout.

For a more personal stay, Les Arts Verts (doubles €80 B&B, 
chambre-les-arts-verts.com 
<http://www.chambre-les-arts-verts.com/en/tariffs-and-conditions/>) is an arty 
new B&B by lake Kruth-Wildenstein, where guests can visit the printmaking 
studio of owner Didier and have access to a sauna. Driving along to the silver 
mines of Sainte-Marie-aux-Mines, it is impossible to miss the bright yellow 
facade ofAuberge de la Canardière (doubles from €43, breakfast €6, 
auberge-de-la-canardiere.fr <http://www.auberge-de-la-canardiere.fr/>). The 
very reasonably priced rooms are basic, and the chef tempts guests with his 
homemade terrines and smoked wildboar ham.

For total pampering, splash out at the luxurious Hostellerie La Cheneaudière 
(doubles from €185 B&B,cheneaudiere.com <http://www.cheneaudiere.com/>). A stay 
includes use of the spa, with a sauna, hammam, water-jet massage and Jacuzzi.

• John Brunton was a guest of Hostellerie La Cheneaudière. Car hire was 
provided bycarrentals.co.uk <http://www.carrentals.co.uk/>. More information is 
available attourisme-alsace.com <http://www.tourisme-alsace.com/> and 
route-des-vins-alsace.com <http://www.route-des-vins-alsace.com/fr>. EasyJet 
<http://www.easyjet.com/en/cheap-flights/france/strasbourg> and Ryanair 
<https://www.ryanair.com/en/cheap-flights/london-stansted-to-strasbourg/> fly 
direct to Strasbourg from Stansted and Gatwick, with returns from £10. Returns 
on Eurostar (change at Paris,eurostar.com 
<http://www.eurostar.com/uk-en/calendar/find-your-98-return-strasbourg>) from 
£98.
