
Florence’s bi-annual tradeshow Pitti Immagine Uomo has a long history of 
launching new talent on the menswear scene. For SS17 it lured two of fashion’s 
biggest names, Gosha Rubchinskiy and Raf Simons, away from Paris. Here’s what 
we learnt.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yt33%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yt33%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9dc167bddfa05d61a055354c59f5d49c8a26912b%2F0_475_3280_4101%2F3280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Menswear%3A%20Five%20trends%20to%20look%20out%20for%20next%20year&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yt33%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Menswear%3A+Five+trends+to+look+out+for+next+year&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yt33%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9dc167bddfa05d61a055354c59f5d49c8a26912b%2F0_475_3280_4101%2F3280.jpg>
 Suits on the Gosha Rubchinskiy catwalk. Photograph: Gosha Rubchinskiy 
Suits are back

The suit has been having a hiatus from high fashion 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/may/25/suit-jacket-crisis-mens-tailoring-trend-ryan-gosling-shawn-mendes-zayn-malik-seal-nick-jones>
 in recent seasons. Now the pendulum is set to swing back withRussian designer 
Gosha Rubchinskiy 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/may/20/russian-ladwear-how-fashion-found-inspiration-in-grungy-post-soviet-streets>
 opening his show at Pitti Uomo with three suits, styled minus shirts (one with 
a sports t-shirt, two bare chested) with chunky silver chain jewellery. If 
Gosha is doing tailoring, it means suits are back in the conversation for 
Generation Z. The kids who walked in his show, cast via Instagram, are some of 
the legion of young fans/customers he and his clothing have on social media

The Pitti Peacock look is over

The Pitti Peacock 
<https://www.businessoffashion.com/articles/intelligence/pittis-peacocks-liberation-mens-style>
 is a nickname given to the group of dandily dressed men who frequent the Pitti 
Immagine event in an array of pastel hued three piece suits with natty pocket 
squares, jazzy sock combos and jaunty trilbys who pose for street style 
bloggers. It’s a curiously dated look that is only seen in such abundance at 
Pitti with little street cred. It looked particularly out of step this year 
with the Gosha and Raf crowd in town.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yt33%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yt33%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38a3b4b99d50198e0dce4ed43ed8439c09c08adc%2F0_0_3280_4928%2F3280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Menswear%3A%20Five%20trends%20to%20look%20out%20for%20next%20year&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yt33%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Menswear%3A+Five+trends+to+look+out+for+next+year&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yt33%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38a3b4b99d50198e0dce4ed43ed8439c09c08adc%2F0_0_3280_4928%2F3280.jpg>
 A Fila x Gosha Rubchinskiy hooded top. Photograph: Gosha Rubchinskiy 
Sportswear is still happening

Don’t mothball that hoodie just yet, after the suits at Gosha Rubchinskiy came 
the sportswear so intrinsically linked to the label. For SS17 and his Florence 
outing he has collaborated with Italian sportswear brands: Fila, Kappa and 
Sergio Tacchini. Retro tracksuits from the latter and T-shirts and sweatshirts 
from the former (he took his bow in a bright yellow one) featuring Gosha’s logo 
under the Fila branding giving them a counterfeit quality that is trending hard 
in fashion now. In LondonChristopher Shannon riffed on the Sports Direct logo 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jun/15/fashion-enters-brexit-debate-in-london-menswear-shows-eu-referendum>
 and Instagram couldn’t get enough of his Haters Direct sweatshirt.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yt33%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yt33%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F961b528501c59d5cc0dc035441b1506133c2238d%2F0_351_3280_4158%2F3280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Menswear%3A%20Five%20trends%20to%20look%20out%20for%20next%20year&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yt33%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Menswear%3A+Five+trends+to+look+out+for+next+year&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yt33%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F961b528501c59d5cc0dc035441b1506133c2238d%2F0_351_3280_4158%2F3280.jpg>
 A Robert Mapplethorpe image on a Raf Simons design for spring/summer 2017. 
Photograph: Raf Simons 
Art is still fashion’s BFF

Fancy owning your own Mapplethorpe? Pitti Immagine’s other guest designer, Raf 
Simons collaborated with the Robert Mapplethorpe foundation to produce a 
collection that was a walking work of art, a sartorial version of the 
retrospective currently showing in Los Angeles at the Getty Center and LACMA. 
Every exit featured a print of one of Mapplethorpe’snow iconic photographs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gallery/2016/feb/23/robert-mapplethorpe-pictures-j-paul-getty-meseum-perfect-medium>
 from self portraits, phallic flower studies, and game changing sexual imagery 
to Patti Smith cutting her hair all printed on shirting and strapped tops that 
nodded to the BDSM gearMapplethorpe often photographed himself wearin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/09/robert-mapplethorpe-photography-jack-fritscher-look-at-the-pictures>
g. Styled under signature Raf knitwear with slim cut black trousers and socks 
with pool sliders.

Florence may be the new Milan

Florence is the prettier tourist friendly one of the two but In Fashion Terms 
traditionally rainy Milan with its brutalist architecture was the hot one. With 
Bottega Veneta, Calvin Klein, Ermenegildo Zegna absent from the Milan menswear 
schedule, the usually packed week has become patchy. There’s now more buzz 
emanating from Pitti Immagine Uomo thanks to hot guest designers and a 
tradeshow packed to bursting with new brands and products to excite the buyers 
and press. Following the all singing all dancing womenswear Louis Vuitton, Dior 
and Gucci Cruise collection shows inRio 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/may/29/louis-vuitton-cruise-collection-seeks-fashions-next-dimension-in-brazil>
,Blenheim Palace 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/may/31/dior-at-blenheim-palace-english-countryside-meets-parisian-style>
 andWestminster Abbey 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jun/02/westminster-abbey-divine-inspiration-gucci-show>
 respectively, the trend for standalone shows that are mini events could be the 
future of fashion week as brands rework the traditional fashion calendar model, 
introducing buy now and merging men’s and women’s collections. With its 
stunning vistas and palazzos Florence’s fashion calendar future looks brighter 
than ever.
