
Should money designed to improve education for disadvantaged pupils be 
diverted into the head office budget of an academy chain? We ask after we 
discovered that the south London-based GriffinSchools 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> Trust (GST) is taking 5% of the 
cash it receives via the pupil premium fund for what is described variously on 
its schools’ websites as “GST management support”, “GST-fee” or “trust 
strategy”.

Such a central levy appears to be frowned on officially. An Ofsted report [pdf]
 
<http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20141124154759/http:/www.ofsted.gov.uk/sites/default/files/documents/other-publications/e/E-ACT%20Multi-Academy%20Trust%20inspection%20outcome%20letter.pdf>
 on the rival E-Act chain last year criticised it for allegedly having deducted 
pupil premium cash before it reached schools.

Meanwhile, government guidance 
<https://www.gov.uk/guidance/pupil-premium-information-for-schools-and-alternative-provision-settings>
 on pupil premium spending in non-academy schools says local authorities – the 
equivalent in the maintained sector to the headquarters of academy chains – 
should pass on all of the cash directly to schools.

This cannot be right. To take pupil premium money away from these schools to 
line the coffers of this trust is abhorrent

A source who pointed us to the Griffin information said: “This cannot be 
right. To take pupil premium money away from these schools to line the coffers 
of this trust is abhorrent.”

The source got in touch after the Observer 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/oct/24/academy-chain-fees-griffin-accountability-trustees>
 revealed how GST spent more than £800,000 over two years on consultancy 
companies in which its founders or trustees have financial interests.

Related: Academy chain’s fees for ‘consultants’ put schools programme under 
scrutiny 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/oct/24/academy-chain-fees-griffin-accountability-trustees>

The trust would not comment directly, but pointed us to a statement [pdf] 
<http://www.griffinschoolstrust.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/11/GST-statement-on-pupil-premium-spend-GST.pdf>
 that outlines how the 5% charge is spent, including contributing to arts 
programmes and expert teacher support, for pupils’ benefit. The cash “funds 
coordinated, strategic work across the trust that supports the chosen work of 
individual schools”, it said.

Durham takes axe to salaries of support staff 

Low-paid school support staff in County Durham are campaigning against 
cost-cutting local authority plans, which they say will leave them up to £5,000 
a year worse off. Durham county council has announced that it wants to abolish 
pay for teaching assistants in the school holidays, and a convention whereby 
those working between 32.5 hours and the full 37 hours a week have been paid 
for 37 hours would also be scrapped.

Helen Pace, a part-time classroom assistant on 22 hours a week, sent us a 
document showing how the council proposes to cut her salary by £1,242, or 10%, 
to £11,197, while asking her to work three hours a week longer. Durham is 
offering a lump sum compensation payment, covering salary reductions for one 
year, to staff if trade unions agree to the changes quickly. Pace has set up a 
Facebook page that she says has 1,400 members. She said: “We are disgusted at 
any proposed cuts.”

Durham, which says consultation on the plans ends next week, said it wanted to 
“pay its teaching assistants for the hours they actually work”, and that most 
other local authorities in the region already did so.

Tussle over teacher training brings U-turn

The policy for allocating teacher training places to universities has been 
under siege in recent days, with the government having to drastically revise 
plans to stop higher education admitting trainees for the year after national 
recruitment quotas are reached.

These quotas were reached last month in PE and history, only weeks after 
applications had started, leaving Oxford and Cambridge history courses among 
those warning they may be forced to close.

This year’s new system was introduced to try to ensure ministers’ favoured 
route into teaching, the school-based School Direct system, attracted the 
majority of trainees. But the DfE has now had to allow history, English and 
primary PGCE courses to recruit up to 75% of the numbers they took last year, 
even if this means universities in total exceed the national quota.

University teacher educators, of course, have been in uproar. But even the 
deputy head of a school that has been running School Direct since its inception 
told us the technicalities of the government’s system could hamper its search 
for good staff. Weary observers must at least breathe a sigh of relief that 
there is no teacher shortage to worry about. Oh, hold on …
