
Jess Phillips <http://www.labour.org.uk/people/detail/jess-phillips> is 
laughing at the top of her voice, recallingthe inventive threats she received 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/oct/30/mps-rally-support-colleague-threats-jess-philips-twitter>
 after she objected to the idea of a “men’s day” that was recently mooted in 
parliament. In the worst of these someone threatened to pour molten metal into 
her vagina. “It doesn’t make me feel scared. At all,” she says, sucking 
cheerily on a fruity electronic cigarette in her Birmingham living room, 
“because I recognise the internet can be a toilet for idiots who make those 
threats.”

She pauses, twirling one of her husband’s slippers on her bare feet. “I under 
no circumstances want to be seen as a victim. I have worked with victims of 
sexual violence and I don’t have a candle to hold to the experiences of those 
victims. I am a warrior, not a victim. But it makes me feel as if I’m wading 
through treacle. Every time I speak out about anything feminist I will be shot 
down by people calling me fat, calling me stupid. And it’s all because I am 
speaking from a feminist perspective.”

This is not what Phillips, 34, expected when she was elected as a Labour MP in 
May, unseatingJohn Hemming <http://www.theguardian.com/profile/john-hemming>, 
the Liberal Democrat MP for Birmingham Yardley, and winning a 6,595 majority. 
Having come from a job managing Women’s Aid refuges across Sandwell in the West 
Midlands, she was used to confrontation. But when she spoke up, she had become 
used to politicians listening.Theresa May 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay>, the home secretary, visited 
one of her refuges, and civil servants often looked to her for advice on 
dealing with domestic and sexual violence, sexual exploitation and human 
trafficking.

Related: As an MP and a mother I’ve found out how sexist Westminster is | Rupa 
Huq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/13/parliament-women-mps-sexist-mothers-westminster>

“I used to change government policy much more than I do now. Much more,” she 
says, six months into her new life as an MP and five years after rejoining the
Labour <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party following a hiatus of 
more than a decade over Iraq. “The home office minister and civil servants sit 
in front of me now, who I have known foryears, and they’re like: ‘It’s a bit 
awkward that we’ve been listening to you for the last five years and now we 
have to pretend to disagree with you.’”

As an opposition MP, Phillips quickly realised that by far the most effective 
way to achieve anything in parliament was simply to speak out – most recently 
securing a debate on making the Commons more family-friendly by introducing 
ministerial job shares andoverturning the ban on breastfeeding in the chamber 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/10/female-mps-breastfeeding-allowed-house-of-commons>
. She devotes her practical skills to the 2,000 pieces of casework she juggles 
in her constituency. That’s where she feels she can make a real difference, and 
she prides herself on operating an open-door policy. Yet after the rape threats 
last month, counter-terror police carried out a risk assessment of her 
constituency office. Now, to her obvious sadness, visitors must give their name 
and address before being allowed inside.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4eek2%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4eek2%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b975cbffd620665ac6fc5c1a164917528affcac%2F219_852_3186_4781%2F3186.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=MP%20Jess%20Phillips%3A%20%E2%80%98You%20have%20to%20be%20a%20remarkable%20woman%20to%20get%20to%20the%20top%20%E2%80%A6%20average%20men%20get%20there%20all%20the%20time%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4eek2%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=MP+Jess+Phillips%3A+%E2%80%98You+have+to+be+a+remarkable+woman+to+get+to+the+top+%E2%80%A6+average+men+get+there+all+the+time%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4eek2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b975cbffd620665ac6fc5c1a164917528affcac%2F219_852_3186_4781%2F3186.jpg>
 Jess Phillips at her family home. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the 
Guardian 
“I don’t fear some horrible rape person online. What I fear, actually, is the 
men’s-rights lobby just turning up,” she says. “A load of men who feel they 
have got a bit of a crappy existence, which somehow is entirely down to the 
fact that people like me are sticking up for women. The two things aren’t 
mutually exclusive. The fact that I stick up for women doesn’t mean that I 
think all men are rapists. But that’s lost somewhere in translation. Obviously 
I don’t think that. I married one! I gave birth to two of them.”

Phillips, the youngest of four children born to lifelong Labour activists in 
Handsworth, Birmingham, had her two sons relatively early. Harry, now 10, was 
conceived when she was 22 and had been with her boyfriend Tom, now husband, for 
barely a month. Their second son, Danny, came along three years later. Despite 
what she admits was their “accidental” conception, she was delighted to be a 
mother, havingsuffered endometriosis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/endometriosis> and pelvic inflammatory 
disease that she feared might have left her infertile.

While it wasn’t easy being a young mum, she says she’s glad she got it out of 
the way before becoming an MP. “All of my friends were going out and getting 
wrecked. It’s brilliant now. They’ve all got tiny babies, and at parties they 
have to run around after them. My kids will go and get me a beer from the 
fridge.” Tom, a lift engineer, recently gave up his job to be the boys’ primary 
carer and works part-time in Phillips’ office.

She hit the national consciousness in September, following the election of 
Jeremy Corbyn as Labour leader, Tom Watson as his deputy and Sadiq Khan as 
Labour’s candidate for next year’s mayoral election. Phillips wasdownbeat about 
the all-male lineup 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/14/labour-shadow-cabinet-angela-eagle-extra-title-women-row>
 and could not contain her dismay at Corbyn’s first parliamentary Labour party 
(PLP) meeting, when he had given the “top” shadow-cabinet jobs to men too. She 
took him to task, only to be told to pipe down by Diane Abbott, a close friend 
of Corbyn.Phillips told Abbott to “fuck off” 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/labour-mp-jess-phillips-told-diane-abbott-to-f-off-in-jeremy-corbyn-sexism-row-10505493.html>
 and insists she has no regrets, apart from her language, which disappointed 
the “little old ladies” in her constituency.

At the moment I’m still incredibly worried about the Labour party’s prospects 
in 2020

“She was basically telling me I didn’t have any right to be upset. And that’s 
not right,” she says, going further: “There’s something wrong with the Labour 
party. There’s something wrong with the fact that women never rise to the top. 
It’s not the case in the SNP; it’s not the case in the Tories.” What is it? “If 
I knew the answer I would be cracking on with the solution. It’s not like they 
weren’t democratically elected because they are. You have to be a remarkable 
and amazing woman to rise to the top, whereas average men get there all the 
time. It’s really, really depressing.”

She has decided to roll up her sleeves and get stuck into trying to shape the 
Labour party’s future rather than just carping in the shadows. She says she 
feels she’s rarely out of Corbyn’s office – he phoned her personally after the 
rape threats – but is clearly frustrated that his team have not accepted her 
belief that to win the next election they must give some ground to the centre, 
to woo back Tory voters.

“At the moment I’m still incredibly worried about the Labour party’s prospects 
in 2020. There will come a point that it has to get better or we have to say 
[to Corbyn] this isn’t about the Labour party, this isn’t about you, this is 
about the 2,000 cases in my constituency – which I’m sure he has [to deal with] 
too because he is, by all accounts, an amazing constituency MP,” she says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4eek2%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4eek2%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa3261659fc316e5e70e25f79b33417dab9c05861%2F0_120_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=MP%20Jess%20Phillips%3A%20%E2%80%98You%20have%20to%20be%20a%20remarkable%20woman%20to%20get%20to%20the%20top%20%E2%80%A6%20average%20men%20get%20there%20all%20the%20time%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4eek2%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=MP+Jess+Phillips%3A+%E2%80%98You+have+to+be+a+remarkable+woman+to+get+to+the+top+%E2%80%A6+average+men+get+there+all+the+time%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4eek2%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa3261659fc316e5e70e25f79b33417dab9c05861%2F0_120_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Phillips (third from right) with former Labour leader Ed Miliband. Photograph: 
Jordan Mansfield/Getty Images 
She still doesn’t think Corbyn can win. “I haven’t changed my mind although I 
am much more open minded to having it changed and to help it change. Only with 
people like me and all of the members doing what they should be doing in their 
constituencies will he ever have a chance – though arguably what that will do 
is firm up the Labour vote. At the moment, I am not convinced we will bring 
over enough people in non-Labour seats.”

There is one outcast from the Labour party Phillips is determined should not 
be brought back into the fold: George Galloway, whom she called a “rape 
apologist” after spotting him on the beach at Labour party conference in 
Brighton in October (though he denies she ever approached him). “Another thing 
ticked off my bucket list,”she tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/jessphillips/status/648536423583383552>, later, laughing 
off claims by Galloway that she was a foul-mouthed fantasist and a liar. She 
has a laundry list of reasons why Galloway,who was expelled from the Labour 
party in 2003 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2003/oct/23/labour.georgegalloway>, is 
unwelcome. “The man is misogynistic, vile, stupid – my dad, a massive 
ideologue, says, ‘Oh, but he’s very clever.’ But, no, he has no emotional 
intelligence, no understanding of real people’s lives, threatens to sue because 
‘I’m richer than you’: what a class warrior. I initially said I would leave. 
However, that’s not what I would do. I’d fight until he’s gone. He’s just a 
vicious, vile, self-important misogynist.”

She was working for Rape Crisis when Galloway suggested the sexual assault 
allegations against Wikileaks founder Julian Assange (which Assange himself 
denies) amounted merely to“bad sexual etiquette” and that a man didn’t always 
need to ask “prior to every insertion” 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/aug/20/george-galloway-julian-assange-rape>
. She roars with appalled laughter at the memory: “He actually said that! What 
a wanker.”

Related: Female MPs call for breastfeeding to be allowed in House of Commons 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/10/female-mps-breastfeeding-allowed-house-of-commons>

Ken Livingstone, former mayor of London and a fellow Labour party expellee 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/699204.stm>, recently said Galloway 
should be allowed back. Phillips disagrees: “Who cares what Ken Livingstone 
says? I don’t know, but I don’t think Livingstone runs the Labour party.” 
Within 24 hours of her saying this,Corbyn appoints Livingstone to co-chair 
Labour’s defence review 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/18/ken-livingstone-trident-opponent-labour-defence-review>
. “Seems a little patriarchal to me,” is her comment on the matter.

As we are chatting, I note that former Guardian columnist Seumas Milne, now 
Corbyn’s spin doctor, is one of Galloway’s good friends. “Oh, nice. I’ll have a 
word with him about that,” she vows, adding: “The difference between me and 
some of my colleagues – not all of them – is that I protect myself by shooting 
things out. So if I see something that I don’t like I will say it. I won’t sit 
in some little cabal and whisper about it … I will go up to Seumas Milne and 
say: ‘Why onearth are you friends with George Galloway? Your personal 
friendships are fine but if I see you are moving in any way to get Galloway 
nearer to this party, I’m going to go for you.’ I’ll just say that to him.”

People are thankful when politicians are honest, she thinks. But party chiefs 
often think differently, she says, which is why she can’t imagine herself in a 
ministerial role that requires her to toe the party line. “At the moment, I 
find myself in a period where the Labour party, regardless of what I said about 
it, suits me just absolutely down to the ground because I am not particularly 
skilled in delivering a line. But I recognise that needs to be done. I would 
struggle with that, my personality. I find myself in a position where I don’t 
have too much responsibility and I’m delighted about that because I can, a) 
focus on my constituency, and b) just be who I am and see if being who I am 
might change the way that people perceive politicians a little bit.”
