
The head of the west’s leading economics thinktank has accused those 
campaigning for Britain to leave theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> of being “delusional” as he warned that 
departure would cost the average household a month’s salary, £2,200, by the end 
of the decade.

Angel Gurría, secretary-general of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation 
and Development, said future generations would pay the price of Brexitas he 
launched a report 
<http://www.oecd.org/economy/the-economic-consequences-of-brexit-a-taxing-decision.htm>
 showing that departure would impose a “persistent and rising shock” on the 
economy.

“The UK is much stronger as a part of Europe, and Europe is much stronger with 
the UK as a driving force,” Gurría said in a speech at the London School of
Economics <https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics>. “There is no upside 
for the UK in Brexit. Only costs that can be avoided and advantages to be 
seized by remaining in Europe. No one should have to pay the Brexit tax.”

Related: UK growth slows to 0.4% - live updates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/apr/27/uk-gdp-growth-figures-released-live-updates>

Gurría said it was a “delusion” to claim the UK would be in a stronger trading 
position if it left the EU. “The evidence over the past four decades suggests 
that, far from holding back growth, harnessing the potential of the European 
single market enhances living standards,” he said. “The responsibility borne by 
British voters on 23 June is very serious indeed. It will be an act of 
intergenerational responsibility.”

Adding its voice to negative assessments by the Treasury 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/hm-treasury-analysis-the-long-term-economic-impact-of-eu-membership-and-the-alternatives>
 and theInternational Monetary Fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/12/imf-says-britain-leaving-the-eu-is-a-significant-risk>
, the Paris-based OECD said a Brexit vote on 23 June would provide a major 
negative shock to Britain and have ripple effects on the rest of Europe.

“In some respects, Brexit would be akin to a tax on GDP, imposing a persistent 
and rising cost on the economy that would not be incurred if the UK remained in 
the EU,” theOECD <https://www.theguardian.com/business/oecd> said.

In an interview with the Guardian, the OECD secretary general said: “Those who 
argue for Brexit are wrong and that is because they have not been properly 
informed about the costs. Once they have seen what the OECD has to say, the 
LSE, the CBI and the Treasury, all of them looking at different aspects of 
leaving, people will ask themselves why they should pay for the equivalent of 
one month’s income, which is a heavy tax, to put themselves in a worse 
situation.


“If anything, I think we are underestimating the downsides from leaving the 
EU.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tk88%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tk88%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcda437ad70ed94e96f5ae17d240eb0afa7501ce7%2F102_303_3398_2039%2F3398.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%20would%20cost%20UK%20households%20%C2%A32%2C200%20by%202020%2C%20says%20OECD&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tk88%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brexit+would+cost+UK+households+%C2%A32%2C200+by+2020%2C+says+OECD&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tk88%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcda437ad70ed94e96f5ae17d240eb0afa7501ce7%2F102_303_3398_2039%2F3398.jpg>
 Angel Gurría said it was a ‘delusion’ to claim that the UK would be in a 
stronger trading position if it left the EU. Photograph: Molly Riley/AFP/Getty 
Images 
Vote Leave spokesman Robert Oxley said: “The OECD said the UK would receive 
‘great benefits’ from joining the ERM [exchange rate mechanism]. It recommended 
that we should join the euro. So why should we listen to their doom-laden 
predictions about leaving the EU?”

The OECD’s policy paper said that even before the UK’s formal departure from 
the EU, which the thinktank assumes would happen in late 2018, the UK would be 
hurt by weaker confidence and more expensive credit.


Once the terms of a “divorce” settlement had been agreed, Britain would face 
higher trade barriers and feel the early impact of restrictions on immigration, 
it predicts.

“By 2020, GDP would be over 3% smaller than [with continued EU membership], 
equivalent to a cost per household of £2,200 [at today’s prices],” the OECD 
added. The rest of the EU would see GDP shaved by one percentage point by the 
decade’s end.

It added that in the longer term, UK labour productivity would be slower 
because there would be less inward investment and restrictions on labour 
mobility would create a smaller pool of skills.

Echoing the assessment made by the Treasury earlier this month 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/18/uk-would-lose-36bn-in-tax-receipts-if-it-left-eu-treasury-report-says>
, the 34-nation OECD said the costs of exit would increase over time. “By 2030, 
in a central scenario GDP would be over 5% lower than otherwise,” it said, 
“with the cost of Brexit equivalent to £3,200 per household (in today’s 
prices).” The Treasury predicted that the economy would be 6% smaller by 2030.


The OECD said that with opinion polls pointing to a tight contest 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-britain-eu-poll-idUKKCN0XN0PV>, Brexit 
speculation was already having an impact on the economy: “Financial markets 
have increasingly begun to price in the risk of Brexit. Economic uncertainty 
has also risen and started to hurt confidence and business investment, 
weakening UK growth.”

It highlighted the risk that investors would move their money out of the UK in 
the event of a decision to end the 43-year relationship with the EU, making it 
more difficult to funda current account deficit running at a record high of 7% 
of GDP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/31/uk-economy-growth-record-trade-deficit>
. Sterling would fall after exit.

The OECD said a slowdown in immigration would be one of the main ways the UK 
would be affected if it decided to leave.

Related: Church of England issues EU referendum prayer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/26/church-of-england-issues-eu-referendum-prayer-european-union>

“Immigration accounts for one-half of UK GDP growth since 2005, with more than 
2m jobs created. Curbs to the free movement of labour from the EU and, more 
importantly, a weaker UK economy after exit, would gradually reduce the 
incentives for economic migration to the UK and would be a cost to the 
economy,” it said.

The report said there would be gains to the UK from Brexit, including the 
saving made on payments to the EU budget and the ability to reduce red tape. 
But it said the benefits were likely to be limited.

“The UK labour and product markets are amongst the most flexible in the OECD, 
which suggests that EU regulations are not an important barrier. Nonetheless, 
it would be possible to pursue further regulatory liberalisation, although this 
would be challenging since regulations are comparatively low and the gains 
would be limited.”

Britain is a net contributor to the EU budget, and would save around 0.3-0.4% 
of GDP per year after Brexit. Describing this as a “relatively small amount”, 
the OECD added: “Lower GDP growth would weigh on the fiscal position 
significantly, limiting the scope to use the net EU budget savings to relax 
fiscal policy.”
