
Whether it’s as a social worker trying to help a family stay together, or an 
occupational therapist encouraging someone do the things they love again, 
people working in social care do amazing things every day. But along with this 
comes more difficult elements; emotional pressures, impossible decisions and 
even dangerous situations.

If you work in social care, we want to hear from you for a new series on the 
Guardian Social Care Network <http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network>, 
which will shine a light on the most memorable moments of your time working in 
the sector.

Perhaps it was a home visit that wasn’t what you were expecting. Or maybe it 
was a service user you worked with who changed your perspective on your job. We 
want to hear the stories you never tell, and show the world what working in 
social care is really like. They can be joyful, angry, scary or touching – or a 
combination of all these emotions! And there are no limits; if you want to 
share your story as a comic strip, letter or gallery instead of a written 
piece, that’s fine by us.

We want to hear from everyone working in and connected to the social care 
sector: social workers, occupational therapists, care workers, service users, 
young people, managers, nurses and everyone in between.

If you’d like to tell us about a defining moment or event in your social care 
career, send an email tosocialcare@theguardian.com 
<mailto:socialcare@theguardian.com> saying what you’d like to write about. You 
can be anonymous or write under a pseudonym.

Some key elements of a good piece are:

 * It should be around 700 words long. 
 * The introduction and ending are the most important parts; put work into 
them, and make sure they’re engaging and clear. 
 * It should be written in a fairly informal, personal style. 
 * Avoid jargon and any words that most people wouldn’t understand. 
For some examples of the style and tone we’re looking for, read these pieces 
from ourSocial Life Blog 
<http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog>:

 * My colleague was tied up with a knife to his throat. Social work can be 
dangerous 
<http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog/2015/nov/18/knife-social-work-dangerous-mental-health>
 * The 18-year-old care worker: ‘I’ve never felt so worthwhile’ 
<http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog/2015/nov/25/care-worker-school-leaver-job-social-care>
 * Autism as an adult: ‘On the many days I spend alone I forget how to talk’ 
<http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog/2015/sep/16/autism-as-an-adult-on-the-many-days-i-spend-alone-i-forget-how-to-talk>
We look forward to hearing from you.
