
If Amazon is concerned about Jeremy Clarkson’s past erratic behaviour 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/mar/25/jeremy-clarkson-top-gear-contract-bbc>
 – which has included, but is certainly not limited to, insulting Mexicans, 
women and gay people, starting a diplomatic row with Argentina and punching a 
Top Gear staffer – the company is doing a sterling job of pretending otherwise.

Jay Marine, the European chief of Amazon Prime Video and one of the executives 
behind signing Clarkson and his formerTop Gear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/top-gear> co-presenters James May and 
Richard Hammond, along with executive producer Andy Wilman, doesn’t seem 
worried that letting Clarkson loose to make a new motoring show could be a car 
crash.

“We talk a lot at Amazon about making bold bets but I have to say I put this 
in the class of like a safe bet,” he says. “This is on the safer side of bets 
I’ve made. We look at everything when we consider a new show and deal. The 
reality is these three guys have made a great show for a long time. They have a 
passionate following and yeah, sometimes they are controversial. But I can tell 
you people are excited to see them back on air.”

Related: Netflix to air Top Gear worldwide in head-to-head with Amazon's 
Clarkson 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/12/netflix-top-gear-amazon-clarkson-chris-evans-matt-leblanc>

With Clarkson’s career at the BBC ending after a “fracas” with Top Gear 
producer Oisin Tymon, which followed a final warning from the BBC after an 
un-aired clip of himmuttering the n-word 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/may/01/jeremy-clarkson-begs-forgiveness-n-word-top-gear>
 emerged, surelyAmazon’s deal 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jul/30/top-gear-clarkson-hammond-may-amazon-deal-bbc>
 included strict terms to keep him on the straight and narrow?

“No, the worst thing we could go and do is tell Jeremy, James and Richard how 
to make a great car show,” he says. “They are in control. Those guys have a big 
budget and creative freedom and we are here to support them. We find great 
creators. Then we get out of their way and let them make their show, make their 
vision without trying to put restrictions around them.”

Marine won’t be drawn on the details of the reported $160m paid in a deal for 
three series, such as whether there is a payment element related to the 
performance of the show, but he scoffsat the suggestion 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/mediamonkeyblog/2015/sep/07/jeremy-clarkson-not-worth-the-money-amazon-spent-says-netflix-exec>
 made by a senior Netflix executive that Amazon over-paid (Netflix later 
back-tracked).

“Have we paid a lot of money? For sure,” he says. “But these guys are worth a 
lot of money. It’s very rare that you find something like this where a team 
come along who already have a built-in worldwide audience that I would argue is 
unique. This was one of the most sought-after and highly competitive situations 
we’ve seen in terms of signing them. We looked at the data every which way and 
we love this deal.”

For Marine the possibility of brand-damaging talent management issues takes a 
back seat to the potential financial rewards offered by numbers: with more than 
350 million viewers, Top Gear holds the Guinness world record as the 
most-watched factual TV programme in the world. Marine is banking on Clarkson 
and Co sprinkling the same magic on their new show to help its video service 
take the fight to rivalNetflix <http://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix>. “We 
do view it as a game-changer,” he says. “It is the exact type of show with a 
passionate audience that people will subscribe for.”

ITV is rumoured to have been keen to air the show, but he pours cold water on 
the question of whether Amazon might look to strike deals to make the new 
Clarkson show available on other services after a period of exclusivity. “There 
has been sub-licensing interest from others, it is a very sought-after show,” 
he says. “But we have no interest in doing that. This is an exclusive show for 
Amazon Prime members.”


He also says that Amazon is yet to decide whether to offer the new motoring 
show in one hit or to run it in a more scheduled episode-by-episode fashion. 
“We usually binge-release,” he says. “But we are open to experimenting on that. 
There is no doubt people have responded well to bingeing. But there is also 
something nice about a weekly cadence where people are all on the same episode 
and there is social discussion about what happened last night. Stay tuned, we 
haven’t made that decision.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tczc%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tczc%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c04ce50c3599eca58a54e2fa6406d2c66c58e44%2F237_460_5200_3121%2F5200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jeremy%20Clarkson%20and%20Co%20%E2%80%98are%20worth%20big%20money%E2%80%99%2C%20says%20Amazon%E2%80%99s%20Jay%20Marine&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tczc%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jeremy+Clarkson+and+Co+%E2%80%98are+worth+big+money%E2%80%99%2C+says+Amazon%E2%80%99s+Jay+Marine&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tczc%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c04ce50c3599eca58a54e2fa6406d2c66c58e44%2F237_460_5200_3121%2F5200.jpg>
 Amazon’s Jay Marine: ‘When you work at Amazon you get to invent all the time.’ 
Photograph: Sarah Lee for the Guardian 
He says that Amazon’s strategy of exclusives, either original commissions from 
Amazon Studios or deals for first-run rights to shows, is paying off just as it 
has for Netflix with flagship shows like House of Cards.

Amazon has made or aired acclaimed shows including Transparent, The Man in the 
High Castle and Mr Robot, but Marine is cagey about quantifying that success in 
terms of subscriber numbers (“growth has far exceeded our expectations in the 
last 18 months”).

Nevertheless Amazon finds itself in the unusual position of playing catch-up. 
Netflix has almost 80 million subscribers (an estimated 5.2 million in the UK) 
and is available in all bar a few countries globally (China, North Korea, 
Syria).

Its video service is available in just five markets to date (UK, US, Germany, 
Austria, Japan), with a UK subscriber base estimated at 2 million.

Amazon’s model is different from Netflix’s in that the video service works as 
an extra enticement to persuade users to pay £79 a year to be “Prime” members, 
offering a package including one-day shipping and music. But users can still 
pay a monthly fee just for the video service.

Marine is bullish about Amazon’s chances of cracking the video market - he’s 
been there before as point man on the US giant’s digital reading revolution 
with the Kindle. “When you work at Amazon you get to invent all the time,” he 
says. “Invent the future. There’s nothing better than that. We saw an 
opportunity to develop a video service that adds value to Prime members. Video 
is a huge market. It is not winner takes all. There are going to be multiple 
winners here and you are already seeing that. It’s working.”

Video may be a huge market, but Amazon’s motoring show has one clear 
competitor in the BBC’s new Top Gear. The former home of Clarkson et al has 
seen a catalogue of misfortunes, from highly-criticised “doughnuts” near the 
Cenotaph war memorial to senior executive departures and even rumours of 
tension between Chris Evans and co-host Matt LeBlanc. A Top Gear flop would 
hurt rival Netflix, which has the popular Top Gear back catalogue on its 
service. Does he get at least a modicum of enjoyment out of the show’s 
production troubles?

“I have seen what they are doing and we wish them well,” Marine says 
diplomatically, but can’t help adding that his show is firing on all cylinders. 
“There is plenty of room for two great car shows. We are focused on making a 
great car show and the guys are doing that. The reality is we are going to be 
in good shape. I’m confident. The show is coming along fantastic and I think 
fans are going to love what they see in the autumn. We wish Top Gear well.”

Curriculum vitae

Age 42

Education Warren high school; University of Michigan (business); Kellogg 
School of Management (MBA)

Career 2000 Business development executive, Elemental Interactive 2002 
director, product management, Amazon Kindle 2012 vice president, Amazon Kindle 
2013vice president – technical adviser to the CEO 2015 vice president, Prime 
Video, Europe
