
While countries all over the world are moving toward universal healthcare, for 
many it remains just a goal. But a handful of them have rolled out universal 
health coverage schemes, and there’s plenty to learn from these nations. 
Consider Thailand, where leaders successfully implemented sweeping healthcare 
reform without breaking the bank.

In 2000, about one-quarter of people in Thailand were uninsured, and many 
other people had policies that granted incomplete protection. As a result, the 
country was in a healthcare crisis. More than 17,000 children younger than five 
died that year, about two-thirds of them from easily preventable infectious 
diseases. And about 20% of the poorest Thai homes fell into poverty from 
out-of-pocket healthcare spending.

In 2001, Thailand introduced the Universal Coverage Scheme (UCS). It’s 
described as “one of the most ambitious healthcare reforms ever undertaken in a 
developing country” in the bookMillions Saved: New Cases of Proven Success in 
Global Health <http://millionssaved.cgdev.org/>. The UCS, which spread to all 
provinces the following year, provides outpatient, inpatient and emergency 
care, available to all according to need. By 2011, the program covered 48 
million Thais, or 98% of the population.

Related: Indonesia's universal health scheme: one year on, what's the verdict? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/may/15/indonesias-universal-healthcare-insurance-verdict>

Several things worked in favor of Thailand’s UCS, including a sustained 
support system and a broad reach. Reformers from the 2001 general election’s 
winning political party, Thai Rak Thai, held leadership positions, and they 
were able to help back the program. As described by Dr Suwit Wibulpolprasert, 
the program’s policy director and Thailand’s deputy secretary of the ministry 
of health at the time, the UCS had to go wide quickly. “The challenge was to 
implement it fast,” he says. “It couldn’t be done over 10 years because there 
was huge political pressure.”

Thailand’s UCS was implemented in every province by January 2002, but this 
level of comprehensive care had taken decades to develop. Since the 1970s, free 
medical care had been available to some people in poverty, but the country had 
a range of health insurance schemes that left many without coverage. Developing 
infrastructure – hospitals, clinics and trained staff – to support universal 
coverage took years.

According to Dr Sara Bennett, associate professor at Johns Hopkins 
<http://www.jhsph.edu/> Bloomberg School of Public Health, quality is the most 
challenging aspect of universal healthcare in developing countries. 
Government-funded healthcare is often free, but it can be geographically 
inaccessible, limited to few facilities and administered by poorly trained 
staff. In addition, what works in urban areas might not be suited to rural 
contexts and vice versa.

When Thailand established solid health infrastructure, universal healthcare 
“totally changed the relationship between patients and doctors”, 
Wibulpolprasert says. Before, patients paid a fee to their doctors when they 
visited the hospital. After 2001, the government paid hospitals, including 
salaries for staff, and financially incentivized medical professionals to serve 
unpopular rural areas.

The lessons in Thailand: a well researched system with a dedicated leadership 
can improve health, and in an affordable way. As of 2011, the country’s health 
scheme cost just $80 per person annually, primarily funded by general income 
tax; it effectively reduced infant mortality, decreased worker sick days and 
lightened families’ financial burden for healthcare.

Meanwhile, in the US, securing agreement from political leadership is one of 
the most contentious issues over universal healthcare. ThePatient Protection 
and Affordable Health Care Act <http://www.hhs.gov/healthcare/>, also known as 
Obamacare, was signed into law in 2010, yet is still embroiled inpolitical 
controversy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/apr/20/united-health-insurance-obamacare-exit-pr-problem>
.However, the plan is  <>paying off 
<http://www.hhs.gov/healthcare/facts-and-features/fact-sheets/aca-is-working/index.html>
: more people than ever are insured and out-of-pocket spending has dramatically 
declined among those insured.

Related: 'We need fundamental changes': US doctors call for universal 
healthcare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/05/us-doctors-calling-universal-healthcare-system-affordable-care-act>

Around the world, many low- and middle-income countries are also moving toward 
universal care. “They are covering more people, who are paying less out of 
pocket and have access to a broader array of services,” Bennett says. “Many 
countries are making significant strides towards this, including the poorest.”

Paying for universal healthcare remains a challenge. In South Korea 
<http://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0019/101476/E93762.pdf>, for 
instance, care is funded by compulsory health insurance from all citizens and 
covers about 97% of the population. However, the country’s health system is in 
growing deficit.

In Thailand, affordability is not currently an issue, though the cost of the 
program as a proportion of general income tax is rising yearly. Still, the UCS 
continues to have wide support from the country’s government, health workers 
and wider population.

“The challenge is to make it more efficient, to get more for less money, 
particularly with the introduction of new technology and new drugs,” 
Wibulpolprasert says.

According to Carolyn Hart, Washington office director at health consultancy 
John Snow Inc <http://www.jsi.com/JSIInternet/>, a multisectoral approach is 
key to global healthcare. “We are looking at the need to develop channels at 
all price points including free, subsidised and pay as you go, which could be 
insurance,” she says.

“How can [countries] afford not to invest in the health of their people?” she 
adds. “Poor health holds you back so badly.”

This content is paid for by the Center for Global Develoment
