
That a bacon sandwich? It’s not that I don’t respect your personal choice, but 
are you absolutely sure you want to do that? Witheverything they’re saying 
about processed meat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/oct/26/bacon-ham-sausages-processed-meats-cancer-risk-smoking-says-who>
 – yuck – killing you?

Without going all I told you so, vegans have been saying meat is deadly 
for years, that’s people as well as animals. All we got was carnists going, 
“But how would you live without bacon?” Maybe if they’d listened to us a bit 
more, instead of going on about how skinny and angry we all are, there wouldn’t 
be so many bloated animal abusers getting ill. Of course I’m not laughing, but 
if it stops even one carnist like you paying other people to torture animals, 
you won’t see many vegans complaining. Up to you, of course.

Do you know how most of the meat on your plate is raised? I’ll send you a link 
to a video, it’s called The Sickening Animal Holocaust Is Totally Your Fault, 
and there’s another brilliant one, Fancy Some Embryonic Fluid Of Unborn Chicken 
On Toast – apparently, most people who see that never eat another egg. You 
might also want to watch Your Pint Of Cow Secretion Came Out Of A Cow’s Actual 
Udder. I promise, if you knew the truth about dairy farming, the next sip of 
your latte would come spurting repulsively out of your nose as you retched in 
disgust, and even if you don’t care about motherless little calves you might 
feel a bit worried about milk giving you diabetes.

But don’t listen to me, I’m just a vegan – wait until the World Health 
Organisation confirms everything I have said. Well, I’m sorry if that sounds 
angry, but if you spoke for the animals, maybe you’d be angry, aren’t we meant 
to be angry about holocausts?

Don’t get me started on people who go on about missing bacon when everyone 
knows there are brilliant vegan substitutes that taste exactly the same. What 
do you think I’m eating? Yum.
