
MIA 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5396ce8fe4b071220f6d2ad6/1015761>

I wish I had met you and known you. I wish I could say I looked like you. I 
wish I had a picture or knew where you were buried. I wish my mum had loved 
you. I ached for you under the unhappy rule of my sisters dad. I know nothing 
about you except your unremarkable irish name. I think I love you. I think I'm 
like you. I hope you're proud of me and my life. If you could come back I would 
embrace you and invite you into my life.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By GYgal <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/GYgal> 

10 June 2014, 18:18 
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5396ce8fe4b071220f6d2ad6/1015751> 
My dad and me, 1949 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5396ce8fe4b071220f6d2ad6/1015751>

I didn't have him long enough, hardly got to know him as adult to adult. He 
was funny, firey and you couldn't go anyway without somebody knowing him, like 
in the tiny Riviera resort of Rapallo...

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By tynegal <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/tynegal> 

10 June 2014, 18:11 
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5396ce8fe4b071220f6d2ad6/1020131> 
My youngest daughter and her daddy 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5396ce8fe4b071220f6d2ad6/1020131>

My youngest daughter with her daddy, he's such a brilliant dad and husband, he 
supports me by being the main parent carer so I can run off on travel 
assignments and continue writing my book.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By Mandy Charlton <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Mandy Charlton> 

13 June 2014, 12:06 

Dad enriched my life 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5396ce8fe4b071220f6d2ad6/1018701>

My dad was a neurologist. As such, he was a keen learner and observer of human 
nature. Having studied in Peru and in France, and traveled extensively, he was 
a citizen of the world: He taught me to enjoy life, have fun, love literature, 
appreciate the arts, eat ice cream, and have a good laugh. At the same time, he 
modeled fine virtues, such as commitment to work and family, loyalty to 
friends, and accessibility to rich and poor who came to him for advice.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By Leonie Voto Bernales Gatica <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Leonie 
Voto Bernales Gatica> 

12 June 2014, 15:05 
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5396ce8fe4b071220f6d2ad6/1016495> 
learning to climb 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5396ce8fe4b071220f6d2ad6/1016495>

me and charlie on his first tree trip with me acting as a soft landing

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By ID3565154 <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/ID3565154> 

11 June 2014, 6:30 

My Dad 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5396ce8fe4b071220f6d2ad6/1018932>

My Dad was a very quiet person, not as expressive and not as successful so he 
wasn't my hero when he was around! But I remember his eyes... they were just 
like mine and in retrospect I think they spoke volumes. I remember once he took 
the whole family to have ice cream in an expensive place, and once he took us 
for summer shopping. It's all so vivid in my memory... the last time I saw him 
he couldn't recognize me.... I miss him a lot!

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By Mubina1 <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Mubina1> 

12 June 2014, 18:23 
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5396ce8fe4b071220f6d2ad6/1017556> 
My Dad's selfie before anyone knew what that was 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5396ce8fe4b071220f6d2ad6/1017556>

I love this photo my Dad took of himself with a camera on timer. He took it as 
he drove from Newcastle to Dorset on a borrowed motorbike when he was in his 
early 20s. He's 83 now. He looks so cool!

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By fromepudding <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/guardianUser10024012> 

11 June 2014, 22:31 

Family is what you make it 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5396ce8fe4b071220f6d2ad6/1018799>

My biological father died when I was in my early teens, and although I loved 
him and don’t wish to diminish his memory, he was not the best role model. My 
stepdad, however, took me on when I was 4 – and he and his family have 
responded to me with so much more warmth and love than my “real” family ever 
did. Of course, life isn’t ever completely plain sailing, and my stepdad could 
be difficult to live with (although so could I – there were definitely a few 
“you’re not my real dad!” moments) at times, but at the end of it all he has 
always treated me like his own, and absolutely no different from my younger 
brother. Even though he and my mum are no longer together, and I am now an 
adult, we still have a close bond; talking to and seeing each other as often as 
the miles between us will allow. I consider it such an absolute privilege to 
know him and be a part of his family and it has really instilled into me that 
family has nothing to do with who you share genes with and absolutely 
everything to do with who loves you and wants to share their life with you – 
and that (almost) any man can father a child, but it takes something special to 
be a dad.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By brndnw <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/brndnw> 

12 June 2014, 16:18 
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5396ce8fe4b071220f6d2ad6/1017647> 
you and me forever  
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5396ce8fe4b071220f6d2ad6/1017647>

Everyone says their dads are the best, but honestly i wouldn't swap or change 
him for the world. He has been my rock throughout my entire life. I have just 
finished university, and this photo is the one of many times he came down to 
visit me. He is the most caring person i know - he would drive 280 miles ever 
weekend picking me up from my mums and dropping me home just so to see each 
other. He speaks to me on the phone every night and during the last 3 years he 
has listened to many 3000 word essays. Not once in my life has this man let me 
down, instead he was always there at every majorettes parade, amateur drama 
productions, and every university interview. Proving this was a moment that 
happened in January 2013. I had gone on a trip to Berlin with my friends for 
New years eve, my dad was across the globe in Thailand (which he did offer me 
to go, don't know why i didn't now!) after a few nights i wasn't enjoying 
myself and after speaking with my dad, he offered and paid for my flights to be 
swapped so instead of flying home on the 8th, i would go home on the 4th (2 
days time) YAY ME! unfortunately for me i had a fall in the shower and got 
taken to hospital - long story short? i broke my collarbone into 5 pieces and 
had to have an operation to attach a metal plate, meaning my flights had to be 
rearranged back to the 8th (again donated by dad) and i had to stay in 
hospital. Very horrible and painful time for me, especially in a hospital where 
i couldn't speak the language (also i'm a very mummy and daddies girl in those 
kinds of situations). But my dad would ring me everyday and talk to me for 
hours, giving me something to pass the time and making sure i was ok - no 
matter how much the phone bill. And it's not just the big things, he remembers 
all the little things. Things like which spoon you like to use when eating your 
cheesey beans on toast or the dentist appointment you had. How would i describe 
him in 2 words - My Hero.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By Justine Raymond <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Justine Raymond> 

11 June 2014, 23:59 
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5396ce8fe4b071220f6d2ad6/1020123> 
My dad, John Gareth Roberts 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5396ce8fe4b071220f6d2ad6/1020123>

This is the only photo I have of me and my father. My mother destroyed most 
mementos of my dad after his death in 1985.

I found it by accident, hid it in a book for years and have always treasured 
it.

Father's Day <http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/fathers-day> this year, 
as so many others before it, is a painful reminder of all the milestones my dad 
has missed - in my life, my brother's and more recently, in my daughter's life.

It is especially painful this year because I will be 38 on my birthday, the 
Wednesday after Father's Day (June 18th). This is the first time I will be 
older than my Dad and it both terrifies me and breaks my heart, all over again.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By Ceri Roberts <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Ceri Roberts> 

13 June 2014, 12:03 

One of the most emotionally intelligent people I know 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5396ce8fe4b071220f6d2ad6/1018981>

My dad was that rare thing in the agricultural community that we grew up in at 
a time when dads did get involved with 'child rearing' he was very involved in 
every aspect of caring for us which included nappy changing, helping with 
homework, school runs, He is a farmer and my mum worked full time and I have a 
lot of siblings so my parents had their hands full but on top of this my 
paternal grandparents lived very locally and needed a lot of physical care for 
the last years of their lives, which my dad provided with one of his his 
siblings and my mum. He has an amazing sense of duty, family loyalty and is one 
of the most caring people I've ever met. One of the most outstanding things 
about my dad is how demonstrative he is with his emotions despite this not 
being the done thing for men of his generation in the farming community that we 
grew up in. My siblings & I all have vivid memories of him hugging us (with 
tears in his eyes) in airports before we headed off on adventures or returning 
to the places that we now live.

My dad left school in his mid teens to take over the family farm when my grand 
dad became ill so often refers to the fact that he is not educated, but he is 
the most emotionally intelligent person I know. He is very diplomatic and 
manages to keep the peace despite a huge family circle & lots of feisty 
daughters! As I've got older, I've come to appreciate these skills of his much 
more so than when I was younger. I rate emotional intelligence so much more 
than academic intelligence.

My dad is now grandad many times over and he seems to love spending time with 
his grandchildren even more than he did spending time with us. I only hope that 
my parenting skills are up the the high standard that he has set in his own 
effortless yet modest way.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By Scotlandrea <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Scotlandrea> 

12 June 2014, 19:11 
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5396ce8fe4b071220f6d2ad6/1019638> 
My Dad, Ian Potts, watercolour artist, hugely missed. 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5396ce8fe4b071220f6d2ad6/1019638>

My Dad was born in a town in the North East called Birtley and this Sunday 
will be my first Father's Day without him as he died on 31st May. Despite being 
born into a family of simple means, he was accepted into the Royal Academy of 
Art. He was still riding his motorbike until recently and I went to see Jake 
Bug with him at the Brixton Academy last winter. He was an adventurer, young at 
heart, a beautiful artist and my best friend. I love you Dad.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By squirrelpaws <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/squirrelpaws> 

13 June 2014, 5:00 
