
At 7:15am in the northern Indian city of Lucknow, a stream of children flows 
through the gates of the Kanpur Road campus ofCity Montessori school 
<http://www.cmseducation.org/home.htm>. A dozen helpers pull school bags off 
roof racks and direct traffic to keep things moving. Every so often achowkidar 
(gatekeeper) urges a laggard along: “Chalo, Beta, chalo.” Nearly an hour later, 
they’re still arriving.

It’s not easy to get more than 7,500 five- to 17-year-old students into a 
single school building, but that’s only a small piece of the puzzle for City 
Montessori (or CMS) – recognised by theGuinness Book of World Records as the 
world’s largest school <http://www.cmseducation.org/guinness/>. The institution 
caters to some 52,000 pre-primary, primary and secondary students distributed 
across 20 campuses in the city.

“I wanted to come here for a better education,” says 11-year-old Mahsum Singh, 
who started at the Kanpur Road campus this year. “It helps us that many 
students are here. We can take help from anyone.”

Almost all of the school’s 1,050 classrooms are full to bursting, with more 
than 45 students to a class. But parents won’t take no for an answer. They pull 
in connections from business and politics to get another chair crammed in, says 
school president Geeta Kingdon. “Sometimes I invite them to come to the school, 
take them to the classroom and ask them, ‘Do you see any place for your 
child?’” says Kingdon, who is also the daughter of the school’s co-founders.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4eta5%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4eta5%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd3ecd2393fd516316c60b98370b3c596bc770701%2F0_67_1123_674%2F1123.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=52%2C000%20students%20and%201%2C050%20classrooms%3A%20inside%20the%20world's%20largest%20school&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4eta5%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=52%2C000+students+and+1%2C050+classrooms%3A+inside+the+world%27s+largest+school&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4eta5%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd3ecd2393fd516316c60b98370b3c596bc770701%2F0_67_1123_674%2F1123.jpg>
 Children at the City Montessori school. Photograph: City Montessori school 
CMS, founded in 1959 by Jagdish Gandhi and his wife, Bharti, who has a 
doctorate in child psychology, is so popular because of its track record. In 
India’s equivalent of A-levels, a whopping 40% of the school score 90% or 
higher, making it one of the top colleges. The class average is above 80%.

What started as small school of originally five students, all from a single 
household has grown far beyond its humble beginnings.

With a new wave of “titan” schools in the UK, including Exmouth community 
college 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/oct/27/supersize-schools-too-big-add-places-pupils>
 in Devon – which is set to grow from 2,500 to 2,860 students by 2018 – CMS has 
demonstrated that large campuses and crowded classrooms aren’t a bar to 
academic excellence. But the differences between CMS’s monster campuses and the 
UK’s “megaschools” are probably more instructive than their superficial 
similarities.

Despite its huge size, CMS is not a school for the masses. Though it’s as much 
as 25% cheaper than some other elite schools in Lucknow, fees are between £300 
and £700 a year, compared with an average per capita income of £1,080. (That’s 
comparable to a UK school charging £7,000-£16,000.)

This gives CMS all the classic advantages of an elite private school. There 
aren’t double-shifts or staggered classes (except at the pre-primary level) – 
just a lot of resources.

Ajay Madan, who teaches chemistry and conducts a remedial session after 
school, finds it inspiring that CMS challenges him to be innovative with the 
curriculum, presenting the lesson using multimedia, for example.

There’s a whole department for writing congratulatory letters

It helps that his salary stub matches his commitment. Teachers are paid a 
touch higher than the sum mandated for government school teachers, and earn a 
bonus of about 1% of their monthly salary for each student after the class size 
tops 45, as compensation for increased workload.

Principals earn double the salary of their government counterparts. To cope 
with the larger administrative burden, a large campus like Kanpur Road has 
sub-principals for the pre-primary, primary, junior and senior sections. To 
further aid administrators there are also two supervising teachers called class 
coordinators for every 35 regular faculty staff. Manjit Batra, senior principal 
of the Gomti Nagar II campus, says: “They teach and also evaluate teachers, 
making sure no child is lagging behind.”

To deal with larger class sizes, teachers have assistants or “notebook 
checkers”, who have bachelor of education degrees but lack higher 
qualifications. They help with grading, but also assist in monitoring students 
and answering questions during class time.

While systems like accounting, transportation and curriculum creation are 
centralised for efficiency, campus principals and teachers find their freedom 
to innovate motivational. The school doles out 10m rupees (£100,000) in cash 
rewards for teachers whose students perform well in nationwide exams. And apart 
from the usual conferences, every teacher visits the homes of five students 
every month in the role of “teacher guardian”. These visits allow teachers to 
make simple observations, suggesting that a child’s study table should not be 
in the same room as the television, for instance. Above all, it shows that they 
care.


“There’s a danger that any one child can get lost in this huge mass,” said 
Kingdon.

Such programmes might prove difficult to implement at the UK’s government-run 
megaschools. CMS’s relatively high fees mean that students tend to be the 
children of very involved parents. All its programmes are funded from revenue 
or, in the case of foreign trips and the like, from parents’ pockets. And 
unlike at government-run schools, its teachers and administrators aren’t asked 
to do more with less.

The intangibles behind CMS’s culture of success may be even harder to 
duplicate.

Teaching of the three R’s is important. But we should not lose sight of the 
fact that man is also a human being

There is a festival atmosphere at school functions, which open with a 
song-and-dance performance called “the unity prayer” where students dressed as 
Hindus, Muslims, Buddhists etc extol the virtues of tolerance. Three times a 
year the mother of a student who has come first in class is called on stage and 
to sit on a giant balance beam to be “weighed in fruits” that then become her 
grand prize.

“There’s a whole department for writing congratulatory letters,” beams the 
school’s 79-year-old guru-like founder-manager, Gandhi.

Indeed, it’s Gandhi’s zeal, and his grandfatherly personal charisma, that 
ensures students feel allegiance to their school, despite its size – something 
that some UK educators fear might be lost at megaschools. His antidote includes 
a healthy dose of religion, albeit of the kind that acknowledges the equality 
of all the great prophets, regardless of denomination.


A slim, energetic man with an engaging smile, Gandhi wears a western-style 
suit that appears to be a half-size too large. Originally called Jagdish 
Agrawal, he changed his surname following the assassination of Mohandas K. 
Gandhi (or Mahatma Gandhi) in 1948, and he remains a fan of such leaders – as 
well as their slogans and quotations.


At the Kanpur Road campus, seemingly every flat surface features a handpainted 
exhortation of one kind or another – “Strong reasons make strong actions”, 
“Don’t be part of the problem, be part of the change”, “Children reinvent your 
world for you” and so on – and it is not easy to stop Gandhi from reading them 
aloud. “You find everywhere good quotations,” he says, without irony.


Along with the school’s constant attention to moral education, about a quarter 
of its students receive a 40% reduction in fees because their parents are poor. 
But that’s a far cry from UK government schools likeAshfield comprehensive 
<http://www.ashfield.notts.sch.uk>, which must take all comers.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4eta5%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4eta5%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1085a3279c5e1ddff1426edb4aab8572347b94cc%2F0_10_1123_674%2F1123.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=52%2C000%20students%20and%201%2C050%20classrooms%3A%20inside%20the%20world's%20largest%20school&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4eta5%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=52%2C000+students+and+1%2C050+classrooms%3A+inside+the+world%27s+largest+school&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4eta5%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1085a3279c5e1ddff1426edb4aab8572347b94cc%2F0_10_1123_674%2F1123.jpg>
 Jagdish Gandhi and his wife, Bharti, founded the school in 1959. Photograph: 
City Montessori school 
This year, Gandhi’s reputation took a hit when CMS went to court to avoid 
having to admit 31 children from the “economically weaker sections” free of 
charge (which is expected in law). Kingdon says the school resisted the move 
because the government violated its own regulations and came to them after the 
term had started, when all its classes were full. Eventually, the court 
compelled it to accept 13 out of 31 students who lived within the legally 
defined 1km radius of its Indira Nagar campus. CMS shoehorned them in.


“We are a law abiding school,” said Kingdon. “But the law must be applied 
properly. Should all private schools in the land really have to keep 25% of 
their seats vacant for six months?”

Despite these challenges, Gandhi remains steadfast in his ambition to “change 
the world” through his school. He insists his mission goes beyond academic 
success.

“Teaching of the three R’s is important. But at the same time we should not 
lose sight of the fact that man is also a human being, and that there is also a 
soul within him.”

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<http://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx?CMP=dis_42> for lesson 
resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
