
A year after the abduction of schoolgirls in the Nigerian town of Chibok, a 
report has shown theimpact of escalating violence 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/13/children-nigeria-conflict-unicef-boko-haram>
 on children in the region. Unicef says fighting between Boko Haram, military 
forces and civilian self-defence groups in north-eastern Nigeria has forced 
around 800,000 children to flee their homes.

Calls to stop Boko Haram emerged when we asked readers 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/01/nigerian-election-what-are-your-hopes-for-the-countrys-future>
 to share their hopes for Nigeria after electing a new president. You canread 
their responses 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/14/nigerian-election-president-muhammadu-buhari>
, which also included a call to end corruption.

As crises continue in Syria and Yemen, we heard from aid workers on the ground.
Mohammed 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/08/syria-my-family-called-from-idlib-they-wanted-my-help-to-flee-the-fighting>
, an aid worker in Syria, described how he rushed back to the city of Idlib to 
ensure the safety of his family. In Yemen,Valerie Pierre 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/07/medics-yemen-lockdown-hospital-aden-msf-fighting-air-strikes>
 wrote from a health clinic in the city of Aden that had seen heavy fighting 
and air strikes. “We are on lockdown inside the hospital,” she said. You can 
also read the latest from community workerIsaac Bayoh 
<http://www.theguardian.com/profile/isaac-bayoh>, who described how the Ebola 
outbreak had affected Easter celebrations.

Elsewhere on the site

 * $73bn more needed every year for social development goals, says ODI 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/13/73bn-social-development-goals-overseas-development-institute>
 * Sudan: ‘The election will not change anything’ 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/13/sudan-election-omar-al-bashir-opposition-boycott>
 * Kenya criticised for closure of money transfer firms following Garissa 
attack 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/10/kenya-closure-money-transfer-firms-garissa-attack-al-shabaab>
 * Afghanistan: US watchdog criticises aid scheme for women’s rights 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/07/afghanistan-us-watchdog-criticises-aid-womens-rights>
 * Ebola: media ‘overlooked Africa’s role in combating crisis’ 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/07/ebola-media-overlooked-africas-role-combating-crisis-african-union>
 * Women from Sierra Leone ‘sold like slaves’ into domestic work in Kuwait 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/02/women-sierra-leone-sold-like-slaves-domestic-work-kuwait>
Opinion

Jonathan Glennie warns that governments must be held accountable 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/13/sustainable-development-wont-happen-without-the-means-to-implement-it>
 for the pledges they make on financing the sustainable development goals.

Also on the SDGs, Nouria Brikci argues why the health goal must tackle 
inequity head on if it’s to succeed 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/07/health-sustainable-development-goal-inequity>
.

In Kenya, justice was finally served for a 16-year-old girl who was gang-raped 
and left for dead in 2013. Legal consultant Kimberly Brown explains the 
importance of the sentencing, and why it represents abreakthrough for women’s 
rights 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/13/justice-for-liz-rape-kenya-conviction-sentence-womens-rights>
 in the country.

And Niamani Mutima, Shira Gitomer, Sarah Hobson argue for more funding for 
local women’s groups fighting Ebola 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/08/womens-organisations-fighting-ebola-funding-first-line-defence-liberia-guinea-sierra-leone>
.

Multimedia

Video: Sophie Christiansen meets disabled children in northern Rwanda 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2015/dec/20/rwanda-disabled-children-paralympian-sophie-christiansen-video>

Podcast: Women’s human rights defenders under threat  
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/audio/2015/apr/02/women-human-rights-defenders-podcast>

What you said: top reader comment


On the piece Sophie Christiansen finds heartbreak and hope among Rwanda’s 
disabled children 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/13/sophie-christiansen-british-paralympian-rwanda-disabled-children>
,ssentongo wrote:

A very good assessment of the problems faced by children with disabilities in 
all of sub-Saharan Africa, and, in a sense, all over the world. One factor 
overlooked but also important is the lack of, or the cost of, wheelchairs and 
transportation. Some ordinary schools would accept these children but it is so 
difficult to get the children there. Well-meaning people, organisations and 
countries donate used or obsolete wheelchairs but for the most part these 
wheelchairs do not stand up to rural Africa and soon break down. Then the 
wheelchairs become a source of frustration.


Highlight from the blogosphere

Global Voices: As Ebola is contained, what’s next for Sierra Leone? 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/monkey-cage/wp/2015/04/08/as-ebola-is-contained-whats-next-for-sierra-leone/>

And finally …

Poverty matters will return in two weeks with another roundup of the latest 
news and comment. In the meantime, keep up to date on theGlobal Development 
website <http://www.theguardian.com/global-development>. Follow @gdndevelopment 
<https://twitter.com/gdndevelopment> and the team – @swajones 
<https://twitter.com/swajones>, @LizFordGuardian 
<https://twitter.com/lizfordguardian>, @MarkC_Anderson 
<https://twitter.com/MarkC_Anderson> and @CarlaOkai 
<https://twitter.com/CarlaOkai> – on Twitter, and join Guardian Global 
Development on Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardianglobaldevelopment>.
