
When a customer travelled 70 miles from Oxford just to buy a slab of his pork, 
Jamie Burgess thought nothing of it. “People know about Ibérico ham now and 
this is like a British version,” he says. “They’re happy to come a long way for 
something a bit different.” The New Forest farmer, whose family has raised pigs 
in this Hampshire location for four generations, makes the comparison loosely. 
He is referring to “pannage pork”, which, like Ibérico, is produced from pigs 
fattened on acorns.

In the UK, the pigs have access to their nutty diet for just two months a 
year, so it doesn’t have quite the same taste and texture as the prized Spanish 
ham. But increasing numbers of food lovers are seeking it out. Chef James 
Golding, who previously worked at the Savoy, Le Caprice and J Sheekey 
restaurants in London, believes pannage pork rivals the best in the world for 
its flavour and texture, and he puts it on the menu atThe Pig Hotel at 
Brockenhurst <http://www.thepighotel.com/>, in the New Forest, whenever 
possible. “As the pigs have been left to roam, the fat content seems to be a 
little less and the meat slightly darker and drier, with a more concentrated 
flavour. It’s extremely ‘porky’,” he says. “We always serve it medium and 
always very simply, to enhance the really excellent flavour. The second you put 
it in your mouth, you know the flavour is something special.”

Pannage is an ancient practice virtually extinct outside the New Forest. This 
former royal hunting ground entitles locals to release their animals into the 
forest to devour fallen acorns, beech mast and chestnuts in the autumn, and 
they can stay out for days and weeks on end if there are rich pickings to be 
found. It’s nature’s own health and safety scheme – the pigs safely scoff as 
many acorns as they like, clearing the area for the ponies and cattle that can 
poison themselves if they eat too many – 90 New Forest animals died during the 
bumper 2013 acorn season.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F43j48%2Fsfb%23img-1&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F43j48%2Fsfb%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F1%2F1417436976203%2F3455c86d-28f4-47a5-95d4-8356991224b1-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pannage%20pork%3A%20why%20it%E2%80%99s%20time%20to%20pig%20out%20on%20British%20Ib%C3%A9rico-style%20ham&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F43j48%2Fstw%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pannage+pork%3A+why+it%E2%80%99s+time+to+pig+out+on+British+Ib%C3%A9rico-style+ham&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F43j48%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F1%2F1417436976203%2F3455c86d-28f4-47a5-95d4-8356991224b1-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The pigs can safely scoff as many acorns as they like. Photograph: Alamy 
The exact timing of the season depends on the weather and when the acorns 
fall. This year it has just come to an end, so the pigs will be brought back in 
and fed a regular diet in preparation for slaughter in a few weeks’ time. 
Serious pork lovers will be able to feast on the meat for Christmas – if they 
can get their hands on some.

“In the past few years we’ve definitely started to see more interest in 
pannage pork,” says Burgess. “People are looking for something different these 
days and they’re paying a lot more attention to where their food comes from and 
how it’s produced.”

The problem – but also the attraction – for consumers is that pannage pork is 
scarce. In the 19th century, as many as 6,000 pigs were released into the New 
Forest each pannage season, but that number now stands at 600 or fewer. And 
this year’s acorn crop is meagre compared to last year’s bumper season, which 
means that fewer pigs have been released and demand is likely to outstrip 
supply. Last season, butcher Nathan Mills fromThe Butchery 
<http://www.thebutcheryltd.com/> in Bermondsey, London, sold all of his limited 
supply “before it came through the door”, such was the level of interest, 
especially from chefs. “Pannage pork is also seasonal, so that makes it very 
special,” he says.

Barry Topp, a New Forest cider producer who raises Gloucester Old Spots, has 
just released 12 pigs into the forest, which he will sell to a butcher in 
London. He’s immensely proud of the product even though pannage season “keeps 
him on his toes”: last year, some of his free-roaming pannage pigs gatecrashed 
a wedding at a local hotel. He would like more local farmers to take up 
production of pannage pork to increase supplies, and sees no reason why they 
couldn’t rival Ibérico producers. “We could be producing our own Ibérico-style 
pork and selling it as premium New Forest PannagePork 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/pork>,” he says. “Why not?”

How to get your hands on pannage pork

The price and availability of pannage pork depends on the season and 
individual producers, but the following suppliers are all worth trying. This 
year, pannage pork should be available from early- to mid-December, but it’s 
best to pre-order. Here is a list of suppliers worth trying:

PR Burgess and Sons <http://www.newforestmarque.co.uk>

The Butchery <http://www.thebutcheryltd.com>

T Bartlett & Son, New Milton, on 01425 611 278

Pondhead Farm, Lyndhurst, on 02380 282 003
