
All the best bits of Andalucía, southern Spain

870 miles 
 Two weeks
Fly into Málaga (1), pick up a hire car and drive east along the coast. An 
obvious place to stop for a day on the beach isNerja (2): there are some 
quieter sands off the coast road towards Herradura.

You could spend months hiking in the Sierra Nevada national park (3), so if 
you can spare a few days, do. One of the white villages in the foothills of the 
Alpujarras would make for a magical base for hiking. Bubion has incredible 
views, andCasa la Sevillana B&B <http://www.casalasevillana.es/>, where doubles 
cost from €55.

Dominated by 10th century fortifications, Almería (4) is an attractive port 
that still has a north African feel, and there's a new movie museum, Casa del 
Cine. The beaches of theCabo de Gata (5) are gorgeous, sweeping and almost 
deserted.

Then head on to Murcia (6), which many say has the best tapas in the land 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/2007/oct/06/saturday.murcia>. Tour and chomp 
around the cathedral and bishop's palace, trying squid, mussels, andcazo 
(spiced hake), and enjoy the Moorish architecture.

Córdoba (7) is another attractive Arabic city. Established in 1908, the 
Bodegas Campos <http://www.bodegascampos.com/> is a recommended restaurant for 
dishes such as tiny fried fish with gazpacho or Iberian pig's cheek casserole.

Colourful Seville (8) is the place for art, architecture, flamenco and 
late-night fun in the cobbled streets. The grand finale isGranada (9), for the 
Alhambra, free tapas and Granadina guitar music.Cortijo del Marques 
<http://www.cortijodelmarques.com/02/en/>, has stunning doubles from €90 a 
night.

Historic villages and sites: Castille-Leon, north-west Spain 
 Salamanca's Plaza Mayor. Photograph: Massimo Borchi/ Atlantide 
Phototravel/Corbis 
578 miles
 One week minimum
Pick up a car in Madrid (1), and drive to Segovia (2), a stunning walled town 
with a Roman aqueduct, and fortress. Try the suckling pig, a local speciality, 
at theParador Hotel <http://www.parador.es/en/parador-de-segovia>. Avila (3) is 
a Unesco-protected city with medieval fortifications.

Head to Salamanca (4), a lively university city easily explored on foot, with 
good nightlife. Nearby Hacienda Zorita is a wine resort in a converted 
monastery, with rooms from €147(chicretreats.com 
<http://www.chicretreats.com/boutique-hotels-salamanca/hacienda-zorita>).

After seeing the Renaissance buildings of Valladolid (5) , its National 
Sculpture Museum and Cervantes' house, enjoy a lunch of suckling lamb, then 
relax at Playa de las Morenas on the river Pisuerga. Just over an hour away is
Burgos (6) , with a famous cathedral, a lovely Old Quarter, and Teodoro, an 
1860s hat shop. For tapas and wine for €1.50, tryLa Favorita 
<http://www.lafavoritaburgos.com/>.

Fossil fanatics will like the archeological site at the caves of the Sierra de 
Atapuerca (7) (book ahead, +34 902 024246, atapuerca.org 
<http://www.atapuerca.org/>) and the Museum of Human Evolution. Hikers should 
head for theSierra de la Demanda (8). There are villages and churches, lots of 
routes – and a dinosaur museum.

Lastly, Soria (9) has Romanesque architecture and a beautiful square. Stay at 
La Posada de Numancia <http://www.laposadadenumancia.com/> (doubles from €70) 
and admire its antiques.

Fly back from Madrid.

Wine and vineyards, Douro Valley, northern Portugal
 Vineyards in the Douro Valley. Photograph: Peter Horree/Alamy 
367 miles 
 One week
Start in Porto (1) with a visit to the port wine lodges (the first of many 
tastings this week), hang out at the waterfront cafes of the Ribeira district 
and take a vintage tram to the beach at Foz do Douro.

Drive 22 miles east to Penafiel (2) to sample vinho verde at Quinta da Aveleda 
<http://aveledaportugal.com/> (aveledaportugal.com). Continue to beautiful 
Amarante (3), set in a dramatic gorge with an 18th-century bridge over the 
Tâmega. Eat atLargo do Paço <http://www.casadacalcada.com/pt/largo-do-paco/> 
(casadacalcada.com), a Michelin-starred restaurant serving inventive tasting 
menus with matching wine.

Next head east. Peso da Régua (4)isn't the prettiest place you'll stop, but 
it's well worth a visit for theMuseu do Douro <http://museudodouro.pt/> for the 
history of the area, and its Solar do Vinho do Porto (for a history of the 
wine).

Take a detour to the Casa de Mateus <http://www.casademateus.com/>, a baroque 
mansion that is home to the famous rosé wine of the same name. It has beautiful 
gardens and hosts concerts in the summer. A mile or so up the road isVila Real 
(5), where you can stop overnight, and visit the Parque Natural do Alvão 
<http://www.icnf.pt/ICNPortal/vPT2007-AP-Alvao?res=1920x1200> the following day.

Back in the Douro valley, there is a great viewpoint at Galafura, en route to 
the little town ofPinhão (6), the centre of port production. Check out Pinhão's 
train station, with its tiles depicting the grape harvest, a wine museum and a 
wine shop. TheVintage House Hotel <http://hotelvintagehouse-douro.com/> 
(doubles from €150) is right on the river, surrounded by vineyards.

Cross to the south side of the river and continue through the Alto Douro 
region for 37 miles toVila Nova de Foz Côa (7). At the Côa Valley 
Archaeological Park <http://www.igespar.pt/en/monuments/53/> you'll find rare 
open-air Paleolithic rock art, some 22,000 years old. On your way back to the 
airport, stop to admire the medieval bridge in Ucanha and the monastery in 
Tarouca. InLamego (8), climb the 600 steps to the church of Nossa Senhora dos 
Remédios and try the localraposeira, Portugal's sparkling wine.

Surf safari, Portugal's Atlantic coast
 Surfing at Figueira da Foz, Portugal. Photograph: Alamy 
550 miles
 Two weeks
Fly to Porto (1), hire a car, then head south. Any dirt track off the N109 
towards the ocean will most likely bring your own private breaks. Roughly 
halfway between Porto and Lisbon,Figueira da Foz (2)has a wide beach, two main 
breaks, lots of bars andthe Paintshop hostel <http://www.paintshophostel.com/> 
( dorms €20 a night, private room €50).

Drive down the coast to Peniche (3), the famous surf town, with eight top wave 
is Medão Grande, also called Supertubos. Seepenichesurfguide.com 
<http://www.penichesurfguide.com> for where to eat and sleep.

To the south again is Ericeira (4), a World Surfing Reserve 
<http://www.worldsurfingreserves.org/>, which regularly hosts a round of the 
ASP World Tour Championship. Ribeira d'Ilhas, a mile north of town, is the best 
beach. Then head on toCascais (5), another surfing mecca and a very pretty 
town, too. The big-name beach is Praia do Guincho, home to swanky beachBar do 
Guincho <http://www.bardoguincho.pt/bar_guincho.html>. There's a campsite 
nearby at Orbitur Point (campings.com/camping-orbitur-guincho-cascais 
<http://www.campings.com/camping-orbitur-guincho-cascais/>).

Stay in Lisbon (6) for a night or two and try Carcavelos beach and Costa da 
Caparica over the river. Lisbon's Bairro Alto is the place to party, or try 
cocktail specialistCinco Lounge <http://cincolounge.com/en> (cincolounge.com).

Take the motorway south to Sagres (7), a historic port town on the 
southwesterly tip of Portugal (and of mainland Europe). There are more surf 
beaches a little way up the coast at Arrifana and Carrapateira.

The south-west coast is quiet, which is great if you want a beach to yourself, 
but the Algarve is an up-and-coming surf region: Praia da Rocha, in the big 
tourist resort of Portimão, is one of the best-known.

Fly home from Faro (8).
