
China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> must take the prize for sheer 
cheek in the current discussions on a final document for the Busan conference 
in South Korea on aid effectiveness.

With just two weeks to go, the pace is picking up among negotiators to hammer 
out an "outcome document" on the future direction of aid, or development 
cooperation as many prefer to call it. Another session is scheduled in Paris on 
Friday, bringing together the "sherpas" – aid officials from rich and poor 
countries – to try to bridge the clear philosophical gaps that have emerged.

Transparency 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/transparency-and-development> on 
aid flows – how much money is being provided, where and how it is being spent 
and how it should be monitored – is one of the crucial issues for Busan, which 
promises to be the biggest aid conference yet. About 2,000 delegates are 
expected to attend, including Hillary Clinton, the US secretary of state, Ban 
Ki-moon, the UN secretary-general, and Andrew Mitchell, the UK international 
development secretary.

The sherpas have to come up with a document that satisfies their masters, and 
transparency and accountability are a major source of contention. The UK, 
Nordic countries and the EU, as well as civil society organisations, prize 
transparency and want a strong commitment on this in the final document. Not 
China, an increasingly powerful player in the international aid architecture. 
China's aid has been estimated at $25bn but as it does not publish official 
figures, no one knows for sure.

China's attitude on transparency was laid bare in a summary of discussions on 
the outcome document in Paris earlier this month, as seen by the Guardian. At a 
meeting chaired by Enna Park, director general of South Korea's foreign 
ministry, China bluntly stated that the "principle of transparency should apply 
to north-south cooperation, but that it should not be seen as a standard for 
south-south cooperation". That is not just the diplomatic equivalent of 
throwing down the gauntlet to the established donors' club of the development 
assistance committee (Dac), but of smacking them in the face with it.

Beijing's position shows how hard it will be at the fourth high level forum 
(HLF4) on aid effectiveness <http://www.aideffectiveness.org/busanhlf4/> to 
bring coherence to the cluttered marketplace for aid, where traditional donors 
from the west jostle not just with the rising powers, China, India, Brazil and 
South Korea, but withprivate foundations that donated $53bn in 2009 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/global-development/2011/nov/09/philanthropic-giving-challenge-aid-debate?INTCMP=SRCH>
. Busan is supposed to build on previous conferences in Paris and Accra and 
their core principles – ownership, harmonisation, alignment, managing for 
results and mutual accountability. But the more ambitious goal is toreach 
global agreement on basic principles to govern all major forms of development 
finance 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/global-development/poverty-matters/2011/sep/19/busan-conference-aid-effectiveness>
.

China is not the only one challenging the Paris-Accra consensus. Brazil, 
another proponent of south-south cooperation 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/global-development/poverty-matters/2011/oct/05/new-development-aid-model-south-north>
, is content to stay outside the Paris principles, maintaining that its aid 
programmes are driven by "solidarity" rather than strategic goals, as in the 
case of the US and Britain, although such proclamations provide noimmunity to 
accusations of "imperialist tendencies" 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2011/11/05/world/americas/brazils-rapidly-expanding-influence-worries-neighbors.html>
. Be that as it may, some have even gone so far as to say that the Paris 
consensus lacks legitimacy as it harks back to an era in which new donors had 
yet to appear.

Indeed, the Paris and Accra accords only cover official development assistance 
(ODA) from Dac countries, covering perhaps 60% of aid. That share is likely to 
shrink as non-Dac donors, such as China and Brazil, and private donors, are 
increasing their aid giving faster than Dac donors.

China's attitude that the principle of transparency should not apply to its 
aid programmes has understandably provoked concern among other donors and 
recipients. The UK is not happy, neither is Mexico or Rwanda, which is 
receiving plaudits for its economic progress, although President Paul Kagame's 
authoritarian tendencies leave some uneasy. Rwanda's position is that the 
sharing of information – particularly when developing countries request it – 
should happen regardless of the type of provider or partner involved. It seems 
an eminently sensible position, especially if the Paris principle of ownership 
is taken seriously.

But even among those who espouse transparency, differences have emerged among 
donors as to how much there should be. The US is cool towards making too much 
information available and objects to a paragraph to "make the full range of 
information on publicly funded development activities, their financing and 
contribution to development results, publicly available". Japan is reluctant to 
move beyond current monitoring frameworks of aid programmes that would provide 
more detailed information on aid flows. NGOs are pushing forinternational and 
transparency initiative standards (IATI) 
<http://www.aidtransparency.net/iati-standard> that came out of Accra. Japan, 
however, arguescurrent standards – the Dac's credit reporting system (CRS) – is 
enough to be getting on with <http://www.aidtransparency.net/about/faq>.

Beyond such details, it is clear that fragmentation is the order of the day. 
It could be argued that this is no bad thing for poor countries, who can play 
donors off against each other. But it can be hellish for poor countries to deal 
with too many well-wishers. Homi Kharas, Koji Makino and Woojin Jung, in
Catalysing development: A new vision for aid 
<http://www.brookings.edu/press/Books/2011/catalyzingdevelopment.aspx>, a joint 
publication of the Japanese and South Korean aid agencies, note that recipient 
countries each received an average of 263 donor missions in 2007 and their 
senior finance officials spend a third to half of their time meeting donors. In 
Kenya, Ghana and elsewhere, governments have resorted to "mission-free" periods 
to allow officials time to get on with their work.

It would be a major achievement if Busan brings some order to this clutter, 
but with key players pulling in different directions, that is a tall order.
