
At Microsoft, we’re all in on education. Our mission is to empower every 
student on the planet to achieve more. We work hard every day to achieve this 
goal by creating innovations likeOneNote <http://www.onenote.com/>, Sway 
<http://www.sway.com/>, Skype <http://www.skype.com/en/>, Minecraft 
<http://education.minecraft.net/> and Microsoft Classroom 
<http://classroom.microsoft.com/>, to make teachers’ lives easier and deliver 
the tools for success into students’ hands. We aim to be completely customer 
obsessed because listening to student and teacher voices on what they need in 
the classroom is the only way for us to empower them.

Meet the Microsofties

Today, we are announcing a new community effort that will help connect 
Microsoft employees to students and teachers from classrooms around the world. 
We call this effortMeet the Microsofties 
<http://education.microsoft.com/microsofties>. Using our Skype in the Classroom 
<https://education.microsoft.com/skypeintheclassroom> program through the 
Microsoft Educator Community <https://education.microsoft.com/>, your students’ 
voices can shape the future of Microsoft technology for the classroom. Over 
Skype, connect with the teams that build the tools you use every day. Tell them 
how you use our technology right now, what you like and don’t like and what 
features you dream about. This is also a great opportunity for your students to 
learn about the importance of Stem and hear firsthand what a career in tech 
looks like.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kz8c%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kz8c%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9feb7a91a6ad0266b54fc8ed83d42a690f59eb10%2F59_0_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Connecting%20with%20teachers%20and%20students%20through%20our%20new%20'Meet%20the%20Microsofties'%20program&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kz8c%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Connecting+with+teachers+and+students+through+our+new+%27Meet+the+Microsofties%27+program&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kz8c%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9feb7a91a6ad0266b54fc8ed83d42a690f59eb10%2F59_0_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 South Korean students connecting with Anthony Salcito, vice-president of 
Microsoft Worldwide Education, over Skype during aSkype-a-Thon 
<http://blogs.skype.com/2015/12/07/microsofts-global-skype-a-thon-look-how-far-we-traveled-together/>
. Photograph: Skype 
Five easy steps to meet your Microsoftie

 * Determine which Microsoft group your classroom would like to connect with 
over Skype. We have an initial kickoff list of teams and products, but this 
will be expanding every day. 
 * Have the teacher register at the Microsoft Educator Community 
<https://education.microsoft.com/>. If already registered, then just sign in. 
 * Head over to the Meet the Microsofties 
<http://education.microsoft.com/microsofties> area of the Skype Classroom area 
of our community and find a team you like – as an example,here is the Sway 
team’s landing page 
<https://education.microsoft.com/Status/Public?token=CsDldcK0>. 
 * Find a time and date on the calendar and submit it. 
 * The Microsoft team will get back to you, and you can set up the Skype call 
from there. 
Your Skype call with the Microsoftie

Typically, we expect your call to last 20–30 minutes. The Microsoftie 
<https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Microsoftie> will be interested in hearing 
product feedback from your classroom: what do students like about the 
technology and what do they not like? How might the product be improved? We 
hope to gather feedback from classrooms all around the world and improve our 
software based on what you and your students think is important. In addition to 
product feedback, your students might have other questions to ask, and we’re 
happy to answer. Ask theMicrosofties 
<https://education.microsoft.com/microsofties> anything, from what it’s like to 
work in Stem, career path or just their opinion on recent technology news.

By learning from classrooms around the world over Skype, we hope to be able to 
build the solutions that will empower every student on the planet to achieve 
more.

Content on this page has been provided and funded by Microsoft 
<https://education.microsoft.com/>. Find out more here 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
