
My mother, Yvonne Chunn, has five children but only one daughter – me. If you 
saw us together you couldn’t miss the connection, and the older I get the 
stronger the resemblance seems to become.

But we are not together very often. She has lived most of her adult life in 
Auckland,New Zealand <https://www.theguardian.com/world/newzealand>. I left in 
1982 and have now lived more than half of my life in London.

For a long time I don’t think this bothered either of us much. Every second or 
third year I would go “home” at Christmas to get an injection of the New 
Zealand summer sunshine. Once I had my first two children (with their New 
Zealand-born father) there would be breaks of two to three weeks so that my 
parents could spent time with their grandchildren. My parents would come this 
way too. She was in London for the birth of each of my babies (with my second 
husband I had a third).

But now that I am middle-aged with two daughters of my own and Von is in her 
88th year, I feel sad that we are so far apart. We speak on the phone, usually 
once a week, but it can’t make up for the fact that I can’t drop by for a cup 
of tea and discreetly check that everything is all right in her world.

My two older brothers and six of her grandchildren live in the same city, and 
two brothers are in Sydney, Australia. But somehow, I – the only daughter, and 
the child living furthest away – feel the most intense tie is to me.

I used to imagine that my father was my lodestar. In truth, my mother was in 
the end the bigger influence

As a teenager, I would not have predicted the strong love I have grown to feel 
for my mother. Decked out in charity shop clothes and armed with self-righteous 
student fury over just about everything, I thought my mother was an haute 
bourgeois sell-out. Her natural social ease seemed to unearth me and I 
practically nursed the pain unleashed when a boyfriend said he fancied my 
mother more than me.

In fact, she was always a pretty fantastic woman. Having trained as a nurse, 
she ran a charm school for a brief period in the early 60s (and never lost her 
eagle eye for table manners) and then wrote freelance for magazines and 
newspapers. This won her a slot covering interior design on a television 
magazine show. When my father was ill, she couldn’t find anyone to look after 
the patients at his GP practice, so once he’d recovered, she started a medical 
employment bureau, finding work in New Zealand for doctors from all over the 
world.

She was also an intrepid traveller, joining medical group tours to China 
in the 1970s, exploring Nepal and India in the 1980s, and South America and the 
Galápagos in the 1990s. Her last trip to the UK was with my eldest brother to 
the London Olympics in 2012.

I used to imagine that my father, a doctor who rather wished he was Graham 
Greene, was my lodestar. When I was young he would take me to a bookshop every 
Friday night, where I could buy whatever I wanted. He read my short stories and 
encouraged my ambition to be a journalist.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kgtd%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kgtd%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf930e02d1201a96ba31a67b9f62499705b55484%2F311_89_2351_1765%2F2351.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Caring%20for%20Mum%20from%2011%2C000%20miles%20away&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kgtd%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Caring+for+Mum+from+11%2C000+miles+away&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kgtd%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf930e02d1201a96ba31a67b9f62499705b55484%2F311_89_2351_1765%2F2351.jpg>
 In the 1970s … Yvonne, centre, with her husband, daughter, Louise, and four 
sons. Photograph: Courtesy Louise Chunn 
But, in truth, it’s my mum who in the end is the bigger influence. I worked in 
women’s magazines rather than reporting international affairs or writing books. 
And just as her company was based on frustration at finding the right doctor to 
cover Dad’s long recuperation, I started a business based on my experience of 
finding it difficult to find a therapist.

But there are many reasons to find life difficult at this point. My father 
died nearly four years ago, and her only brother to whom she was touchingly 
close, not long after. Within the last six months her two oldest friends have 
died and I know she misses both women deeply.

I have just returned from visiting Mum for the first time in 10 months. On 
previous stays we filled our days together chatting over coffee in cafes, 
getting old photos out of boxes, visiting friends and going to the cinema. This 
time was different. There had been a couple of “incidents”, resulting in the 
arrival of a fire engine at her apartment, so it was clear that the previously 
loose arrangements that were not even termed “care” are not enough any more. As 
she acknowledged to me, fresh off the 26-hour flight: “I need some help 
these days.”

Now I feel a devotion that is hard to express when I am almost 12,000 miles 
away

She’s a healthy woman, in good physical shape, but her memory is very poor 
now. Always slim, she kept tapping her tummy and telling me she’d been getting 
fat; but when we visited her doctor we discovered she’d lost 7kg in the past 
two years. She’s skipping meals, probably not realising it.

I leapt into organisational mode, setting up help; re-doing her telephone 
book; creating a message book system; restricting her use of the cooker; 
organising her wallet; handing my email address out to everyone involved in her 
care so that I’ll know exactly what is happening.

We talked quite frankly about her future. My dad spent his last few years in a 
care home, with Mum visiting every day. She prefers to stay where she is and 
pay for care there. I used to think she’d be happier in one of Auckland’s 
highly rated care homes, but readingAtul Gawande’s Being Mortal  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/oct/22/being-mortal-medicine-what-matters-atul-gawande-review>
has made me more respectful of what she wants. And when that becomes 
impossible? “I trust my family to make the right decisions for me,” Mum told me 
stoically.

I was in New Zealand for eight days, balancing seeing Mum with overseeing my 
business in the UK. And when it came time to leave, we were both sad, but not 
inconsolable (I hope).

Would she want me to be with her full-time? Up until now I’d have said no. But 
now I’m not so sure. I may have resisted being her daughter when I was younger, 
but now I feel a devotion that is hard to express when I am 11,400 miles away. 
I think about her a lot and I know she misses me because when she phone she 
tells me. Our calls are more frequent, though often short and sweet, and simply 
reassure her that I’m here, but not there.

• Louise Chunn is the founder of the find-a-therapist 
<http://welldoing.org/find-a-therapist> directory, welldoing.org
