
Developing countries lose out on billions of dollars each year 
<http://www.actionaid.org/sites/files/actionaid/actionaid_-_mistreated_tax_treaties_report_-_feb_2016.pdf>
 (pdf) as a result of their tax treaties with wealthier countries. If countries 
are to raise more revenues to invest in eradicating hunger, giving all children 
a good education and eliminating all forms of violence against women and girls, 
then we need to make sure our tax treaties are in line with our development 
objectives. The UK has more work to do than most.

Did you know that foreign investors in Uganda 
<http://www.actionaid.org/sites/files/actionaid/actionaid_-_mistreated_tax_treaties_report_-_feb_2016.pdf>
 (pdf) can get a tax free deal when they send payments to shareholders via the 
Netherlands? Or that manycorporate payments to the UK are tax free in Malawi 
<https://www.actionaid.org.uk/sites/default/files/publications/uk-malawi_tax_treaty_-_actionaid_briefing.pdf>
 (pdf) due to a colonial-era tax agreement? Or that Chinese construction 
projects in Mongolia are oftenout of reach of local tax collectors 
<http://www.actionaid.org/sites/files/actionaid/actionaid_-_mistreated_tax_treaties_report_-_feb_2016.pdf>
 (pdf)?

Related: Remittances are three times greater than aid – how can they go even 
further? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/11/remittances-three-times-greater-aid-sdgs>

This is all made possible by tax treaties. They set the rules of the game. Tax 
treaties between countries define when multinational corporations can, and 
can’t, be taxed. They play a facilitating role in many well-known tax avoidance 
schemes and often make it possible for big business to significantly reduce the 
tax they pay in the countries where they make their profits. High-income 
countries including the UK, Italy and the Netherlands all have very restrictive 
tax treaties with developing countries, such as Bangladesh.

Bangladesh gives up around US$85m (£60m) a year 
<http://www.actionaid.org/sites/files/actionaid/actionaid_-_mistreated_tax_treaties_report_-_feb_2016.pdf>
 as a result of a single clause in its tax treaties. In the capital Dhaka, 
there is a severe shortage of public transport andwomen repeatedly experience 
sexual assaults on the overcrowded buses 
<https://www.ms.dk/sites/default/files/udgivelser/freedom_to_move_working_paper_may_2016.pdf>
 (pdf). It is estimated that another 3,000 buses are necessary to meet the huge 
needs of the city’s population, which would get Bangladesh one step closer to 
the sustainable development goal ambition to “make cities inclusive, safe, 
resilient and sustainable”. Dropping just this clause from Bangladesh’s tax 
treaties would raise enough public funds to cover the cost of purchasing about 
1,000 new buses each year.

The poorest people in the world lose out the most when ineffective global tax 
rules make it possible for big business to cut their tax bills. Public services 
like schools and hospitals are left desperately underfunded and when essential 
public services are absent or inadequate,women and girls pay the highest price 
<https://www.actionaid.org.uk/blog/campaigns/2016/01/29/why-tax-is-a-feminist-issue>
. On top of that, spending to combat gender inequality isfalling dramatically 
short 
<http://www.governmentspendingwatch.org/images/pdfs/GSW_2015_Report/Financing-Sustainable-Development-Goals-Report-2015.pdf>
.

Erik Solheim highlights 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/10/were-losing-240bn-a-year-to-tax-avoidance-who-really-ends-up-paying>
 the need for tax transparency, capacity building and OECD-driven reforms. If 
we’re serious about addressingthe sustainable development goal funding gap 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/09/missing-development-trillions-welcome-debate>
, we need to go further. We need to take a look at the full set of tax rules in 
place and question if they’re fit for purpose. Tax treaties are a good place to 
start.



The IMF’s experts have found that 
<https://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2014/050914.pdf> (pdf) “treaty 
shopping” – the use of tax treaty networks to reduce tax payments – is a major 
issue for many developing countries, which would be well-advised to sign 
treaties only with considerable caution.”

Related: An extra trillion dollars: could development banks do more? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/18/trillion-dollars-development-banks-funding-infrastructure>

It’s time for developed countries, which have far more resources to evaluate 
the impact of these treaties, to start taking responsibility for their 
involvement. Developed countries should review their tax treaties with 
developing countries to ensure they prioritise the fight against poverty.

Some tax treaties, like the UK’s treaty with Malawi, are old and outdated. 
Others, like the Netherlands’ treaty with Uganda, illustrate the race to the 
bottom in some taxing rights that is prominent in recent treaties. These 
powerful agreements are negotiated behind closed doors and receive minimal 
scrutiny from our parliaments before they enter into force. This has to change.

Tax treaties can be re-written. The rules of the game can change. This week, 
tax justice activists in Uganda finally heard from their government thatall 
double taxation agreements are going to be renegotiated 
<http://linkis.com/www.monitor.co.ug/Bu/u7VMC> to reach more favourable terms. 
Activists in Malawi and the UK arecurrently campaigning 
<https://www.actionaid.org.uk/campaign/campaign-to-make-tax-fair/take-action-to-make-tax-fair-everywhere>
 for a fairer new treaty between our countries, which is now under negotiation.

If country leaders are serious about their commitment to the sustainable 
development goals and tackling poverty, they need to make the impact on 
development financing a top priority when tax rules are agreed. Ensuring that 
tax treaties don’t block developing countries from collecting a fair share of 
tax from multinational corporations is a good place to start.

Lovisa Moller is policy adviser at ActionAid UK <https://www.actionaid.org.uk/>
.

If you would like to contribute to our Missing Development Trillions 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/series/the-missing-development-trillions>
 series get in touch on globaldevpros@guardian.co.uk or tweet us on the hashtag 
#globaldevtrillions.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
