
With the proportion of older people in the UK due to rise from 23% to 28% of 
the population and the numbers of over-85s to double by 2030, theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> faces a challenge to develop services 
that can meet the requirements of ageing generations.


Old age may bring frailty or other health issues – the number of people in 
England with three or more long-term conditions is expected to reach 2.9 
million in the next two years, and most of them will be aged over 60.

Too often care for older people revolves around hospitals, when they would 
prefer to receive treatment closer to home. And they also often face delayed 
discharge after treatment.

Our expert panel will discuss how community services can deliver preventive 
care for older people, help them to manage their health conditions and try to 
avoid hospitalisation.



Related: Older people need healthcare closer to home – not in hospitals 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/nov/11/young-doctors-and-community-services-are-hospitals-only-hope>

Join our live discussion on Tuesday 19 April, from 12pm-2pm BST to discuss 
whether there is enough support and planning to help older people maintain good 
health.


We’ll be asking if families and carers are confident that services enable them 
to properly look after older relatives and whether commissioners are 
effectively using their powers to deliver services for all older people, 
whether or not they have family support.

You can leave questions ahead of time in the comment section below, email 
anna.isaac@theguardian.com <mailto: anna.isaac@theguardian.com> or tweet 
@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
.


The panel

Michael Dixon (@MichaelDixonGP <https://twitter.com/MichaelDixonGP>), GP and 
former chair of NHS Alliance and former president of NHS Clinical 
Commissioners, chair ofeveryLIFE <http://www.everylifetechnologies.com/> 
advisory board

Professor John Young, Academic Unit of Elderly Care and Rehabilitation 
<http://www.bradfordresearch.nhs.uk/research-teams/academic-unit-of-elderly-care-and-rehabilitation>
, University of Leeds

Phil McCarvill (@Phil_McCarvill <https://twitter.com/Phil_McCarvill>), deputy 
director of policy,NHS Confederation <http://www.nhsconfed.org/>

Anna Dixon (@DrAnnaDixon <https://twitter.com/DrAnnaDixon>), chief executive 
of theCentre for Ageing Better <http://www.ageing-better.org.uk/>. Former 
director of strategy and chief analyst at Department of Health

Léa Renoux (@Lea_Renoux <https://twitter.com/Lea_Renoux>) health policy 
manager,Age UK <http://www.ageuk.org.uk/>

Professor Athina Vlachantoni (@CPCpopulation 
<https://twitter.com/CPCpopulation>), associate professor in gerontology at the 
Centre for Research on Ageing 
<http://www.southampton.ac.uk/ageingcentre/index.page> and the Centre for 
Population Change <http://www.cpc.ac.uk/> in the University of Southampton

Richard Curtis, head of community healthcare contracting at Specsavers 
<http://www.specsavers.co.uk/> and former NHS commissioner


David Oliver, consultant in geriatrics and general internal medicine, 
president of theBritish Geriatrics Society <http://www.bgs.org.uk/>. Oliver 
will be joining the opening and closing half hours of the discussion


Discussion commissioned and controlled by the Guardian, funded by Specsavers

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
