
You might never have used the Land Registry, but if you have there’s a very 
good chance you were happy with the speed and quality of the service we 
provided.

 Last year we were a bit disappointed because our customer approval rating 
slipped to “just” 94%. In the same year, our entirely self-financing agency – 
we are a publicly-owned body that takes no money from the public purse – 
returned around £120m to the Treasury.

By any measure, the Land Registry is successful and efficient operation that 
has been in public hands for more than 150 years. We’re not broke, so why is 
this government trying to fix us?

Related: Land Registry faces privatisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/24/land-registry-faces-privatisation>

Actually, it is much worse than that; the Tories want to sell us off to a 
private company 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/24/land-registry-faces-privatisation>
, which we believe will seriously damage our work and lead to higher fees for 
the public and businesses.


If you’re not a home or landowner, or a conveyancing solicitor, you have 
probably never come across us before. It is quite complex but, essentially, we 
provide a state guarantee of land ownership, effectively the legal basis that 
confirms you own the land on which your property stands.


There is obviously more to it – and much more work we could be doing, if we 
had more resources, to register more land. It’s not something most people think 
about, but around 15% of the land in England and Wales is unregistered, so we 
don’t know who owns it. We could be more active in investigating this and 
filling in the blanks.


We could assist with efforts to crack down on the kind of tax avoidance 
highlighted by thePanama papers 
<http://www.theguardian.com/news/series/panama-papers>, by making it less 
attractive for offshore entities to buy up property in this country and shield 
themselves from the public gaze. And we could help with setting up and 
maintaining a register of landlords so people who rent have more security and a 
better deal.


These would be sensible, progressive measures for a government to take in 2016 
to tackle the serious issues around our housing crisis and tax dodging. So it 
is not just depressing that this government plans to privatise us instead, it 
is a national scandal.


This isn’t the first time either. Just over two years ago the coalition 
government proposed a sell-off but after we took industrial action and were 
part of one of the broadest campaigns I have ever seen – including staff, 
industry professionals and politicians – the thenbusiness secretary Vince Cable 
vetoed it 
<http://www.pcs.org.uk/en/news_and_events/pcs_comment/pcs_comment_archive.cfm/land-registry-sell-off-shelved>
. But the plan was only put on ice.


Put simply, there is no demand from industry or the public for this

The rationale has now shifted. This time, we believe it is entirely 
Treasury-driven, as business ministers seem less keen. Chancellor George 
Osborne seems to have pegged privatisation of the Land Registry to his desire 
to repair his battered image of financial incompetence, saying the estimated 
proceeds of the sale of around £1bn would be used to fund infrastructure 
projects.

The short-termism of selling off a self-financing agency that provides a 
return to the public coffers will be obvious to everyone.


The government’s consultation on the plans closed on Thursday 26 May. The case 
was wafer thin and failed even to demonstrate that the government understands 
the work we do. We believe that, like last time, responses will be 
overwhelmingly in opposition.


Our own submission pointed out the dangers of handing a quasi-judicial 
function to a private company to be run for profit, so the management of our 
property data is geared towards commercial interests, rather than the public 
interest.


Put simply, there is no demand from industry or the public for this and it has 
already been criticised by, among others, theOpen Data Institute 
<http://theodi.org/blog/consultation-response-on-moving-land-registry-operations-to-the-private-sector>
, theCompetition and Markets Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/23/cma-objects-land-registry-privatisation>
 and theNews Media Association 
<http://www.pressgazette.co.uk/warning-land-registry-sell-threatens-journalism-and-publics-right-know/>
.


We are committed to working with these organisations, and others, to do 
everything in our power to keep the Land Registry in public hands, where it 
belongs and where it has a proven track record of success and innovation.


Kim Lowes is assistant secretary of the PCS union’s Land Registry group.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
