
We see countless examples of the discrimination against mental health at the 
heart of theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>, but there are few as 
outrageous as the practice of shunting people with mental illness across the 
country in search of a bed at a moment of crisis.

One of my constituents in Norfolk has described how, after an attempted 
suicide, he was transported in silence more than 120 miles to a mental health 
facility in London. Frightened, isolated and disorientated, he felt more like a 
prisoner than a patient.

Just imagine the public outrage if this scandal happened to someone who had 
suffered a heart attack or stroke. Yet it continues to happen in the mental 
health system up and down the country.

Related: Tackling underfunding in children’s mental health services 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/may/17/ambitions-for-childrens-mental-health-services>

It is an utterly inhumane way to treat people. We also know it’s completely 
avoidable. Happily, this was the conclusion of NHS England’s independentMental 
Health Taskforce 
<https://www.england.nhs.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/Mental-Health-Taskforce-FYFV-final.pdf>
 and Lord Crisp’scommission on inpatient psychiatric care 
<http://media.wix.com/ugd/0e662e_a93c62b2ba4449f48695ed36b3cb24ab.pdf>. Both 
recommended that out-of-area placements should be phased out by 2020, and the 
Crisp commission set a more ambitious – but still achievable – target of 
October 2017.

After learning about the problem as a minister, I initiated the collation and 
publication of data on out-of-area placements. This transparency will be 
critical in bringing about change – identifying variation around the country 
and holding NHS trusts to account where unacceptable practices continue.

We have to dispel the misconception that more beds in local hospitals is the 
answer. Look at how they have reduced bed occupancy in Swindon by placing a 
focus on early intervention and by offering effective alternatives to hospital 
admission. So the solution must instead be a stronger focus on prevention and a 
bold revolution in community support for people experiencing a mental health 
crisis, avoiding the need for hospital admission in the first place.

Offering 24/7 access to crisis care and better intensive home-treatment teams 
is, rightly, at the heart of NHS England’s new five-year mental health 
strategy. But we cannot hope to achieve this vision without proper investment 
and the determination of government.

There is a clear moral imperative, and good practice is emerging in parts of 
the country, such as Sheffield, Mersey Care in Liverpool, and particularly in 
Swindon, where there have been no out-of-area placements in the past year. But 
eliminating this unacceptable practice must be identified as a priority by all 
mental health trusts. People with mental illness deserve the same right to 
receive care, close to home, as those with physical conditions. Society has 
increasingly come to agree with this view. It’s time we start acting on it.

Former health minister Norman Lamb, MP for North Norfolk, is now Liberal 
Democrat health spokesman

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
