
I was excited as a young woman about the future for our sex. I thought as 
I grew up that the world was ready for the positive developments that the 
inclusion of women in all walks of life and in particular in the power system, 
would bring.

To be sure, there have been some good shifts – but by and large the dreams of 
my generation have not been realised.

I am backing the Women’s Equality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/equality> party because I really do not 
want to die before closing the pay gap, which stands, in our great and 
supposedly modern capital city, at 23%. We keep being told that closing it is 
very “complicated”. Why?

Related: Women’s Equality party leader Sophie Walker: ‘It’s complex, but not 
complicated’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/04/womens-equality-party-leader-sophie-walker-its-complex-but-not-complicated>

I am backing it, too, because I am shocked that 85% of young women in London 
aresexually harassed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/21/i-cried-all-the-way-back-to-my-final-destination-sexual-harassment-on-public-transport>
 every day. I want my son to see gentleness and caring as manly attributes, and 
my daughter to see strength of purpose and voice as feminine. I am very worried 
about the hyper-sexualisation of our children and I do not see that being 
addressed anywhere else. I am backing the WEP because it is putting issues of 
caring – for children and for the elderly – at the top of its agenda.

The WEP wants our economy and our education systems to work fairly for men and 
women and it wants to see women in positions of authority in equal numbers.

All the above are at the top of the list of WEP’s priorities and I look 
forward to helping it with some of its campaigns. I have met and talked with 
them and a more committed, bright, inspiring bunch of women with fantastic 
ideas I have never found. They are only asking for half my votes in the 
elections on 5 May, so I can continue to support my old allegiances with the 
other half. Give half your votes to the Women’s Equality party on 5 May. We’re 
half the population and equality is way, way overdue.
Emma Thompson
London

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
