
Hahahaha, here we go again. Listen, they’re all “shocked” – what planet do 
these people live on?! You know there was ice on the bird bath again last 
night? In March! And now we’re meant to panic because it’s boiling in 
Australia. It’s called weather, people. El Niño mean anything? Thought not. It 
was hot here in 1976, wasn’t it? Nobody went mental, said our kids would all 
fry if we didn’t give up lawnmowers, or whatever it is now – yoghurt, probably. 
You know they’re trying to blame cows, as well as anybody evil enough to boil a 
kettle?

No, because there weren’t any renewables in 1976. Ask yourself, who’s making a 
profit, it’s all about power and money, wind farms and solar panels – and 
batshit crazy catastrophists lying about extinct polar bears. Complete myth. 
Fact: they’re all going in your lasagne. It’s just being covered up. So where 
are the polar bear bodies then? Just do the math.

If it’s really warming, how come we still have to fly abroad on holiday? You 
know what the temperature is in the North Sea today? In March? Oh, yes, very 
globally warmed. Definitely throwing away my wetsuit. Fact: the whole planet is 
cooling. Well, once the consensus was, the Earth is flat. If I’m wrong, why 
don’t we have vineyards like in medieval times? A lot of people would love a 
vineyard, but oh no, hysteria’s a better earner.

Related: Modern tribes: the paint pedant 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/12/modern-tribes-paint-pedant-catherine-bennett>

I don’t care about the 1950s! Why don’t they compare it with what it was like 
for the dinosaurs? It’s the alarmists getting desperate, churning this stuff 
out, they’re terrified – they can’t admit it’s the coldest March in years and 
there are more penguins around than at any time in human history. It’s all 
being hushed up.

Why do we never hear about it? Go figure. This brilliant scientist, Professor 
Delingpole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/blog/2011/jan/24/james-delingpole-tv-interview>
, he’s proved we’re entering a new Ice Age – human survival literally depends 
on us in the developed world flying and burning fossil fuels, but the 
treehuggers would rather we all went extinct than admit they’re wrong. So why 
does he have towrite it in the Spectator 
<http://www.spectator.co.uk/author/james-delingpole/>? The greenies make him. 
Fact.
