
The chief inspector of schools 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/people/michael-wilshaw> has issued a stark 
warning against any attempt to undermine the independence of the school watchdog
Ofsted <http://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> as he prepares to hand 
over to his successor at the end of this year.

In an interview with the Guardian, Sir Michael Wilshaw, who will have been in 
charge of the school inspectorate for five years, expressed concern about the 
future of the organisation, warning that it should not become a “plaything” of 
government.


Wilshaw, who has had a combative relationship with ministers – and the 
profession – throughout his term in office, said he was aware of questions 
being raised about the future ofOfsted 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted>, with suggestions that regional 
schools commissioners could do the job and routine inspections were no longer 
needed because “data tells you all you need to know”.


Wilshaw insisted, however, that Ofsted was vital to efforts to raise standards 
in schools and called on his successor to continue to “tell truth to power”, no 
matter how uncomfortable it might be.


Related: Ofsted chief calls for return of national tests for 14-year-olds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jun/10/ofsted-national-tests-key-stage-3-sir-michael-wilshaw-secondary-schools-exams>

“Governments would always like chief inspectors to say things are going a lot 
better – that academies and free schools are doing well,” said Wilshaw. “But 
it’s the job of chief inspectors to sometimes say uncomfortable things to 
government. I’ve found that the most difficult thing about my job. It obviously 
irritates ministers who fund us.”

Wilshaw’s comments came before the Department for Education announced on 
Friday that Amanda Spielman, the chair of exams regulator Ofqual and a founder 
of the Ark chain of schools, would take over as chief inspector next year, 
subject to approval by the Privy Council.


In his time Wilshaw has become a prominent media figure, publicly taking the 
government to task on contentious issues such asunderperforming multi-academy 
trusts 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/10/academy-chains-come-under-fire-from-ofsted-chief>
, and ministers will be hoping the new chief inspector is less fond of the 
limelight.


Asked about his successor, Sir Michael said: “I wanted to raise Ofsted’s game. 
Who knows what the next chief inspector will want to do. Unless it’s someone 
who can challenge the system to do better, and take on the forces of the 
establishment who don’t want change, they are not doing their job properly.


“The thing about Ofsted that gives us such credibility and authority is the 
independence that we have. I’ve fought from time to time to maintain our 
independence – that’s really, really important.”


And he stressed the role Ofsted had played in raising school achievement. 
“People who criticise us can’t remember the dire state that schools were in in 
the 70s and 80s. There’s a long way to go, but without Ofsted being there, I’ve 
no doubt standards will fall and we would go backwards, not forwards.”

Wilshaw, who is approaching his 70th birthday, said whoever takes over would 
need to be “as tough as old boots to ensure we fight the good fight for that 
independence”. And he said dealing with the threat of radicalisation should be 
the “absolute priority” for the new chief inspector.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kq6x%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kq6x%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf801e260d69f3b5ebbc915928b8dd0f6b6ba481%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ofsted%20'should%20not%20become%20the%20plaything%20of%20government'&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kq6x%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ofsted+%27should+not+become+the+plaything+of+government%27&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kq6x%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf801e260d69f3b5ebbc915928b8dd0f6b6ba481%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Wilshaw said Ofsted’s critics should recognise the central role played by the 
inspectorate in the fight against radicalisation. Photograph: Alicia Canter for 
the Guardian 
In the final months of his tenure, Wilshaw will issue a report that is likely 
to be highly critical of local authorities, some of whom he will accuse of 
failing to carry out their responsibilities to safeguard children.


Speaking on Thursday following a visit to Birmingham, which was the focus of 
the Trojan Horse investigation over allegations of an Islamist plot to dominate 
schools in the city, Wilshaw said: “The whole Trojan Horse thing has not gone 
away. It may have gone underground, but we should not think the problem has 
been resolved.”


Though he was satisfied children were safer in schools today as a result of 
Ofsted’s vigilance over the enforcement of the Prevent agenda and the teaching 
of British values, Wilshaw remained deeply concerned about the growing problem 
of illegal schools.

He said a taskforce of inspectors working with local authorities had 
identified almost 150 illegal schools where children were being taught in 
“filthy, unhygienic” conditions by unqualified and unvetted teachers.

“Parents are using the home tuition rules to opt out of the system and then 
are working with other parents to set up these illegal schools.” Other parents, 
he said, had been persuaded by religious leaders to take their children out of 
mainstream school.

“If you want to radicalise children, you are not going to go into a mainstream 
school where there are all the checks. You will go to these illegal schools.” 
Wilshaw confirmed, however, that half of the schools identified by inspectors 
are not religious.

He continued: “It’s a growing problem. Whoever replaces me has got to see this 
as an absolute priority and make sure that local authorities who are 
responsible for safeguarding take their responsibilities seriously.


“Some local authorities are not doing that. It’s partly a lack of political 
will to do it, partly it’s incompetence, partly it’s resources. If I was 
staying at Ofsted I would make this an absolute priority.

“I would ramp up our inspections of local authorities and seek the resources 
from the Department for Education to do that.”

Wilshaw said Ofsted’s critics should recognise the central role played by the 
inspectorate in the fight against radicalisation. “Anyone who wants to 
undermine Ofsted – and you hear those voices from time to time, how it should 
be got rid of or its importance reduced – but without Ofsted going in schools 
and checking on British values, without Ofsted going to local authorities and 
ensuring they are taking their responsibilities seriously, we would be in a 
much worse position.”

Wilshaw, who was previously a highly successful head teacher in inner London 
secondary schools, was appointed to the role of chief inspector in 2012 by the 
then education secretaryMichael Gove 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove>, who according to Wilshaw 
will be seen as one of the great secretaries of state for education.

“I would not have done this job if I did not have a great deal of admiration 
for Michael Gove. I still have a good relationship with him.”


Despite tensions between government and Ofsted, the two men shared a 
commitment to raising educational standards and increasing opportunities for 
the least privileged in society. Wilshaw has since been highly critical of the 
current education secretary Nicky Morgan’s approval of plans to build a new 
“satellite”grammar school  <http://www.theguardian.com/education/grammarschools>
inKent 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/oct/15/conservatives-green-light-first-selective-state-school-50-years>
.

“It would be a regressive step to go back to selection,” he said. “If we are 
serious about social mobility ... we’ve got to make our comprehensive system 
work. That means making sure we’ve the best leaders in the comprehensive 
system.”

He believes there’s been too much focus on school structures – (“inevitably we 
will move to a fully academised system,” he says) – at the expense of 
developing head teachers and school leaders, and it’s an area he’d like to work 
on once he leaves Ofsted.

“It’s been exciting, difficult, challenging and tough,” he said of the last 
almost five years, choosing his words carefully. The lowest point was a highly 
publicrow in 2014 <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-25900547> over alleged 
briefings against Ofsted. “It was a difficult thing to endure,” said Wilshaw, 
who underwent major heart surgery in 2015.

Asked about his legacy, and what he is most proud of achieving in his time at 
Ofsted, Wilshaw said the scrapping of the “satisfactory” judgment in school 
inspections and changing it to “requires improvement” had improved the system 
enormously.


And regrets? “I’ve very few regrets,” he said. “Perhaps not challenging more 
…?” And he laughs.
