
“BBC accused of racism over documentary”, said the headline over a short news 
article on page 17 of the Times on Thursday. I was about to turn over until I 
read the first paragraph:

“The BBC has faced a backlash on social media over its documentary Last Whites 
of the East End, about ethnicity inLondon <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>
.”

Now “backlash” is a favourite tabloid word, almost always misused. Here’s a 
dictionary definition 
<http://www.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/english/backlash>: “A strong 
negative reaction by a large number of people, especially to a social or 
political development.”

But surely the Times would have good reason to use it? No, it most definitely 
did not.

After a couple of paragraphs describing the programme, which was screened by 
BBC1 on Tuesday night, came the following sentences:

“Some viewers praised the show for giving an honest glimpse of life in areas 
that have experienced huge demographic changes, but Stephen Timms, the Labour 
MP for East Ham, said that the portrayal was one-sided.

One Twitter user said that the title ‘suggests there’s only a handful left 
[and] plays into racist lies’.

A BBC <http://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> source said that there had been 
only seven complaints and a spokesman said: ‘The film features a wide range of 
people voicing their personal opinions and shows many different facets of life 
in Newham, exploring both positive and negative views.’”

Some backlash, eh? An MP, a single Twitter user and just seven complaints to 
the BBC. A commenter to the story’s online version, Nicholas Watson, wrote:

“I don’t understand [the] Times’s presentation of this ‘story’ - if it is even 
one. There were only 7 complaints, meaning it’s not really a story. And if 
anything, it should be: ‘The BBC only received 7 complaints about a documentary 
that the MP for the area said gave a one-sided portrayal about the changing 
ethnic mix.’”

Quite so, sir. There was no story, as such. Quite apart from the hyping of the 
“backlash,” the headline relies on the anonymous tweet, which is the only 
mention of “racism” (since we, and the paper, have no clue about the nature of 
the complaints to the corporation.

So why publish? I can’t quite decide the reasoning. Another chance to knock 
the BBC, perhaps? If so, pretty pathetic.The Times 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/thetimes> should run a correction and an 
apology.
