
5.30pm: And now, to use an old Radio 2 phrase: TTFN.

5.28pm: I am told that Luke Johnson may cause some trouble for the BBC by 
highlighting a National Audit Office report next month on the BBC's 
Broadcasting House renovation. He said: "The BBC has so much money it... can 
spend £1bn on something it already owns."

5.06pm: Full text of Hunt's speech 
<http://www.conservatives.com/News/Speeches/2010/01/Jeremy_Hunt_No_public_subsidy_for_outdated_regional_news.aspx>
. Although he is still actually speaking in Oxford, so this blog is actually so 
Live! it is In The Future...

4.52pm: Hunt: "Let me be clear, we do not support these provisions in the 
Digital Economy Bill and we do not support the pilot [regional news] schemes. 
The contracts are not due to be signed until May [and] anyone looking to sign 
one should understand that we'll do all we can to legally unpick them if David 
Cameron enters Number 10. And if they haven't been signed, we won't be doing so.

He reiterated the Tory view that using a portion of the BBC's licence fee to 
"prop up regional news simply casts a failed regional TV model in aspic".

Earlier this month the department for culture, media and sport announced the 
eight successful consortiums to bid to run pilots for regional news in 
Scotland, Wales and England 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jan/13/trinity-mirror-regional-news-pilot>
.

4.44pm: BIG BREAKING NEWS: Jeremy Hunt, the future culture secretary (maybe), 
says thata Tory government would stop the new regional news consortiums by all 
necessary means. 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jan/21/hunt-itv-news-replacement-pilots> 
He says that the Tories will use legal action to stop theIFNC 
<http://www.newspapersoc.org.uk/blog/index.php/2009/11/19/government-outlines-timetable-for-ifnc-tender-process/>
 pilots if they have already started. And if they haven't started they will not 
begin.

4.10pm: How many lawyers does it take to fight a case about share ownership? 
Chris Tryhorn examines Sky's lengthy battle to keep its 18% stake in its ITV 
rival <http://bit.ly/7TcaRC>. Until Sky is finally forced to relinquish its 
shareholding (which every court that has ruled on this case has said it should) 
ITV cannot really move on. Who knows, it may even be bought...

3.40pm: MSN UK executive producer Peter Bale <http://twitter.com/PeterBale> 
tweet: "The age of irony is alive and well: former Sun editor David Yelland is 
on a panel on media "ethics"."

3.19pm: Back to Oxford. Patricia "hotlips" Hodgson (©Matt Wells): We all have 
"needs and desires" on a Saturday night. (For the avoidance of doubt, we think 
she was talking about Strictly Come Dancing)

3.01pm: Or, you could follow www pioneer Tim Berners-Lee's launch of the UK 
public data website live 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/blog/2010/jan/21/timbernerslee-government-data>
.

2.52pm: Elsewhere in the world, Hillary Clinton is declaring the virtues of 
internet freedom, whichyou can watch live now <http://state.gov/>.

2.47pm: Here is the full text of Stephen Timms' OMC speech 
<http://interactive.bis.gov.uk/digitalbritain/2010/01/timms-speech-omc10/>

2.40pm: Back to Hodgson (BBC trustee) v Johnson (soon-to-be-ex C4 chairman). 
Johnson: It's an "illusion" that the chairman/CEO relationship is key to a 
successful business.
As Matt Wells says <http://twitter.com/MatthewWells>: Shame Andy Duncan has 
gone home.
Matt and Ben Green are producing a special MediaTalk podcast 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/series/mediatalk> from the conference.

2.30pm: Interesting reaction to Bailey's "pravda" attack from blogger Nick 
Baines 
<http://www.allvoices.com/s/event-5081850/aHR0cDovL25pY2tiYWluZXMud29yZHByZXNzLmNvbS8yMDEwLzAxLzIxL21pbmktcHJhdmRhLw==>
: "I doubt if Sly Bailey ever actually read (or reads) Pravda. (I do, but would 
love someone to get them onto Twitter…) It would interesting to know if she 
actually reads any local newspapers from her own stable. But, if the cry to 
halt the 'mini-Pravdas' is to hold any weight, it will have to involve 
self-examination by local media themsleves (and their owners) and a willingness 
to base reportage on relationships characterised by intelligence, 
accountability and accuracy."

2.18pm: Patricia Hodgson has put the BBC on the front foot in the governance 
debate. She says it was a "phenomenal political disaster" to ditch BBC 
"governors" name. It put BBC independence "in play". She adds that BBC Trust 
should have more power over appointments and salaries

Here is more on Sly Bailey's earlier attack on council "mini Pravdas" 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jan/21/sly-bailey-council-pravdas-bbc>.

And a fuller report of Andy Duncan's speech: "Set BBC targets to partner its 
rivals." 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jan/21/bbc-targets-partner-rivals-andy-duncan>

2.12pm: Coming up: "The next breakout sessions offer a choice of BBC bashing, 
begging bowl offering, and social media waffling, saysPaul Bradshaw 
<http://twitter.com/paulbradshaw>

1.38pm: Great quote from Matt Brittin, Google MD: "We do not have people at 
Google stroking white cats plotting to use data in devious ways"

Stephen Timms session: Q: Where will we be this time next year? Long pause. A: 
"I'm looking forward to being back in this capacity this time next year"

Credit to the FT's Tim Bradshaw <http://twitter.com/tim> for those.

1.37pm: @patrickfoster2 has kindly sent me a picture of the aforementioned 
"press room"/cupboard <http://twitpic.com/z2409>.

12.58pm: By the way, Andy Duncan, is sporting a pinstripe suit. Much smarter 
than he waswhen he was at the OMC on a previous notable occasion 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/gallery/2009/sep/15/andy-duncan-channel-4?picture=353023850>
, when he was actually in a job. Maybe it is his need for new employment that 
has smartened him up.

12.54pm: Stephen Timms says that the UK is ahead of Japan in terms of broadband
 <http://twitter.com/urmeek/statuses/8025310214>.

12.30pm: "Hack and pundit" Bill Thompson has taken some pictures to give more 
of a flavour of the conference 
<http://www.flickr.com/photos/visualfield/sets/72157623129918653/>.

12.20pm: Over in the panel: "What principles should govern our use of data in 
the media?", session chairCharlie Beckett <http://twitter.com/CharlieBeckett>, 
director of Polis, says: "Just chaired a remarkably consensual debate on the 
use on data online with Facebobk, Google, Virgin & Joe Turow. Very gentle 
audience."
On this subject, WWW creator Tim Berners-Lee will this afternoon be in 
Guardian Towers launching data.gov.uk 
<http://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2010/jan/21/timbernerslee-government-data>
.
data.gov.uk <http://www.data.gov.uk/> will allow citizens to access large sets 
of Government data. My Guardian Technology colleagues have been campaigning to
Free Our Data <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/free-our-data> for some 
time, but the real impetus for this came from Barack Obama's decision to do it 
in the US and the appointment of Berners-Lee.

11.57am: Ofcom's Stewart Purvis says don't let regional news die - more people 
watch it than network news 
<http://twitter.com/janemartinson/statuses/8024464039>. He should know, given 
that he is former ITN chief exec.
Helen Boaden says 20% of the UK has never gone online.
In the later keynote speeches from Stephen Timms (current Digital Britain 
minister) and Jeremy Hunt (potential future culture minister) we may hear more 
about local news' future. The present government seems to be rushing through 
their plans for local news consortiums 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/organgrinder/2010/jan/18/itv-opposes-local-tv-news>
. The Tories are against the idea and seem to suggest they will dump them/not 
let them go ahead.

11.49am: This from @patrickfoster2 <http://twitter.com/patrickfoster2> in 
Oxford: "@busfield <http://twitter.com/Busfield> It's a good job you're at your 
desk in London, as the press room here at #OMC10 is literally the size of a 
disabled toilet."

11.30am: Guardian editor-in-chief Alan Rusbridger is speaking: he says that 
"hyperlocal" journalism will rely on volunteers, that big media needs to
collaborate with smaller media/web/blogs 
<http://twitter.com/PeterBale/statuses/8023863739>, but that some reporting is 
best left to professionals (such as court reporting 
<http://twitter.com/urmeek/status/8023759719>)

11.27am: Quote of the day so far, from BBC's director of news Helen Boaden: 
Compared to sharks and minnows, "the BBC is a dolphin". 
<http://twitter.com/MatthewWells/statuses/8023544940>
The difference, of course is that dolphin hunting is frowned upon.

11.10am: Sly Bailey, ceo of Trinity Mirror and owner of a large stable of 
local and regional newspapers, launches a broadside on council-owned papers:
'Propaganda masquerading as journalism.' 
<http://twitter.com/MatthewWells/status/8023425396>
On a lighter note, my colleague Matt Wells <http://twitter.com/MatthewWells> 
tweets about another Guardianista:@emilybell <http://twitter.com/emilybell> 
forgets to put phone on silent #OMC10

10.47am: For every £1 the BBC is given in its £3.7bn licence fee, £2 is 
generated for the British economy 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jan/21/bbc-licence-fee-uk-economy>, is 
apparently the message that BBC chief operating officer Caroline Thomson will 
deliver this afternoon in Oxford.
The figure comes from a Deloitte report into the economic benefits of the BBC, 
which will be published soon. BBC TV contributes £4.5bn, the radio network a 
further £1bn, online £300m and BBC WW £866m.
Much of that money is created by commissioning output from the independent 
sector.
Some (the Murdoch family for instance) may wonder how much the BBC takes away 
from its commercial rivals.

10.36am: More pearls of wisdom from Duncan: "Digital Britain report ended up 
pulling its punches in far too many places." Media sector"suffering acute case 
of RDS - repetitive debate syndrome." <http://twitter.com/tim/status/8022041436>

10.21am: Ah, here is a bit of that Duncan bitterness I was talking about. He 
says that the BBC "struggles to work with others" but has a responsibility to 
work with public institutions.

10.18am: Duncan has just come up with this pearl of wisdom: "2012 is only two 
years away." <http://twitter.com/MatthewWells/statuses/8022409195>

10.06am: So here are further details of the BSkyB/ITV ruling 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jan/21/bskyb-itv-court-of-appeal>. Sky 
now has 28 days to apply directly to the supreme court. Just a guess but I 
think that they will. They have fought this ruling for more than three years, 
despite losing at every stage, so why stop now?

9.58am: I will (hopefully) be getting plenty of tidbits from my colleagues in 
the sessions in Oxford (Full disclosure: I am at my desk in London - that's how 
I knew about the Sky/ITV ruling so quickly), but please leave comments below or 
tweet me@Busfield <http://twitter.com/Busfield>. Following the tweets from 
Oxford, there is clearly a schism on hashtags, but#omc10 
<http://twitter.com/#search?q=%23OMC10> seems to be winning

9.48am: More on BSkyB/ITV shortly, but back to Oxford. Here is the programme 
<http://image.theguardian.com/sys-files/Society/documents/2010/01/19/OTD_programme2010_final.pdf>
. As I say, Duncan is up now, the Minister for Digital Britain, Stephen Timms, 
at midday and Jeremy Hunt at 4.30pm.

Other highlights should be the local media debate at 10.45am (featuring 
Trinity Mirror's Sly Bailey, Helen Boaden from the BBC, Stewart Purvis and Alan 
Rusbridger of this parish) and this afternoon, parallel sessions on what should 
taxpayers subsidize (starring the BBC's Caroline Thomson and Channel 4 deputy 
chairman Lord Puttnam) and a BBC Trust debate which pits C4's departing 
chairman Luke Johnson with BBC Trustee Dame Patricia Hodgson.

9.45am: More on the Sky judgement soon, but here is timeline 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jan/20/timeline-sky-itv-stake> of how 
this story has developed, all the way back toJames Murdoch's cheeky purchase of 
a 17.9% stake in ITV back in November 2006 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2006/nov/17/itv.television>, a move that 
stopped NTL (later Virgin Media) buying ITV (a plan which had beenexclusively 
revealed by MediaGuardian.co.uk shortly before 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2006/nov/09/citynews.television>).

9.43am: Not in Oxford, but big breaking media news: Sky has had its appeal has 
been dismissed against the ruling that it must sell its ITV stake. This has 
been going on for more than three years now and there is still time for Sky to 
appeal again.

9.39am: Good Morning. Andy Duncan is about to stand up and deliver the opening 
keynote. Apparently he is going to say that "the UK's creative industries could 
go backwards, despite economic recovery, unless they work together to face 
future challenges". Maybe he is still smarting from his inability to get a 
tie-up deal with BBC Worldwide to "save" Channel 4. We'll soon see.
