
Key points

It’s deputies day. George Osborne deputised for David Cameron, who is on an 
official visit to Poland, meaning Angela Eagle, the shadow first secretary of 
state and business secretary, stood in for Jeremy Corbyn. A scattergun of 
subjects, but the top line was probably Osborne’s announcement ofa £50m fund 
for flood victims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/live/2015/dec/09/storm-desmond-recovery-threatened-by-more-rain-live-updates#block-56681aade4b0e038e83e50c0>
.

Snap verdict

Old PMQs isn’t so bad after all, is it? Certainly not on the basis of this 
exchange. That was a bit more like PMQs used to be, beforeCorbyn smothered it 
in seriousness 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/16/pmqs-verdict-corbyns-presented-as-an-extremist-but-he-came-across-as-moderate>
, and although it was not particularly enlightening, it was at least jolly. 
Neither deputy really won, but Eagle was impressive because she managed to 
needle Osborne quite well while also quotingTony Blair 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> in a manner that won the 
approval of Labour MPs (a feat no one else has managed from the Labour 
frontbench for almost 10 years, it seems) and, at the same time, affectionately 
mocking Corbyn’s PMQ strategy.

Best lines

Eagle’s performance certainly seemed to please Labour MPs. She was genuinely 
funny, sharp and unifying. She was not critical of Corbyn, but adopted a tone 
that was distinctively different and asked a question thatin effect mocked his 
crowdsourcing PMQs strategy 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/16/corbyn-in-search-of-more-consensual-politics-at-question-time>
. She also had the ideal response to Osborne’s inevitable jibe about Tony 
Blair’s Spectator article. She quoted Blair saying:


Just mouth the words ‘five more Tory years’ and you feel your senses and 
reason repulsed by what they had done to this country

It is from a speech Blair gave in 1996. The only possible drawback with 
Eagle’s performance was that it was too funny; her jokes slightly blunted her 
political edge.

That was not the case with Osborne. In his exchanges with Eagle, and in PMQs 
generally, he seemed slightly too eager to apply the political cosh. This was 
most apparent when he was asked a question by an SNP MP about how the 
government intended to honour its promise to ensure thatmothers do not lose 
child tax credits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jul/09/government-third-child-tax-credits-proposal-budget-rape>
 if their third child is born as a result of a rape.

Osborne’s reply, which involved a default response about welfare reform, was 
emotionally tone deaf. Overall, though, he was perfectly competent. But it 
served as a reminder that doingPMQs <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/pmqs> 
is actually much harder than it looks and David Cameron, who has now had 10 
years’ practice, is a hard act to follow.

For more on PMQs, read our politics live blog with Andrew Sparrow 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2015/dec/09/blair-says-labours-tragedy-is-that-corbyn-has-turned-it-into-fringe-protest-movement-politics-live>
.
