
You get more mums than dads in picture books. Perhaps that’s understandable. 
Mums still loom largest in the lives of many picture-book-aged children. But 
perhaps it reflects our world, in which absent fathers are ever more common. 
One way or another, it would be good to have more fathers present in the lives 
of children, and it would be good to have more fathers in picture books.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4km98%2Fsfb%23img-1&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4km98%2Fsfb%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37c937410ccb221db1d7a1d4be16062ab50aba25%2F0_280_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20dads%20in%20picture%20books&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4km98%2Fstw%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top+10+dads+in+picture+books&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4km98%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37c937410ccb221db1d7a1d4be16062ab50aba25%2F0_280_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Sean Taylor with his son Rafa. 
And there’s something else. The dads who do appear in stories for young 
children can be pretty narrow characters. There’s the above-it-all dad, reading 
the newspaper. There’s the not-very-smart dad, who’s just a joke. There’s the 
fix-it, dad with his toolbox. There’s the about-to-be-absent dad, off to work. 
Even the all-loving, Guess-How-Much-I-Love-You kind of dad can feel 
one-dimensional.

So for my top 10, I’ve chosen books featuring fathers who are both at the 
centre of the story and morealive than the caricatures. The books are ordered 
roughly by age of reader: younger first, older last. I hope there’s something 
new for you to find and enjoy.


1. Some Dogs <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/some-dogs-do-2.html> Do by Jez 
Alborough

Related: How to Draw... Chicks by Jez Alborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/gallery/2012/apr/06/how-to-draw-chicks>

A special story told (as Jez Alborough brilliantly does) in few words and with 
rhymes that read just right. A young dog called Sid is so filled with happiness 
that he flies! But he can’t convince anyone that this has happened. He’s 
laughed at. “…dogs don’t fly – it can’t be done,” says his teacher. “Dogs don’t 
fly!” repeat his friends. This leaves Sid alone and sad. But his father comes 
by. He asks what’s wrong, and it saves the day. Sid’s dad believes in him. He 
understands Sid’s free spirit because he shares it. And these two things 
(literally) lift Sid up again. It’s a wonderful image of the magic a father-son 
bond can do.

2. The Father Who Had 10 Children by Bénédicte Guettier 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/an-away-day.html>

Related: Who are the greatest dads in fiction? – Join in the discussion! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/jun/19/who-are-the-greatest-dads-fiction-join-discussion>

A quirky tale, first published in France. The father in question does 
everything for his 10 children. He takes them to school. He cooks their meals. 
He tells them stories. He kisses them good night. Then, wanting a break, he 
builds “a secret boat”. He says he’ll leave the children with their grandma, 
and sail away for a long holiday. But he can’t live without his kids. He’s back 
soon. The ten children join him in the boat. It’s an engaging depiction of what 
it is to have (or be) a loving parent. The absurd realism draws you in like a 
nursery rhyme. Just right for younger picture book readers.

3. Pete’s a Pizza 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/310109/> by William 
Steig

Related: Top 10 embarrassing parents in books 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/mar/24/top-10-embarrassing-parents-in-books>

It’s raining. Pete can’t go out to “play ball with the guys”. So he’s in a bad 
mood. His father thinks it might cheer Pete up to be made into a pizza. He’s 
right, of course! Dad kneads him and twirls him up in the air. He sprinkles on 
cheese (actually torn up bits of paper) and puts him in the oven (actually the 
sofa). This is a celebration of the parents’ trick of distracting a grumpy 
child with a bit of zany humour. (Best trick in the book, as far as I’m 
concerned.) And what a wonderfully loving, inventive, energetic dad William 
Steig has created! Pete laughs “like crazy”. And the sun comes out at the end.

4. Oscar’s Half Birthday by Bob Graham

Related: Nigel Smith's top ten embarassing dads 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/jun/15/top-ten-embarrassing-dads-nigel-smith>

One of many memorable picture books from a master of creating dads, mums, 
children and all human beings. (Also fairies, in fact.) A family go walking to 
a green hill in the city to celebrate baby Oscar’s “six-month birthday”. Bob 
Graham paints the world as a jumble of different lives, made beautiful by the 
warmth that can come between them. And in this story, there’s particular 
attention to moments of grace that children and parents can conjure up, if they 
want. I love the dirty-old-town setting, with its colourful graffiti. And I 
like the spiky-haired dad. He makes the sandwiches. He gets on with the stuff 
of the family day. He does it with love. And he’s involved one of my favourite 
of all picture book endings. When the kids are asleep, he pushes back the 
furniture and dances with Mum…

5. At the Crossroads by Rachel Isadora

A brilliant book (who would dare publish this today?) by the author of the 
equally brilliant Ben’s Trumpet. In a South African township, some children 
expect their migrant-labourer fathers to arrive home after 10 months away. They 
wait, in celebratory mood at first, but with increasing tiredness and 
uncertainty as the day and the night go by. They tell stories to stay awake. 
But the youngest falls asleep. A truck pulls up. It’s nottheir dads. Then the 
day dawns. And, with it, the fathers arrive. There’s hardly any 
characterisation of the dads. They come to life through the children’s 
excitement and persistence. So does the deep emotion of an absent father 
returning. My boys have often chosen this book at bedtime. And they know it 
well enough to look up curiously when the dads arrive - to check if there are 
tears of happiness in my eyes. There usually are.

6. We’re Off to Look For Aliens 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/we-re-off-to-look-for-aliens.html> by Colin 
McNaughton

Related: How to draw… an alien invasion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/gallery/2014/dec/14/how-to-draw-an-alien-invasion-comics>

Colin McNaughton was once a prolific picture book maker. His jaunty, colourful 
touch is much missed. I always feel that there are traditional strands in it - 
from pantomime, or music hall even. And you don’t get those in some cooler, 
sharper contemporary picture books.We’re Off to Look For Aliens 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/we-re-off-to-look-for-aliens.html> is a 
lovely yarn. The dad is McNaughton, himself. The story starts with his newly 
published book being delivered. He shows it to his family. And here, this 
second book is pasted into the first. The book-inside-the-book is a catchy 
verse tale about a space journey McNaughton once made. After a string of 
mishaps, he fell in love with “a lovely alien girl” and she travelled back with 
him. It’s another original dad: irrepressibly playful, eccentric and warm. And 
there’s a surprise. The final spread reveals McNaughton’s wife and kids have 
big, overhead eyeballs and extra arms...so the whole story is true!

7. Don’t Let Go by Jeanne Willis, illustrated by Tony Ross

Related: Where are all the car-free books? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/may/07/book-doctor-car-free-books> 

A story about a father-daughter relationship told in rhythm and rhyme. Megan 
wants to visit her dad. But her mother is too busy to take her. Megan suggests 
learning to ride her bike so she can make the journey alone. Dad teaches her. 
He’s patient and encouraging. “I won’t let go,/Not until you say.” So Megan 
overcomes her fears. She calls out, “Okay, you can let go now!” Then she’s off 
into the delight of a first bike ride (illustrated by Tony Ross, with a magical 
touch, as a journey past a tiger, into jungle.) Meanwhile Dad is left behind, 
knowing he’s let go of his daughter in more ways than one. Set in the big, wide 
world of a windswept park. Lovely writing, as always, from Jeanne Willis. And 
another human-hearted dad, alive on the page.

8. Ted by Tony Di Terlizzi

This one is for older picture book readers. The narrator is a six- or 
seven-year-old boy who lives with his rather serious father. Ted is a large, 
pink imaginary friend who shows up one day, talking about birthdays and 
raspberries. Antics follow, which get the narrator into deeper and deeper 
trouble with his father. They invent a barmy game called monopoly twister. Ted 
gives the boy a bad haircut. They paint the walls. Then they flood the house. 
Dad can’t take it. “NO MORE TED! EVER!” he says. But there’s a good twist. Ted 
tells the boy not to worry. He says he was once his father’s imaginary friend. 
They used to play space pirates. He even remembers where Dad’s atomic blaster 
toy is buried. When Dad sees his old toy, memories wake up in him. The story 
turns around. And the three of them end up playing “space pirates monopoly 
twister”.

9. The Christmas Miracle of Jonathan Toomey 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/christmas-miracle-of-jonathan-toomey.html> by 
Susan Wojciechowski, illustrated by PJ Lynch

Related: How to draw… with charcoal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/gallery/2016/jan/02/how-to-draw-with-charcoal-pj-lynch>

A longer story, more for 5-8 year-olds. It is illustrated with great skill and 
feeling, by PJ Lynch. (And it’s another one that brings tears to my eyes most 
times I read it!) Jonathan Toomey is a wood-carver who has moved to a village, 
far from where his wife and baby died. So this is not a typical picture book 
dad. He is solitary and grieving. The widow McDowell and her son, Thomas, are 
newcomers to the village. In their move, they have lost a precious nativity 
set. So they ask Jonathan Toomey if he will carve them a new one. The carpenter 
reluctantly agrees. His heart warms to both Thomas and Thomas’s mother. He 
carves a beautiful replacement nativity set. In the making, he faces his 
terrible loss. And the final, beautiful, image is of the three of them walking 
side by side on Christmas day with laughter in their eyes.

10. My Dad’s a Birdman 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/276562/> by David 
Almond, illustrated by Polly Dunbar

Related: David Almond wins Guardian children's fiction prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/nov/19/david-almond-wins-guardian-childrens-fiction-prize>

Lizzie’s mum has died and her father can’t cope. In fact, he’s decided he’s a 
bird. He thinks that if he can make a good pair of wings, he’ll fly across the 
River Tyne and win the Great Human Bird Competition. David Almond’s eye for 
what’s precious in the human drama we live in makes this a deeply enjoyable 
story. It’s junior fiction rather than a picture book. But it does have 
wonderful artwork by one of the best picture book illustrators at work these 
days: Polly Dunbar. So I’ll end my list with this. Lizzie’s father is just the 
sort of rounded, engaging dad I’m pointing to. He’s wounded and inarticulate. 
But he brims with things that can make a good father: love, humour, enthusiasm, 
energy. And the story has a positive outcome, as he and Lizzie try the 
impossible.
 Photograph: PR 
 Sean Taylor is the author of many books for children of many different ages. 
He is also the father of two young boys. His new picture book,A Brave Bear  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/387482/>(illustrated 
by Emily Hughes, published by Walker Books) is a story of a father and a son on 
a hot day.

