
Tony Blair and Sir John Major have said that if Britain left the EU, border 
control would be introduced betweenNorthern Ireland 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> and the Republic and the union 
with Scotland would be threatened.

In a symbolic joint appearance in Derry, the former prime ministers, both of 
whom played key roles in the NorthernIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> peace process, stressed the risks 
of voting to leave the EU in the 23 June referendum.
Referendum explained: Major and Blair verdict 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/05/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=blair_major>
Speaking to an audience at Ulster University, Major said Brexit would probably 
lead to a new vote on Scottish independence, while Blair said it would result 
in the border between Northern Ireland and the Republic becoming the frontier 
between the UK and the rest of the EU. Major said Brexit would probably lead to 
a new vote on Scottish independence.

That would make Vote Leave’s pledge to restrict EU immigration impossible to 
achieve without ditching the common travel area that currently allows the 
public to move freely between the two countries, he said. “What you would 
actually have to do is end up with having border controls and customs checks.”

In other developements in the EU referendum 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> campaign:

 * The influential Conservative MP Sarah Wollaston switched sides, saying she 
would vote for Britain to remain in the EU because 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/09/dr-sarah-wollaston-defects-vote-leave-remain-campaign>
 some Vote Leave campaigners had admitted in private that their claim about EU 
membership costing £350m a week was untrue. She accused them of practising 
“post-truth politics”. 
 * Arron Banks, the funder of the unofficial exit campaign Leave.EU, said he 
wasconsidering a challenge 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/09/arron-banks-leaveeu-may-challenge-extension-of-voter-registration-deadline>
 to the government’s decision to extend the deadline for registering to vote in 
the EU referendum by 48 hours. 
 * The head of the CBI said young people would be hit hardest by a British exit
 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/09/cbi-projects-1m-fewer-jobs-post-brexit-with-young-worst-hit>
. 
 * The National Institute of Economic and Social Research said low-income 
households were likely to bear a disproportionate share of the costs of Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/09/poorer-uk-families-shoulder-heavier-burden-brexit-costs-niesr>
 if the UK voted to leave.  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kztn%2Fsfb%23img-1&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kztn%2Fsfb%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd54f37da56ebb6bd7581c15bf3cb3a736874dcee%2F0_30_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tony%20Blair%20and%20John%20Major%3A%20Brexit%20would%20close%20Irish%20border&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kztn%2Fstw%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tony+Blair+and+John+Major%3A+Brexit+would+close+Irish+border&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kztn%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd54f37da56ebb6bd7581c15bf3cb3a736874dcee%2F0_30_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Major and Blair share a platform at the remain campaign event at Ulster 
University in Derry. Photograph: Reuters 
Major, who was Blair’s predecessor in No 10, said on Thursday that leaving the 
EU would put the Republic of Ireland on “the opposite side of the table”, as 
the UK sought to negotiate an exit with the 27 other member states.

He also said pressure for a fresh referendum on Scottish independence could 
become “politically irresistible” if people inScotland 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> voted to remain in the EU but the UK 
as a whole pulled out. For that reason, he said, Brexit could undermine the 
entire constitutional settlement of the UK.

Related: Brexit threat causes alarm among Northern Irish border communities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/08/brexit-threat-northern-ireland-border-communities>

“The plain, uncomfortable truth is that the unity of the UK itself is on the 
ballot paper in two weeks’ time,” he said. “There is a serious risk of a new 
referendum, not immediately perhaps, but eventually.”

The two men, who referred to to each other as John and Tony, also underlined 
the importance of EU membership for employment and business.

Major said: “Just like prime ministers before us and after us, Tony and I 
fought hard to persuade our fellow EU leaders to continue to build the single 
market. We did so because it’s of great benefit to Britain.”

‘Against the grain of the future’

Major fought a bitter battle against backbench Tory rebels over Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> during his premiership, and has 
made a series of spiky interventions in the referendum, including branding one 
of the leading Vote Leave campaigners, Boris Johnson, a “court jester”.

Blair said that for Britain to split from its neighbours would be to “go 
against the grain of the future”, which was about countries coming together.

The Northern Ireland secretary, Theresa Villiers, who is campaigning for 
Britain to leave the EU, said she did not accept that Brexit would end the 
open-border arrangement. In a statement issued by Vote Leave, she said: “The 
common travel area between the UK and Ireland has existed for nearly 100 years, 
since the creation of the Irish state in the 1920s. It will continue if we vote 
to leave.

“There would be risks to manage but they are not significantly more serious 
than risks that are already managed effectively today through bilateral 
cooperation between the UK and Ireland.”
