
Is your business thriving? Does it have great potential? Then perhaps it could 
be time to grow it quickly or, in other words, scale up. With608,110 businesses 
<http://startupbritain.org/2015-a-record-year-for-startup-formation/> starting 
up in 2015, it’s clear there’s an appetite for entrepreneurialism in the UK.

However, while more businesses start, fewer are surviving and growing. The 
latestbusiness demography 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/businessindustryandtrade/business/activitysizeandlocation/bulletins/businessdemography/2014>
 statistics from the Office of National Statistics found the number of UK 
business deaths increased by 3.5% between 2013 and 2014, compared with a 
decrease of 5.9% in 2013.

There are calls to increase support for businesses to scale up. The Scale-up 
Report <http://www.scaleupreport.org/> and The Scale-up Challenge 
<http://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/uk/Documents/strategy/deloitte-uk-scale-up-challenge.pdf>
 (pdf), two reports published in 2014, defined a scale up as an enterprise with 
a 20% average annual growth in employees or turnover over three years.

Listed in the reports were the following issues companies face when scaling 
up: finding employees with the right skills; building a strong leadership; 
accessing customers in the UK and abroad; accessing the right combination of 
finance, and navigating infrastructure.

During this live Q&A, a panel of experts will discuss how to overcome these 
issues. They’ll offer a range of expertise including advice on the different 
sources of finance, such as angel and equity investment and crowdfunding, and 
how to build a skilled team. Put your queries to them on Wednesday 27 April 
from 1-2pm BST. Taking part is simple: justregister to comment 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/register?skipConfirmation=true&INTCMP=HEADER_GU_REG&returnUrl=https%3A%2F%2Fmembership.theguardian.com%2Fjoin%2Ffriend%2Fenter-details>
. Once you’ve signed up, you can post your questions in the comments thread 
below this article.

Alternatively, tweet @GdnSmallBiz <https://twitter.com/GdnSmallBiz> with your 
questions, or email them tosmallbusinessnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:smallbusinessnetwork@theguardian.com> and we will put them to the panel 
for you. Comments are currently open and we welcome questions in advance.

Our panel

Adam Goodall is an entrepreneur and mentor to small businesses at startup 
acceleratorLaunch22 <http://www.launch22.co.uk/>. He co-founded an accounting 
software business, which was bought out. He is now working on his second 
venture and advises several startups

Richard Wilkinson is co-founder of Doisy & Dam <http://doisyanddam.com/> 
chocolate. Wilkinson and his business partner Ed Smith began by canvassing 
shoppers at local food markets to identify popular flavours. They’ve now 
launched ten varieties of chocolate and raised £300,000 through crowdfunding. 
Their products are stocked in stores across the UK including Selfridges and 
Ocado.

Haydn Thomas is the head of business development for NatWest 
<http://www.business.natwest.com/business.html> in the small business market. 
He has over 20 years of banking experience spent mainly in the SME market and 
is responsible for leading the bank’s strategy to support the growth ambitions 
of small businesses across the country.

Andrew Reeve is the founder and CEO of online craft beer retailer HonestBrew 
<http://honestbrew.co.uk/>. He has scaled HonestBrew from a home-based startup 
to a company shipping beer to thousands of customers.

Debra Charles is founder and CEO of smartcard technology company Novacroft 
<http://www.novacroft.com/>. The business has recently grown, moving to a new 
office in order to take on more staff and growing their client base across 
charities, corporates and transport operators.

George Burgess is the founder and CEO of Gojimo <http://www.gojimo.com/>, a 
revision app that he set up aged 17.

Rachel Carrell is the CEO of Koru Kids <http://www.korukids.co.uk/>, a startup 
in the childcare industry. She was previously CEO of DrThom, a digital health 
company, which she grew from 200,000 to 1.3 million paying patients in the UK, 
Ireland and Australia.


Dana Zingher is the co-founder of Enclothed <http://www.enclothed.co.uk/> an 
online clothing service for men. She is also a former contestant on Dragons’ 
Den.

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.

