
France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> was wrong to imprison a 
Ghanian woman who was arrested at the Channel tunnel during an attempt to enter 
Britain illegally using a false passport, the EU’s most senior court has ruled.

The European court of justice said on Tuesday that the EU directive on 
returning irregular migrants prevents any member state imposing a prison 
sentence on a non-EU migrant who is in the country illegally, and whom they 
have not attempted to return.

Related: EU referendum live: Cameron accuses Leave of telling six 'complete 
untruths' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/07/eu-referendum-live-farage-cameron-itv-debate-foreign-criminals>

Selina Affum had false travel documents when she was stopped by French police 
on a coach travelling to London from Ghent, in Belgium, in 2013.

“After presenting a Belgian passport with the name and photograph of another 
person, and lacking any other identity or travel document in her name she was 
initially placed in police custody on the grounds of illegal entry to French 
territory. The French authorities then requested Belgium to readmit her to its 
territory,” said the ruling, adding that Affum was challenging her detention.

An earlier opinion by the court’s advocate general in February was described 
by anti-EU campaigners as a blow toDavid Cameron’s attempts to crack down on 
migrants and refugees 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/04/benefits-limit-sideshow-europe-alan-johnson-labour>
 trying to “sneak into the UK”. They claimed that the European judge’s view 
that Affum should not have been imprisoned, but instead released, would have 
given her the chance to vanish.

The home secretary, Theresa May, is under pressure to increase resources, 
including from the Royal Navy, to stem the flow of refugees and migrants 
illegally crossing the Channel into Britain.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktkd%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktkd%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7804aa40cb6803bc05bb7acd7fe200449f1200b3%2F0_95_2796_1678%2F2796.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Imprisoning%20woman%20trying%20to%20illegally%20enter%20UK%20was%20wrong%2C%20EU%20rules&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktkd%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Imprisoning+woman+trying+to+illegally+enter+UK+was+wrong%2C+EU+rules&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktkd%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7804aa40cb6803bc05bb7acd7fe200449f1200b3%2F0_95_2796_1678%2F2796.jpg>
 Theresa May delivering a speech on the EU in April. Photograph: Will Oliver/EPA
The European court ruling on Tuesday says that the EU directive for sending 
back “illegally staying third country nationals” lays down common standards and 
procedures that apply to all EU member states who want to remove illegally 
staying migrants from their territory.

The judges said that the directive provides that the migrant must be given a 
chance to go home voluntarily before the use of forced removal measures if they 
are necessary.

“If voluntary departure does not take place, the directive requires the member 
states to carry out forced removal using the least coercive measures possible. 
It is only if there is a risk of the removal being compromised that the member 
state may keep the person concerned in detention, the duration of which may not 
in any case exceed 18 months,” ruled the court in Luxembourg.

They said that illegal entrants could be imprisoned if they have previously 
been told they must leave and either refuse to go or try to re-enter the 
country after already having been deported. They can also be detained if they 
commit some other crime.

The ruling says the fact that Affum was merely in transit between Belgium and 
Britain when she was arrested in France does not mean the terms of the EU 
directive did not apply in this case.
