
One of the big problems facing businesses is the struggle to be heard in a 
crowded marketplace. There’s a medium out there that excels at this, and it’s 
called podcasting. Let’s see if it would work for you:


What is it?

Podcasting <http://www.theguardian.com/media/podcasting> is just one aspect of 
content marketing, which includes blogs, social media and video. The power of 
podcasting is that it has the ability to generate huge amounts of trust and 
attention in a very short space of time.


Podcasting has all of the advantages of talk radio, adding to it the drivers 
of on-demand listening and subscription. Because the vast majority of podcasts 
are audio only you can listen in your otherwise wasted time: driving, ironing, 
mowing the lawn, cooking dinner.


Video struggles to retain viewers beyond five minutes, and blog readers skim 
articles as quickly as possible. Many of the most popular podcasts on the web, 
however, run for an hour or more. In this time listeners are getting to know 
you, like you, and, importantly, trust you. This is the power of podcasting: 
nurturing that tribe of trusting, loyal fans.


How do you get started?

Many people get lost in a maze of shiny microphones and technology platforms, 
but the key in the early days is to make it simple. After all, the best way to 
grow an audience is with engaging content, delivered on a regular basis.


Regularity is easy as long as recording is easy, so keep your equipment as 
simple as possible. If you record regularly, concentrating on style, you’ll get 
good fast. You don’t need much. Find yourself a goodUSB desk microphone 
<http://www.thepodcasthost.com/blog/the-best-podcasting-microphones-on-the-market/>
 or a qualityheadset microphone 
<http://www.thepodcasthost.com/blog/headset-microphones-for-podcasting/> and 
download either GarageBand or Audacity for recording and editing.

What should you talk about?

If you already sell a product or service there are people out there that are 
interested in your topic. For example, if you are a personal trainer you could 
offer nutrition and training tips each week, or if you are a vet could you 
speak about pet care. Others topics may require more of a sideways jump, such 
as the luggage company that talks about travel, or the car insurance company 
that covers motorsports.

The key is to know your ideal customer and to offer content that appeals 
directly to him and her. It shouldn’t revolve around your products, but around 
their questions and desires. Once you have this information to hand, episode 
ideas will flow.


If you’re struggling for inspiration, it’s time to start speaking to 
customers. Grab the next 10 that walk into your shop, ask them what problems 
they’re experiencing and how you might be able to help. If you’re online, send 
out a survey to your email list, or canvas your social following. Ask a few 
honest questions and you’ll get some useful answers.


Presenting content

First sketch out your episode in bullet points, then hit record and start 
following through in your normal speaking style. Don’t be tempted to put on a 
“radio” voice. Instead speak naturally and informally, as if to a friend a few 
feet away.


If you’re struggling to stay relaxed, some people find it useful to speak to a 
mirror, or to place a soft toy in your eyeline as a target for your ramblings. 
It might feel strange at first, but it works.


Promoting your podcast

The last step is publishing: releasing your message into the wild. The 
platform doesn’t really matter. You can create a WordPress podcasting website 
with the PowerPress plugin, or outsource the whole system to an expert like 
BluBrry. The key component is iTunes, however, being the biggest podcasting 
directory by far. Submission is carried out through aniTunes form 
<http://www.apple.com/uk/itunes/podcasts/specs.html> and is entirely free. 

Who to learn from

One of the best ways to hone your craft is to learn from the best. Here are 
some great business shows to start with:


 * The StartUp podcast <https://gimletmedia.com/show/startup/> 

 * The Content Marketing Academy Podcast 
<http://www.learning-everyday.co.uk/podcast/> 

 * Excellence Expected <http://www.excellence-expected.com/>

 * Digital Marketing Radio <http://www.digitalmarketingradio.com/> 

Colin Gray is the founder of The Podcast Host <http://www.thepodcasthost.com/>
. You can listen to his podcast PodCraft, about the art of podcasting,here 
<http://www.thepodcasthost.com/podcraft/>


Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
