
We’ve just passed a minor anniversary of sorts: the 36th year since Margaret 
Thatcher wrote in the Daily Telegraph of 22 May 1980: “There’s no easy 
popularity in what we are proposing, but it is fundamentally sound. Yet I 
believe people accept there is no real alternative.” She went on to repeat a 
version of this several times and so the acronym “Tina” was born.

For a ruler to say “There is no alternative”, he or she has to be more bold 
than cunning. I’ve started to think that the godfather of the secretary of 
state for education isNiccolò Machiavelli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2012/mar/26/machiavelli-prince-power-good-evil>
, the scientist of absolute rule. I think he would have seen repeating “There 
is no alternative” as a bad way to try to secure absolute rule. But he might 
have been inspired by what seems to be going on in English education today, 
when even if some of us can see that there are other ways of going on, your 
department has created structures that ensure these other ways can’t be put in 
place.

Consider this: imagine a school that is part of an academy chain – a system of 
school governance that you, Ms Morgan, have decided is at the very least 
desirable – and if you had been able to get away with it, would have been 
obligatory. The sponsor of this chain – let’s call him Lord Grind – has no 
background in education apart from his schooling at a private school. Whenever 
he feels like it, Lord Grind walks into one of “his” schools and demands that 
the teachers perform their duties according to his wishes, such as: “All 
classes will use the textbooks edited by [insert name of Lord Grind’s friend].”

Related: The Tories’ absurd school regime can’t even set a spelling test | 
Simon Jenkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/22/george-osborne-school-regime-spelling-test-local-authorities-exam>

After several years the teachers note that Lord Grind’s friend’s textbooks are 
not improving scores on the approved charts, so they quietly remove the books. 
But now a new problem arises: most of the older teachers have been weeded out 
according to a Tina rule: “If they’re old, they cost too much, so get 
management to observe some lessons, fail them and fire them.” The young and 
less experienced teachers know that the textbooks don’t do the job but they 
don’t know of an alternative: Tina plus Machiavelli is working.

Even more impressive is the exam effect. In a stroke of brilliance, just as 
you pretend you are handing schools “autonomy” through forced conversion to the 
national-curriculum-free academy status, the high-stakes, national exams become 
an enforced national curriculum all of their own. At key points, a child finds 
that education narrows down to hundreds of yes/no, right/wrong answers. Life 
suddenly becomes defined by the binary.

Far be it from me to maintain that there are no binaries in the universe. 
Either the sun goes round the Earth or the Earth goes round the sun. It can’t 
be both and it can’t be something in between. Yet, in some spheres of our 
existence, it is indeed possible for the “both”, the “between” and even the 
“other” to be legitimate views.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k8zh%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k8zh%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a994ce86f787385a10064440deeb09fc9a528f4%2F540_433_1514_908%2F1514.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Machiavelli%20appears%20to%20be%20inspiring%20education%20policy&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k8zh%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Machiavelli+appears+to+be+inspiring+education+policy&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k8zh%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a994ce86f787385a10064440deeb09fc9a528f4%2F540_433_1514_908%2F1514.jpg>
 Nick Gibb, the schools minister, was caught out on a question of grammar. 
Photograph: Alastair Johnstone/SWNS.com for the Guardian 
Consider, for example, the embarrassment of your colleague, Nick Gibb, when 
Martha Kearney on Radio 4’sThe World at One 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/media/2016/05/listen-schools-minister-nick-gibb-gets-sats-question-11-year-olds-wrong>
 appeared to skewer him on the crucial matter of whether a word in a typical 
exam-concocted sentence was or was not a subordinate conjunction. Poor Nick 
floundered in the very field where thousands of children flounder, too, and 
started talking about prepositions. Martha pronounced him wrong.

The truth is that the experts in the field are themselves divided on this 
very point. It wasn’t that Nick was wrong; what was wrong was the test that 
dictates such a word is one thing and not the other. It just so happens that 
it’s a test that Nick himself is very fond of, one that engenders a view of 
language for which there can be no alternative. Every child and every teacher 
has to be led to think there is no alternative to treating language as if it’s 
an unchanging, unvarying system unavailable for investigation, interpretation 
or invention.

A branch of modern Machiavellianism that feeds “Tina” is the principle by 
which the ruler creates an effect he desires indirectly: through minions 
performing acts that look like their own choices. The ruler desired open-ended 
creative learning in secondary schools to be sidelined. The ruler created 
Ebacc, a system to judge schools by the numbers of students succeeding in five 
favoured traditional subjects.Schools 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> marginalise and diminish the 
arts subjects in order to fit the Ebacc. The ruler says: “I didn’t do that, you 
did.” It’s self-inflicted Tina: Machiavelli would be impressed.

Yours, Michael Rosen
