
My uncle Malcolm Smith (Mickey, to almost everyone), who has died aged 87, was 
once described as "the best-dressed postman in Scotland". Small, neat, 
handsome, witty, charming and seemingly at home anywhere, he had the rare knack 
of engaging and involving friends and acquaintances throughout his long life.

A perfectionist without obvious ambition, he left his own very specific mark. 
Mickey was born in Irvine, Ayrshire, the son of a shipwright and first world 
war veteran. He played football at inside-half for Scotland juniors at Hampden 
Park. As the second world war approached, he joined the Territorial Army, 
enlisting with the Royal Artillery.

Luck was already on his side. Of two troop carriers that sailed simultaneously 
from the Clyde in 1940, one stopped at Cape Town before proceeding to Singapore 
and was lost at sea. The other, Mickey's boat, berthed at Durban before sailing 
to Bombay.

Mickey's Burma campaign was long, dangerous and eventful. His roles included 
positioning artillery guns with pinpoint precision to bombard enemy lines. The 
training gave him the surveying skills he used, along with his innate charm, to 
survive for the rest of his life.

Back home and delivering letters, he soon joined Ordnance Survey, spending the 
next decade tramping around Scotland, the Lake District and the Yorkshire Dales 
as part of the metric resurvey of Britain.

It was a wonderfully carefree existence. At Thurso, the dead-flat bog country 
in the far north of Scotland, a key preliminary to the resurvey was to plot 
1,000 metres to within one millimetre. As Mickey put it to Lois Sutcliffe, whom 
he met when working in Wharfedale in 1952: "There's more landladies' sandwiches 
in the Thurso bog than anywhere else in the country."

Lois and Mickey married in 1956 and moved to north London, where Mickey took a 
surveyor's job at Wood Green town hall. Work then led them to Essex, to 
Cornwall and finally back to Yorkshire.

Struggles with alcohol, which he eventually conquered, never impaired Mickey's 
abilities or his quirky humour. He once told me that "a rolling sausage gathers 
no gravy". He was a rolling soul, but his memory lives on, not least with his 
former wife Lois, his son Stephen and his grandson Oliver.

â€¢ This article was amended on Friday 1 May. This Other lives obituary was 
originally bylined Robin Waterhouse. This has been corrected.

