
Its sun-dappled tropical setting is one of the factors behind its staggering 
success. But BBC1’s hit drama, Death in Paradise, will – for two episodes at 
least – leave behind its fictional Caribbean home in its new series in exchange 
for the distinctly colder climes of London.

It will be a return home for maladroit detective Humphrey Goodman, played by 
Kris Marshall, a fish out of water on the fictional paradise island of Saint 
Marie.

Death in Paradise is one of the BBC’s most popular dramas, watched last year 
by a consolidated audience of 8 million viewers. It initially starred Ben 
Miller as detective Richard Poole, who was replaced by Marshall’s Goodman at 
the beginning of series three.

Related: What is the secret to Death in Paradise's success? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/feb/19/the-secret-to-death-in-paradises-success-is-simplicity-and-sunshine>

Its charms may be lost on some critics – “How on earth does this get so many 
viewers?” the Guardian once asked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/feb/11/death-in-paradise-how-viewers>
– but it is one of a select band of hit returnable dramas that manage to hang 
onto their audience.

Two episodes of the new series – the sixth – will be filmed in London, part of 
a two-part special featuring the show’s most-complex murder yet.

The new series will feature a host of guest stars including Natasha Little, 
Ardal O’Hanlon, Douglas Hodge, Monica Dolan and Fiona Allen. Not Going Out star 
Sally Bretton will also return to the show as Martha Lloyd, a series regular.

Executive producer Tim Key said: “We are very excited to be bringing Death In 
Paradise to London for the very first time.

“Humphrey has always been a fish out of water in Saint Marie, adjusting to the 
island’s ways and customs, but for the scenes set in London, the roles are 
reversed as he is back in his hometown, giving an opportunity to explore the 
characters that viewers know and love against a new backdrop.”

BBC <http://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> commissioning editor and executive 
producer, Elizabeth Kilgarriff, said: “Death In Paradise provides the perfect 
combination of drama, comedy and sun to warm viewers over the cold winter 
months.”

The series is made by Tony Jordan’s Red Planet Pictures.
