
It is one of the more intriguing possibilities to have emerged from the BBC’s 
£800m cost-cutting drive 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/08/bbc-increases-saving-target-to-800m-a-year-to-pay-for-drama-and-sport>
 – a tie-up between BBC local radio and its national news and sport station, 5 
Live.

If they were sporting competitors, neither is at its fighting weight – both 
have lost large numbers of listeners in recent years – and further shared 
content (they already partner overnight) would save millions of pounds a year.

But such a move would also be fraught with problems – 5 Live’s audience tends 
to be younger and male, local radio older and more female.

And the prospect of 5 Live being given a valuable FM berth – it currently 
broadcasts on AM and digital – would have the corporation’s commercial rivals 
marching on Broadcasting House.

And yet the BBC’s 39-strong network of local radio stations in England is in 
urgent need of fresh thinking.

Its weekly reach – the proportion of listeners who tune in at least once a 
week – has fallen by a quarter over the last decade, from 19.5% in 2005/06 to 
14.8% in the last three months of 2015. There is a similar pattern among its 
target audience of over-50s, where reach was down to 23.9% in 2014/15.
Reach of BBC local radio, 2005-14 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/mar/2016-03-17T15:59:00.html>  
Reach of BBC local radio, 2005-14. Source: Rajar 
Local radio was saved from more brutal cuts in the last big round of 
cost-cutting 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/jan/24/bbc-local-radio-cuts-lord-patten> 
– Mark Thompson’s Delivering Quality First – after the intervention of the BBC 
Trust.

But it has failed to stem the decline in audience and its cost per listener 
hour, at 3.8p, is more than 5 Live (2.5p) and nearly eight timesRadio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> 2 (0.5p).

The BBC Trust, in its review of local radio a fortnight ago 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/09/bbc-local-radio-stations-need-to-work-harder-to-stay-relevant-says-trust>
, said it was valued by listeners as “very high quality” and was “not just 
distinctive, but unique in many respects”. But it must punch its weight in the 
current environment even though, as the trust suggested, it has already cut its 
costs to the bone.

Liz Kershaw, the BBC Radio 6 Music DJ who has been the breakfast presenter on 
fourBBC <http://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> local radio stations since her 
first show on Radio Leeds in 1984, has a radical solution.

“They need to totally shake it up, redraw the map and put the programme makers 
back in charge,” she says.

“They have to scrap this idea of targeting the over-50s, local radio should be 
for everybody. Stop being patronising and assuming the audience is downtrodden 
and housebound and reflect what is going on in the local community.

“I don’t see the point of the BBC providing the equivalent of Alan Partridge’s 
Mid Morning Matters on 40 stations,” she adds.

“If they have to put 5 Live on from 10am until 4pm or whatever, that would be 
a shame but if it means protecting the real go-to information points of the day 
[breakfast and drivetime] then concentrate your resources on the areas where 
people want it.”

John Myers, the commercial radio executive and consultant who said in a 
BBC-commissioned report four years ago that local radio couldsave £2m a year by 
cutting senior management in half 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/feb/27/bbc-told-cut-senior-radio-managers>
, says the network has to undergo the sort of makeover Radio 2 had 15 years ago.

“Local radio is hugely important but the way it has to be delivered to retain 
and build audiences is very different to 10 years ago – over-50s now have more 
choice than ever before,” says Myers.

They recognise the need for change, he adds, but “it is taking so long I fear 
the cuts will come before they have a chance to implement it”.

BBC local radio producers and presenters are being given tips and training on 
how to develop their on-air personality (tricky as this may seem) to generate 
“greater warmth” with listeners. An internal profile of local radio listeners 
says they love Kate Middleton and Stephen Fry, hate Jeremy Clarkson and Russell 
Brand.

But too much personality can be a bad thing. The trust also noted two serious 
editorial breaches last year, warning that a “relatively informal style” is not 
a licence for presenters to go “beyond what audiences would have expected”.

It all costs. BBC local radio’s budget of £153.8m in 2014/15 was bigger than 
any of its national radio stations. Radio 4 was closest at £115.7m, 5 Live 
£66.1m.

5 Live has challenges of its own 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/feb/05/bbc-radio-5-live-audience-below-where-id-hoped-admits-controller>
, with a most recent audience of 5.6 million listeners in the last quarter of 
2015, down from apeak of more than 7 million in 2010 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/feb/03/rajars-talk-radio>. It faces 
intense competition for sports rights at a time whenbudgets are being cut 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/19/bbc-f1-olympics-rona-fairhead>, 
and in a digital world where the BBC has multiple platforms on which to break 
news, its original rationale is not what it once was.

The idea of combining local radio with 5 Live, which is understood to have 
been discussed by senior BBC executives, echoes proposals considered – and 
rebuffed – five years ago. A dual local-national station is not unprecedented 
and is done quite successfully in Sweden.

But to replicate it in the UK would pose difficulties, not least during the 
Olympics, or football World Cup, when huge swathes of local coverage would have 
to be ditched. Digital radio is not quite so advanced as to offer an easy local 
opt-out. Not yet, anyway.

The BBC says it does not comment on speculation about cuts.

“Everyone knows the BBC faces a significant financial challenge,” a 
spokesperson for BBC local radio says. “There has already been plenty of 
speculation about how we can save money and best meet the needs of our 
audience, and there will no doubt be plenty more, but we’re proud so many of 
our audience trust and value our high quality and distinctive local radio 
stations in England.”
