
A teacher recently came to me with a dilemma: there was an epidemic of 
self-harm among her students. They were using razors to injure themselves in 
their boarding school dorms, so staff had confiscated their razors.

But for self-harming teens any item can become a weapon and a means to 
exorcise their emotional pain. Undeterred, and ignoring the plastic bands and 
ice cubes their school nurse had suggested as a “safe” way to induce pain, the 
pupils began using the blades from pencil sharpeners, compasses or shattered 
rulers. One student smashed a plastic cup and ended up severing an artery using 
the jagged edge.

Related: Sacked children's mental health tsar Natasha Devon: 'I was proper 
angry' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/13/sacked-childrens-mental-health-tzar-natasha-devon-i-was-proper-angry>

This wasn’t enough to make the other pupils stop. Camhs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/27/this-is-the-nhs-schools-help-children-mental-health-services>
 was overstretched in their area, and many students were not “severe enough” 
for an appointment. What could the school do? It resorted to reinstating the 
razors and providing antiseptic creams and bandages when incidents occurred on 
the basis that since there was nothing they could do to stop the self-harming, 
they needed to ensure it was happening as safely as possible. The teachers were 
terrified. Were they doing the right thing, she asked me? I couldn’t give her 
an answer.

There has been an alarming increase in self-harming – figures from the charity 
Self-harm UK <https://www.selfharm.co.uk/get/facts/self-harm_statistics> based 
on A&E attendance suggest an increase of 70% over two years to 2014. After 
almost a decade visiting three schools a week across the UK as a mental health 
educator, I have heard stories like this with alarming regularity. Teachers 
daily have to deal with serious mental health issues with no training, no 
resources, no external support and, in the state sector, no budget.

Teachers are attempting to step in for a generation enduring record levels of 
poor mental health, sexual pressure and confusion, where 48% of 11-14 year old 
girls avoid everyday school activities as they hate how they look, and one in 
four deaths in young men under 35 is a suicide. Child and adolescent mental 
health services have suffered budget cuts of£85m since 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/27/uk-child-mental-health-services-destroying-lives-families>
. And while never-ending, sometimes contradictory, directives are churned out 
from above, teachers mop up the emotional damage caused by the narrowing of the 
curriculum, ever-spirallingexam stress 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/may/14/calls-to-childline-over-exam-stress-break-records>
, excessive testing and a fiercely competitive, perfectionist culture. And 
that’s before we think about the family problems some students face.

All of this has put a strain on teachers’ own mental health. A recent survey 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-35900499> by the NUT found almost half of 
teachers had sought help from their doctor for stress related conditions in the 
past year.

Related: Mental health in schools: Lily’s story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/31/mental-health-schools-child-exams-abuse>

Yet pressure on schools extends beyond the realm of mental health. With 
extensive cuts to the public sector, schools remain the one consistent bastion 
of the community, places that can always be relied upon to be open. They absorb 
the consequences of austerity and are expected to plug the gaps where local 
services have been stretched past breaking point.

The ruthless slashing of social services, and cuts to policing and the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/may/02/crisis-in-childrens-mental-health-nhs-insider-speaks>
 have left teachers flailing. In addition to the mountains of paperwork and 
box-ticking, they are attempting to be therapist one moment, social worker the 
next.

Teachers tell me of families who have been made homeless turning up on the 
doorsteps of schools, desperate for help. Schools feed children who are hungry. 
They provide emotional support for those from troubled homes. Schools will soon 
be expected to take responsibility for the ongoing care ofexcluded pupils 
<http://schoolsweek.co.uk/queens-speech-law-change-will-make-schools-responsible-for-excluded-pupils/>
, which has sparked fears that the increasing number of academies will be 
reluctant to admit children who have any risk of being excluded.

The latest recommendation, from charity Catch22 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/education/teachers-should-stand-at-bus-stops-to-halt-gang-violence-at-london-schools-a3247246.html>
, would see teachers standing at bus stops after hours to moderate behaviour 
among adolescents and prevent gang violence. Mary Bousted, general secretary of 
the Association of Teachers and Lecturers, was quick to point out that this 
might put teachers in danger. This is of course a serious and obvious concern, 
however the proposed initiative is emblematic of a wider trend.

Each time a public service is sacrificed, it seems that the government and 
others assume teachers can shoulder the consequences. Now, in the increasing 
absence of an adequate police service, teachers are being expected to take on 
the role of police community support officers.

When it comes to mental health, schools can do only so much. While teachers 
can be incredibly effective at prevention and spotting early symptoms, they 
cannot be doctors. And they cannot refer their pupils for the medical support 
they needif that support does not exist 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/jul/29/chilld-and-adolescent-mental-health-service-failing-children>
.

Related: Mental health champion for UK schools axed after criticising 
government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/04/mental-health-champion-uk-schools-axed-after-criticising-government-natasha-devon>

Despite a promised £1.4bn investment in mental health over the next five 
years, no one seems to know where the proportion given so far, which is not 
ringfenced, has gone – just half of local authorities have reported a real 
increase inmental health spending 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/09/nhs-mental-health-funding-is-still-lagging-behind-says-report>
 over the past year.

Since David Cameron declared that we were “all in this together”, teachers 
have been taking on more and more social responsibility. The result is an 
education system straining to hold it together, relying on the goodwill of 
teachers. It is little wonder there is a recruitment crisis and huge numbers
plan to leave 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/22/teachers-plan-leave-five-years-survey-workload-england>
. When the teachers are gone, exhausted and burned out from doing what the 
state should – supporting the needs of the most vulnerable in their community – 
who will pick up the pieces?

• Natasha Devon was the mental health champion for schools from August 2015 
until therole was cut earlier this month 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/04/mental-health-champion-uk-schools-axed-after-criticising-government-natasha-devon>

In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the National 
Suicide Prevention Hotline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support 
service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. Hotlines in other countriescan be found here 
<http://www.suicide.org/international-suicide-hotlines.html>
