
Do you know the best time in the month to try for a baby? Traditionally, it is 
all about the fertile window, the five or six magical days in which pregnancy 
can occur. Ovulation, which typically happens around the 14th day of a cycle, 
releases a mature egg into the fallopian tube – but the egg only lasts for 24 
hours. Sperm, which survive for five days, should ideally be supplied as often 
as possible during this fertile window.You can monitor this window 
<https://www.asrm.org/FACTSHEET_Optimizing_Natural_Fertility/> by watching the 
calendar, checking the cervical mucus to see if it looks like runny egg whites, 
and investing in an ovulation predictor kit.

But such monitoring can take the sexiness out of sex. And a new study this 
week in Fertility and Sterility <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26385401> 
makes even more demands on couples trying to conceive: its findings suggest 
that it may be better to have sex every day. Yes, every single day. The study 
finds that a lot of sex may prepare a woman’s immune system for pregnancy. 
Sexually active women in the study had higher levels of cytokines, molecules 
released by type 2 helper T cells from the immune system that help reduce the 
“foreignness” of sperm or embryos, and the likelihood that the body will attack 
them. The lead author, Tierney Lorenz from theKinsey Institute for Research on 
Sex, Gender, and Reproduction, <http://www.kinseyinstitute.org/> says that the 
immune system is critical for a healthy pregnancy – from making sure the sperm 
isn’t attacked as an invader to helping the fertilised egg implant into the 
uterus. Lorenz thinks that more frequent sex sends a message to the immune 
system that it’s time to reproduce.

The solution

However, the study of 30 women did not actually follow them up to see if they 
became pregnant, and Lorenz says that the relationship between sex, changes in 
the immune system and the likelihood of having a baby is far too complex to be 
made clear from this one piece of research. As to how often couples should have 
sex, Lorenz says that women get so much advice that you should just “do what 
works right in your relationship”. There is no evidence from this study that 
daily sex will increase fertility, though Lorenz believes that the more your 
immune system gets the message that it’s time to reproduce, the more this could 
eventually increase your chances of pregnancy.

In the meantime, NICE in its latest guidance last year 
<https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg156/chapter/recommendations#initial-advice-to-people-concerned-about-delays-in-conception>
, advises couples who want to get pregnant to have sex two or three times a 
week throughout the month. This makes it more likely you will hit a fertile 
window without looking for it, and reminds the immune system to play nicely 
with incoming sperm.
