
Is he some Alexis Sánchez figure, a fabulous soccer signing – or merely a 
Mario Balotelli? The football parallels work well enough in high-profile TV 
transfer markets, too. Remember Adrian Chiles? And now there isRobert Peston 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/robert-peston>. ITV has him, after a headline 
tug-of-war with the BBC (and a flood of barbed jokes from erstwhile 
colleagues). But now they have to decide how to deploy their new striker, 
floppy hair, long pauses, open-necked shirts and all.

Michael Jermey, ITV director of news and current affairs, says political 
editor Peston’s “conversations with Tom Bradby onNews at Ten will be essential 
viewing for everyone who wants to be well-informed about politics. And our new 
programmePeston on Sunday will offer viewers a fresh and distinctive approach 
to political discussion at the weekend.” In short, he’ll be there on screen 
most nights, chatting to the presenter who used to have his new job, and going 
head-to-head withAndrew Marr <http://www.theguardian.com/media/andrewmarr> on 
Sabbath mornings. Is this worth £350,000 plus an excited buzz?

It could be if Peston manages to do what he’s done through most of his Fleet 
Street and BBC life: find exclusive stories. TheBBC 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> political editorship’s default stance – 
well-exemplified during Nick Robinson’s tenure – is more interpreter than 
newshound. You try to explain what you think is going on to viewers. Often 
that’s helpful. Sometimes it can get a bit tedious – see Laura Kuenssberg’s 
rather relentless insistence that Tory time in Manchester was all about some 
race to succeed David Cameron in 2020, a distant horizon without hinterland. 
But – saving scoops – is there much allure to the spectacle of two political 
editors (one current, one past) chewing the fat on air each evening? No more, 
perhaps, than theNewsnight spectacle of one past economics editor, Evan Davis, 
interviewing his more junior economics correspondent, Duncan Weldon, about the 
latest deficit figures. It’s all a little lugubrious (though not as bad, 
perhaps, as theNewsnight situation had Peston stayed and been given a slot 
there: Evan interviewing Robert interviewing Duncan).

But news and allied blogging is one thing; Peston on Sunday was the 
deal-clincher here, the offer that couldn’t been refused. And now that offer 
has to be made solid flesh, wriggling on studio sofas. There’s an existential 
question first, though. Does Sunday need another political interview show?

There’s also a question of timing. ITV, remember, waxes hot and strong because 
the BBC’s main weekdayNews at Ten is parked on its audience ratings lawn. 
Where’s the public service in that? But now that boot changes foot. Do Peston 
and Marr go head-to-head at 9am in a move that’s bound to hurt Marr’s 1.44 
million audience average? An earlier slot – remember the hard slog of Alastair 
Stewart’s modestly excellentSunday Programme from 8am to 9 on GMTV before 
cancellation came – is no good option. Peston versusMatch of the Day rewound. 
After that means church bells ringing and the big news breakers choosing Marr. 
Later still and you’re inSunday Politics territory, up against Andrew Neil.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d6fc%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d6fc%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F9%2F1444394789625%2F59503b57-ba0b-42cc-9b63-909d9875021e-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Now%20ITV%20has%20Robert%20Peston%2C%20it%20must%20use%20its%20floppy-haired%20striker%20wisely&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d6fc%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Now+ITV+has+Robert+Peston%2C+it+must+use+its+floppy-haired+striker+wisely&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d6fc%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F9%2F1444394789625%2F59503b57-ba0b-42cc-9b63-909d9875021e-1020x612.jpeg>
 David Cameron on Andrew Marr’s Sunday morning show. Photograph: 
AOB/LNG/Supplied by WENN 
The impulsion to challenge Marr directly, time for time and interview for 
interview, is clear. But take a reality check before you do. Politics may 
bounce along in the media Westminster bubble. It is not great ratings bait – 
and declining. Marr used to get 2.39 million viewers five years ago. That’s 
950,000 gone. Andrew Neil’sSunday Politics, at 610,000 today, used to have 
750,000. TheDaily Politics show is down from 350,000 to 310,000. If ITV cares 
about ad rates, it will need to ponder audience sizes, too.

Of course there are opportunities to be exploited. Maybe Marr’s figures are 
falling because the formula’s a bit tired. Maybe Peston can attract 
heavy-hitting pols who don’t love the BBC (watch that Manchester queue spiral 
around the building). Maybe a few news-packed encounters could change the whole 
game.

But the game itself has hidden rules. ITV (see that valiant old GMTV 
contender) liked to give politicians a platform because politicians also helped 
decide franchise shifts. Peston can’t twist too many knives if he wants top 
interviewees back, because there’s always an alternative. Competition will spur 
on Andrew Marr in any case. And Messrs Cameron and Corbyn can’t sit in two 
studios simultaneously.

Hubble bubble, toil and trouble? Peston is an undoubted talent, his loss much 
lamented by those who worked closest to him at the BBC. If you like sparky 
rivalries, you’ll probably like what happens next. But is that a Sánchez I see 
before me – or a poor, bemused Balotelli on a free transfer yet again?
