
What a great running weekend I had, full of contrasts. A large part of 
Saturday was spend on a 400m track: my own club speed session in the morning, 
followed by heading to the Night of the 10,000m PBs 
<http://www.highgateharriers.org.uk/> to watch far, far faster people attempt 
to get those PBS and - in the case of the very speediest - to qualify for the 
Olympics.You can read more (and more eloquently) about it here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/may/22/hampstead-heath-athletics-british-10000m-trials>
, but this really is a unique event. Standing in lane three, chatting toSteve 
Way about his recent Wings for Life <http://www.steveway.co.uk/?p=1728> victory 
in Cambridge, and to Martin Yelling about hisupcoming epic 630 mile run home 
<http://longrunhome.co.uk/>, drinking beer and watching some impressive 
performance. That’s my idea of good night out. Huge kudos toBen Pochee 
<https://twitter.com/lgnwellbeing> and the Highgate Harriers for coming up with 
this brilliant event, and running it entirely with volunteers.

So, to Sunday (and, err, a bit of a hangover). My long run took in two legs of 
my club’s annual 5x5km relays,this year fundraising for an all-terrain special 
needs buggy 
<http://www.charitychoice.co.uk/fundraiser/windmilers/windmilers-5x5-relays> 
for our clubmate Stephanie’s daughter Daisy. I made two strategic errors here. 
Firstly, the whole 16 miles with a hangover thing. Ugh. Secondly, needing to 
run home meant I couldn’t eat tonnes of the delicious cake on sale. Disaster! 
Really must work on my simultaneous running and cake-eating. Never mind a beer 
mile, perhaps I should start training for a chocolate brownie mile ...

So, over to you. How was your weekend running? A few late spring marathons 
this weekend - I saw reports on Facebook from friends running in Copenhagen 
(hot) and Richmond Park (hilly). Did you race, did you come to Highgate to 
watch the Olympic qualifiers, or were you training and/or nursing a niggle? 
Come and share below the line as always.
