
It has been nearly three weeks since Report the Abuse 
<http://reporttheabuse.org/> launched. Three, simultaneously, long and short 
weeks.


There has been a slow growth in the data collected, and the number of results 
that have come in is not sufficient to make any determinations yet. But what I 
am seeing though is interesting, and I think we are in a good place from which 
to start discussions.


Although 840 people have started the survey, only 77 have completed it. This 
works out to a roughly 11% completion rate, and this in itself is worth 
commenting on.


From that 77, 83.12% say that they know of someone who has been the victim of 
an act of sexual violence while working as a humanitarian. Even with a small 
sample size, this is a statistic that made me sit back. If the numbers are so 
high, why is the number of submitted responses of either witnessing or 
experiencing sexual violence so low? Why have so many people begun and then 
stopped the survey?

Related: Aid worker: I was drugged and raped by another humanitarian in South 
Sudan 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jul/29/aid-worker-rape-humanitarian-south-sudan-sexual-violence>

The most common feedback I have received, from people who have began and then 
stopped the survey, is that they are having troubles articulating their 
experiences. I think this says something important about the stigma that still 
exists within the humanitarian community around these issues, as well as 
society more broadly.


To that end, I wanted to share some of the stories submitted through the 
survey. All of the individuals who submitted these stories gaveReport the Abuse 
<http://reporttheabuse.org> permission to share their quotations, on the 
website and to the media. I worked with these individuals to ensure that what 
they revealed to me through the survey was protected and honoured, that their 
experiences were highlighted to show other members of the humanitarian 
community what has happened to them.


I am hoping that, by sharing a story from someone like this survivor, we can 
help other survivors to find their voices, to help them know that they are not 
alone:


“He put out his hand to shake mine and when I took hold of it he pulled me 
towards him and kissed me. I pulled away, and he did it again. I pushed him 
away and told him to leave my office.


I later submitted a complaint to his organisation. A few months after this 
they told me he was not reprimanded as he had left my office when I had told 
him to go. I heard from other expatriates that he used to harass the national 
female staff. I was in a much more powerful position than these female staff, 
but I could not do anything to stop him.”


Related: Secret aid worker: sexual harassment and discrimination in the 
industry 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jul/29/secret-aid-worker-sexual-harassment-and-discrimination>

This is just one story, one experience with sexual violence, in this case an 
incident of sexual harassment that was dismissed by the individual’s 
organisation. It highlights the difficulties getting assistance from their 
organisation, and the very real problem of sexual harassment against national 
staff, a problem thatReport the Abuse <http://reporttheabuse.org> is actively 
trying to figure out how to address.

There are many more stories, like this survivor, whose colleague increasingly 
sexually harassed her, to the point where she worked while worrying that the 
harassment might one night escalate:

“At first, he started flirting with me, and I was very clear with him I was 
not interested. He continued to say inappropriate things, and then started 
touching me. It was hand under the table, then it was hand on my neck, and 
finally he walked into the kitchen when I was there, forcibly kissed me and 
grabbed my breasts. I pushed him away and walked out of the kitchen. For the 
rest of the time when we were both there, even though I could lock my door, it 
was so flimsy that I continuously worried that he would force himself into my 
bedroom.”

I wish I could say that these were the only incidents submitted through the 
story, but they are not. They are just the beginning of the responses, a 
fraction of the stories submitted to date.


Related: Sexual assaults against aid workers: it's time to take a stand 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/aug/19/sexual-assault-rape-against-aid-worker-its-time-to-take-a-stand>

Highlighting these experiences is incredibly important, and I cannot express 
enough gratitude to the survivors who have allowed me to share their 
experiences. They are playing an essential role to breaking down the barriers 
we appear to still be facing within the humanitarian community, barriers that 
must come down.


To that end, from 12 September until 31 October, leading up to the anticipated 
publication date of ourBest Practices Guide 
<http://reporttheabuse.org/best-practices/> on 1 November, Report the Abuse 
<http://reporttheabuse.org/> will be highlighting a different experience or 
testimony every day, through thewebsite <http://reporttheabuse.org/>, our 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/reporttheabuse> page and Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/megan_nobert>. During these 50 days of testimony, we will 
talk about how someone felt dealing with their experience, or how their 
colleagues or friends reacted to the news. We will highlight an individual’s 
experience with different forms of sexual violence. 50 days, 50 testimonies.

All of these stories will be anonymous, but that does not take away from the 
power of their words.


I have said this before, but I think it is worth repeating: you are not alone 
- we are not alone.Share these stories, share the survey, and discuss this 
amongst your colleagues <http://reporttheabuse.org/what-can-i-do/>. Let’s keep 
the conversation going.

Do you have a story you’d like to tell? You can contact us confidentially at 
globaldevpros@theguardian.com with ‘Sexual abuse’ in the subject line.

If you would like to contribute to the survey find out more information on the 
reporttheabuse <http://reporttheabuse.org/about-2/> website or email 
iwrp.humanitarians@gmail.com <mailto:iwrp.humanitarians@gmail.com>.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
