
It’s a sad indictment that in 2016, there’s such a paucity of inclusive talent 
management across the public sector. Skin colour and ethnic background still 
impact on whether you get your foot through the door, can progress upwards, and 
the extent to which your skills and talents are valued.

The Snowy White Peaks 
<http://www.mdx.ac.uk/__data/assets/pdf_file/0015/50190/The-snowy-white-peaks-of-the-NHS.pdf.pdf>
 survey (pdf) highlighted the lack of progress on inclusion of black, Asian and 
minority ethnic people (BAME) in the NHS. In some respects the health service 
has moved backwards in relation to race equality. This was particularly stark 
across London’s trusts, within a city that is so diversity-rich.


We know that progress on equality isn’t inevitable; things only move forward 
with courageous leadership, clarity of vision and purposeful activities that 
deliver on specific intentions. It’s not a completely negative picture though; 
for example, there are more women on boards than there were 15 years ago. It’s 
questionable, however, whether the necessary culture change has taken place to 
support the shift and ensure a continued presence for women in senior 
positions. Merely counting diverse heads won’t guarantee sustainable progress.

Related: How can mental health services deliver better care for black patients?
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/may/20/mental-health-services-better-care-black-patients>

We have work to do to reverse the most negative diversity trends and 
accelerate the pace of change around inclusion. As far as race equality is 
concerned, the data tells us that the current situation is woefully inadequate. 
Indeed, research byElevation Networks <http://www.elevationnetworks.org/> shows 
that 96.5% of those in senior positions in the public sector are white.

The disparity in health is notable – the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> has an immensely diverse workforce, 
with 41% of doctors and 20% of qualified nurses, health visitors and midwives 
from BAME backgrounds. However, representation of BAME individuals falls 
significantly at senior level, with only 6% of nurse consultants and 7% of ward 
matrons identifying as minority ethnic.


There are those who consider this a fluffy subject. It is not; it is critical 
for better performance, utilising talent and, most importantly, delivering 
great care. Our diverse workforce is delivering care to increasingly diverse 
populations. The range of thought we get from people who have had different 
experiences leads to the innovation we so badly need, so we have to include 
voices – at every level – that have traditionally been excluded.


Despite years of work supposedly directed towards creating equality, many 
people aren’t feeling the difference. Unless inclusion is felt and experienced 
by the BAME staff who make up such a significant proportion of our workforce, 
the tools, processes and current approaches to creating change are meaningless.


For greater levels of inclusion to become a reality, the public sector must 
think very differently about what leadership means, particularly in relation to 
power. Leadership should be an enabler, challenging and shifting power so the 
voices of those who’ve been historically marginalised can be at the heart of 
decision making, fundamentally disrupting “taken for granted” organisational 
patterns and behaviours and quickening the pace of change.


The public sector must reap the benefits of this diversity advantage in health 
to nurture talent, maximise resources, drive innovation and find new, more 
effective ways of delivering services in collaboration with our communities. 
For the NHS to be financially viable going forward, leadership must empower the 
majority to challenge exclusion, where power and privilege reside with the few.


In the main, the will for change is there; but leaders haven’t been equipped 
to understand how to make a difference. TheNHS Leadership Academy 
<http://www.leadershipacademy.nhs.uk/> is working to empower leadership at all 
levels to take action to create a legacy of inclusion within the NHS, so the 
time is now to make a substantive and sustainable difference.


It’s going to take courageous leadership and difficult conversations, but let 
this be the generation of senior NHS leaders to finally and significantly move 
the issue forward.


Tracie Jolliff <http://www.leadershipacademy.nhs.uk/author/traciejoliff/> is 
head of inclusion and systems leadership at the NHS Leadership Academy

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
