


Manufacturing’s contribution to African GDP has remained constant at 10% for 
the past 40 years, and Africa’s contribution to global manufacturing has 
actually reduced from 3% in 1980 to 2% today.

Despite famously high growth rates in many African countries (notably 
Ethiopia, Ghana, Mozambique, Tanzania and Zambia), a wholesale shift into 
manufacturing across the continent appears elusive. Why? And does China hold 
any lessons? Those were the questions for panellists at the International 
Growth Centre’sannual conference <http://www.theigc.org/event/growth-week-2016/>
 last week.

The meeting was opened by UK development minister Desmond Swayne 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/people/desmond-swayne>. At the outset he was on 
firm footing with his theme that development is all about job creation. But 
soon he reverted to old-fashioned rhetoric about governments as “barriers” to 
be removed from the path of free enterprise.

Related: Domestic critics carp over extent of China's munificence towards 
Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2013/apr/29/china-critics-aid-package-africa>

This was certainly not the view of Chang-Tai Hsieh 
<http://www.chicagobooth.edu/faculty/directory/h/chang-tai-hsieh>, a professor 
at Chicago University, who demolished the very basis upon which economic 
development policy has been based for the past three or four decades.


Hsieh set out to explain why China had done so well since the late 1980s. He 
started by looking at the World Bank’sdoing business 
<http://www.doingbusiness.org/> rankings, which order countries by how easy it 
is to start a business. China ranks at 151 alongside the Democratic Republic of 
the Congo.

But look a little deeper and you realise there are two tiers of business in 
China: those that follow formal bureaucracy and find all the barriers that the 
doing business survey counted, and those that avoid such obstacles because they 
are favoured by local government officials.

The role of officials, it turns out, from party secretaries to vice-mayors, is 
to choose winners – exactly what governments are not meant to do according to 
liberal economic theory. Hsieh described this as “crony” capitalism, but not in 
a disparaging way. It has been, according to Hsieh, one of the main reasons for 
China’s incredible growth.

And while corruption remains a massive problem for societies across the world, 
in this reading of China’s story it certainly isn’t a problem when it comes to 
economic growth. Local government officials being able to extract payoffs from 
successful businesses encouraged them to support such enterprises, removing 
bureaucratic obstacles, investing in appropriate infrastructure and thus 
creating millions of jobs.

In 2013, when the government began to crack down on corruption 
<http://www.chinabusinessreview.com/chinas-crackdown-on-corruption-and-government-spending-a-timeline/>
, this effective system began to break up, according to Hsieh. Why would 
government officials work overtime to make businesses successful if they were 
unable to cream off something for themselves?

Neither Hsieh nor the other panellists were able to answer my question about 
lessons for some African countries from China’s growth – perhaps unsurprising 
given the incendiary implications of this particular analysis.

But there are at least two. First, there is what Hsieh, in an amusing 
rhetorical flourish, referred to as the difference between creating 
institutions for priests and for “selfish bastards” – the Roman Catholic model 
versus the Goldman Sachs model. While you could hope that everyone acts in the 
best interests of society, you’re probably better off developing a system with 
incentives to take advantage of the fact that most people will act in their own 
self-interest.

This is a theme developed by researchers such as Mushtaq Khan 
<https://www.soas.ac.uk/staff/staff31246.php>, Tim Kelsall 
<https://www.odi.org/staff/tim-kelsall> and David Booth 
<http://www.institutions-africa.org/page/bio-booth.html>, who have argued that 
there has been excessive focus on reducingrent-seeking 
<http://www.investopedia.com/terms/r/rentseeking.asp> and clientelism 
<http://www.britannica.com/topic/clientelism> in Africa, without realising how 
important it is for elites to benefit from changes under way. Unless elites 
have a stake in development and poverty reduction, they will be a barrier to 
them. Or to put it another way, getting the political classes fully focused on 
developing industry and reducing poverty may mean allowing them some of the 
cream.

This is heresy in much of the development sector, but quite logical and backed 
up bysome pretty good evidence 
<https://www.odi.org/projects/africa-power-and-politics-programme>.

The second lesson from China – one that many African leaders are taking – is 
that the arrogant platitudes of the western growth economists of the 1980s and 
1990s have been roundly undermined. While it may not be easy to translate what 
worked inChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> into successful growth 
strategies in African countries – the context and starting points are so 
different – it is clear that there are many ways to develop an industrial base, 
not just the western way.

Most crucially, the too-neat separation of modern economies into public and 
private sectors is simply inapplicable in China and indeed in many countries – 
it’s not just that there is so much overlap between the two sectors, it’s that 
they’re often one and the same person.

So if you’re looking for simple answers, or simple blueprints for growth, you 
won’t find them here. But that, in itself, is an important lesson.
