
Do we care enough about boys’ under-achievement to spend more on their 
education? That’s the question delegates were asked at a recent conference. I 
faltered as I pondered: do I care?

School funding <http://www.theguardian.com/education/school-funding> normally 
isn’t up for discussion, so the question would be hypothetical, but the 
government is embarking on a serious attempt to change the way it pays schools. 
Instead of heads receiving funds allocated by a local body, the plan is to 
create a national funding formula – a sort of programmed super-cash calculator 
into which a school leader can plug their pupils’ details and the amount due 
will pop out the other side.

But what should go into this new school formula? This is the big debate. 
Proposals so far include extra for poorer pupils and small schools, alongside 
money for expensive school buildings and a few other things, all of which is 
then multiplied by an “area cost” factor. This almost certainly means the 
expensive south will get some kind of bonus on top of each pupil’s funding, 
whereas schools in the north will lose out because teachers there 
are expected to find cheaper houses.

Hidden among the plans, however, is a benign sounding “low prior achievement” 
factor that will give extra cash to pupils who receive low scores in their 
tests at primary school. Given thatonly 7% 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-32204578> of pupils with low attainment at 
the age of 11 go on to pass five GCSEs – and we know that a lack of GCSEs is 
one of the highest predictors offuture joblessness 
<http://www.poverty.org.uk/31/index.shtml> – this factor is a sensible attempt 
at doling out cash while schools can still turn things around.

Related: Why do we worry that few girls take physics, but not that boys make 
up just 29% of English A-level students? | Laura McInerney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/mar/18/girls-physics-boys-other-subjects-gender-disparity>

If extra cash were sloshing around then I would certainly rather it went to 
low attainers. But there is no extra cash. If anything, there’s less. Although 
school funding is notionally protected, greater wage costs mean schools will 
see their budgets eroded by about8% in real terms 
<http://schoolsweek.co.uk/the-8-per-cent-school-budget-cut-what-is-it/> over 
the next few years. When the calculator plops out its numbers, every 
low-attaining pupil’s financial gain will be someone else’s loss.

If more cash is on offer for lower prior attainment, the money heading into 
grammar schools will automatically shrink relative to that of comprehensives. 
But another effect of all this is that given boys’ lower achievement at primary 
school, schools serving only boys will gain a significant budget jump on girls’ 
schools. This makes me nervous.

Although it is true that girls outperform boys in tests, there are many other 
areas where their participation isn’t equal. Take sport. Only about30% of 
school-aged girls 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/jul/25/school-pe-lessons-putting-girls-off-sport>
 play sport once a week, compared with 40% of boys – and that number diminishes 
as they get older. Byage 14 
<https://mail.google.com/_/scs/mail-static/_/js/k=gmail.main.en_GB.u5aDBGtEYt0.O/m=m_i,t/am=PiMeCPiTcX8wrjEKyEpfoTDvveGzJeUnF3hVd8IEiNSqgP-b_T-A3wO9eIsN/rt=h/d=1/rs=AHGWq9BSvKP-MvOAKTPdsBFnvvuk5LTu4g>
, it is estimated just 10% of girls are playing enough sport to stay healthy. 
Is there a premium for low sport participation? No, there is not.

Girls’ exam over-achievement doesn’t always translate into the highest 
accolades. Despite having a better A-level pass rate than boys for many years – 
andresearch last week 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/12/university-gender-gap-scandal-thinktank-men>
 showed they are much more likely to go to university – state school girls are 
still the least likely group to be accepted intoOxford 
<https://public.tableau.com/views/UoO_UG_Admissions2/AcceptanceRate?%3Aembed=y&%3Adisplay_count=yes&%3AshowTabs=y&%3AshowVizHome=no>
. In part, this is because for the past two years boys have actually achieved 
more top grades than girls, but the situation persisted for many years before, 
when boys did worse at the top end, too. So not only did girls fail to get 
ahead when they were doing better, the situation now appears to be reversing.

If boys are doing worse in tests when younger, at least some are later 
catching up, and when it comes to society at large the continued inequalities 
across top jobs suggests women’s exam achievements are still apparently not 
enough.

All of which leaves a conundrum. Yes, it makes sense to give more funding to 
pupils with low prior attainment. If those pupils happen to be boys more often 
than they are girls, so be it. But if we bake this factor into the formula, it 
will mean more money is spent on boys’ education and, given everything else, 
this could mean we will store up worse imbalances for the future.
