
We can expect a rise in unemployment, at least in the short term

Regardless of which side of the fence they sit on, it’s generally agreed that 
there will be a rise in unemployment if the UK leaves the EU. Catherine 
Barnard, a professor in European Union law at theUniversity of Cambridge 
<http://www.cam.ac.uk/> says: “Since we project that Brexit would lead to a 
decline in economic activity, we naturally expect that Brexit would lead to job 
loss too.” She estimates that around 550,000 jobs will be lost by 2020.

Steve Coulter, who teaches political economy at the European Institute of the 
London School of Economics <http://www.lse.ac.uk/home.aspx>, agrees: “Brexit 
would lead to a fall in growth, jobs and investment in almost all scenarios.”

It’s a change that some say is happening already, particularly for school 
leavers and graduates, as employers await the outcome of the referendum. Mike 
Hill, chief executive ofProspects <https://www.prospects.ac.uk/> and the Higher 
Education Careers Service Unit <http://www.hecsu.ac.uk/index.htm>, says: 
“Planned recruitment for next year’s cohort is still on schedule, but if we 
vote to leave, there will be a hiatus, which will see recruitment plans either 
shelved, or numbers to be recruited reduced. Uncertainty delays recruitment and 
a recession kills it.”

There are a number of options post-Brexit, but none seem perfect

If Brexit becomes a reality, there are a number of possible scenarios. Anthony 
Robinson, principal campaigns and communications adviser at theConfederation of 
British Industry <http://news.cbi.org.uk/> (CBI), says that becoming one of the 
European Economic Area (EEA) states comes with its own challenges: “[It] would 
enable us to remain in the single market, but we would have no influence over 
the rules, we would still have to pay [a financial contribution] and accept 
free movement of people. It’s hard to see this as a valid option given the 
arguments for leaving revolve around immigration, cost and sovereignty.”

Barnard agrees that immigration remains a key issue. If the UK accepts the 
free movement of people, “it is possible to ‘do a Norway’ or even a Switzerland 
– although the EU is not keen on that option.” But if not, she adds: “A trade 
deal would be possible and UK immigration rules would apply to any EU migrants 
wishing to come to the UK.”

Perhaps we will look to history for inspiration, suggests Diego Zuluaga, 
financial services research fellow at theInstitute of Economic Affairs 
<http://www.iea.org.uk/about/what-we-do>. He explains that dealing under 
unilateral free trade “was Britain’s policy in the 19th and early 20th 
centuries and massively successful, not least for the poorest workers and 
consumers”.

It’s difficult to predict the real effect on businesses before new agreements 
are in place

Experts have identified a number of industries 
<http://www.theguardian.com/careers/2016/may/23/work-after-brexit-the-biggest-winners-and-losers-for-uk-jobs>
 that would lose out if Brexit went ahead – particularly financial services and 
the automotive industry – but some sectors will find that life improves. 
Coulter from the London School of Economics says it depends on how the UK will 
trade with the EU, post-Brexit.

“Most companies in goods markets depend on a complex global value chain, so 
what matters is how the UK is integrated in the European economic area. If the 
EU is not the area on which economic decisions depend, then a Brexit might not 
be a completely crazy idea.”

For those who do export to the EU, little will change in terms of regulations. 
Catherine Mann, chief economist and head of the economics department for theOECD
 <http://www.oecd.org/>, says: “If they wish to trade in the EU they will 
continue to have to comply with EU safety standards and EU competition law in 
just the same way as US and Chinese companies have to comply.” There may be 
increases in export duty until new trade agreements are put in place.

There will also be repercussions beyond those businesses that export, says 
Robinson – foreign investment is likely to slow. “Multinational companies 
invest here for a number of reasons – language, infrastructure, educated 
workforce, etc, but being in the EU and being able to conduct European-wide 
business from the UK is a major incentive.”

There will be a longer-term impact on the economy, but catastrophe is unlikely

Overall, it is the economy that is likely to feel repercussions: “To 2030, the 
real issue is that GDP is lower by a range from 2.7%–7.7%, and living standards 
will have deteriorated on account of productivity slowdown and weak investment 
and lower capital stock,” Mann says.

But Zuluaga says the “likelihood of economic catastrophe as a result of 
changing trading arrangements is very small,” adding: “The UK will do well 
either way over the long term because it has got a very resilient and dynamic 
economy and a large talented workforce.” However, he does believe that a 
tightened migration policy will make a dent on the country’s potential to grow: 
“[Migrants] contribute to the tune of an annual £20bn [double the UK’s net EU 
contribution] to the public finances. They are young and of working age so help 
to support our benefits and pensions system.”

It’s a risk that many seem willing to take. Angus Armstrong, director of 
macroeconomics for theNational Institute of Economic and Social Research 
<http://www.niesr.ac.uk/>, says: “For some people, the opportunity to have 
greater say on making one’s own rules and perhaps fewer migrants may mean that 
the likely economic consequences are simply a price worth paying.”

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
