
There was a time when we could say that humanity had no control over Aids, but 
this is no longer true. Yet only last year,1.1 million people died 
<http://www.unaids.org/en/resources/campaigns/HowAIDSchangedeverything/factsheet>
 of Aids-related illnesses, and 2.1 million more were infected with HIV. An 
estimated 19.7 million people living with HIV are not receivingantiretroviral 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/may/27/drugs-hiv-antiretroviral-trial-immune-system>
 treatment.

This is not due to our inability to tackle Aids; rather, it is a manifestation 
ofinequality <http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/inequality> in all 
its forms – social, cultural, economic and gender-based.

Often, different forms of inequality go hand-in-hand: rape survivors, for 
instance, run an extra high risk of being infected with HIV. More often than 
not they are poor – and so are their rapists. Once infected, they are very 
likely to become ill and die and, although there are medicines to prevent this, 
many people don’t have access to them.

Related: Mozambique's enduring discrimation leaves gay men untreated for HIV | 
Andrew Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/29/mozambiques-enduring-discrimation-leaves-gay-men-untreated-for-hiv>

This inequality doesn’t only affect the world’s poorest regions. About 60% of 
people 
<http://www.unitaid.eu/en/making-hiv-treatment-affordable-in-middle-income-countries>
 with HIV live in middle-income countries.

That figure illustrates an alarming phenomenon: although inequality between 
countries is fading, inequality within countries is growing. On the one hand, 
incomes in middle-income countries are rising, a middle class is emerging and 
healthcare is improving. On the other hand large groups of people are not 
benefiting from this progress.

People with HIV are a particularly distressing example. All too often social 
stigma stops them from seeking help 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/01/world-aids-day-we-need-to-end-stigma-and-change-our-ideas-about-manhood>
. There are even cases in which social stigma prevents help being offered. It’s 
time that we as governments, together with our civil society partners, tackle 
the discrimination that prevents those infected with HIV from seeking and 
finding assistance and treatment.

We know what we have to do. Active policy in the sex industry over the past 15 
years hasreduced the number of HIV infections by three-quarters in India and 
Thailand 
<https://www.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/resource-pdf/GlobalHIVEpidemicsAmongSexWorkers.pdf>
 (pdf). Harm reduction programmes among drug users that provide information and 
promote needle exchange have had spectacular results in Asia, and similar 
effects are nowbeing seen in Kenya 
<http://idpc.net/alerts/2016/04/achievements-and-challenges-in-bringing-harm-reduction-services-to-kenya>
.Decriminalising prostitution in New Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/oct/16/law-jacquismith> and 
drug usein Portugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/24/from-cannabis-cafes-to-death-row-drugs-laws-around-the-world>
 has also yielded success. In Portugal, the number of infections went down by a 
factor of 14 in as many years. And from El Salvador to theIndian state of Tamil 
Nadu 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/oct/24/a-journey-across-four-continents-nick-danziger-tales-from-india>
, governments are pursuing bold policies that save the lives of transgender 
people every day.

In my own country, the Netherlands, we’re also making progress. People with 
HIV are now able totake out life insurance policies 
<http://www.expatica.com/nl/news/Dutch-offer-first-HIV-life-insurance-policy_127316.html>
. The 2018international Aids conference 
<https://www.iasociety.org/Web/WebContent/File/IAS_annoucement_AIDS2018.pdf> 
(pdf) will be held in Amsterdam, with an explicit focus on reaching the most 
marginalised members of society.

Even though we have made progress, the situation is still reason for grave 
concern: a manifestation of inequality. And that inequality is a result of 
political choices. In 1990 many obstacles prevented us from combating Aids: 
there was no effective treatment, combined with a serious lack of insight and 
knowledge about the disease. But now those barriers have been overcome, the 
scale of the key remaining problem – inequality – is becoming ever clearer.

Related: Sex, syringes and the HIV epidemic Russia can no longer ignore | Alec 
Luhn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/19/sex-syringes-hiv-epidemic-russia-can-no-longer-ignore>

Girls who are raped or are unaware of HIV; people who are afraid or unable to 
access condoms, care or treatment; drug users or sex workers who take risks. 
What they have in common is that they are between a rock and a hard place when 
it comes to social power relations. The task of giving these people a voice and 
eradicating Aids rests largely on the shoulders of governments. That political 
responsibility should be the decisive factor in all the choices we make.

So I call on world leaders to place women above cultural beliefs. Recognise 
their rights and tackle their disadvantaged position. Recognise the rights of 
lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people. Allow sex education. Give the 
poorest of the poor access to care and therapy. Do not give in to religious 
objections to condoms.

Leave no one behind. That’s what we all promised to do when we pledged our 
support for theglobal goals 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive>
 last year.

Let’s practise what we preach.

 * This article is based on a speech Liliane Ploumen will make at the 2016 
high-level meeting on ending Aids, in New York on 9 June
