
Tony Blair has said it would be a “very dangerous experiment” if Jeremy Corbyn 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> or a populist politician 
like him were to form a government.

In an interview with the BBC, the former Labour 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> prime minister said populist 
politicians, whether on the left like Corbyn or on the right, were worrying and 
he spent a lot of time thinking about how people in the centre should respond.

Blair famously said last summer that anyone thinking of voting for Corbyn as 
Labour leader because it was what their heart told them to do should “get a 
transplant 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2015/jul/22/tony-blair-jeremy-corbyn-labour-leadership-video>
”, but his latest comment may be his harshest yet.

Speaking to Emily Maitlis for BBC2’s This Week’s World, Blair rejected the 
suggestion that he was responsible for Corbyn’s emergence as a political force. 
He said it was “a result of the way the world works these days”.

He said: “It’s a big challenge for the centre and, when I’m not thinking about 
the Middle East, I’m thinking about this because I do think, by the way, it 
would be a very dangerous experiment for a major western country to get gripped 
by this type of populist policymaking left or right, a very dangerous 
experiment.

“I do think the centre ground needs to work out how it gets its mojo back and 
gets the initiative back in the political debate because otherwise these guys 
aren’t providing answers, not on the economy not on foreign policy.”

Blair and Corbyn are at opposite ends of the spectrum of Labour opinion 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/24/tony-blair-questions-whether-jeremy-corbyn-can-win-an-election>
, with Blair on the far right of conventional party thinking and Corbyn on the 
far left. Blair won three general elections, but his support for US 
intervention in Iraq and free-market economics made him increasingly unpopular 
with Labour activists, helping to explain the rise of Corbyn in 2015.

A spokesman for Corbyn declined to comment.

In the interview, Blair would not comment on the forthcoming Iraq inquiry 
report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/09/chilcot-report-iraq-war-inquiry-published-6-july>
. But he said he felt some humility when he thought about the decisions he took 
at the time.

“I have a real humility about the decisions that I took and the issues around 
them 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/24/tony-blair-i-underestimated-forces-of-destabilisation-in-iraq-chilcot-report>
,” he said. “I was trying to deal with this in the aftermath of 9/11 and it was 
very tough, it was very difficult. I think it’s important that we also have 
humility then about the next phase of policymaking, so we try and actually 
learn the lessons of the whole period since that time.”

He said Islamic extremists posed a threat even before the Iraq war and that 
people in Europe faced the risk of even bigger terror attacks if the extremists 
were not confronted.

Asked whether he was worried by the thought of Donald Trump becoming US 
president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/26/donald-trump-delegates-count-republican-nomination-news-campaign-2016>
, he said he had “the same view of Donald Trump as most people, here at least,” 
and he hoped Americans would choose their next president wisely.
