
In the years following the global financial crisis, the academic study and 
teaching ofeconomics <https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics> has come 
in for a bashing. In fact, it has faced the kind of fundamental criticism 
rarely directed towards entire disciplines.

 The apparent failure of economists to predict, let alone prevent, the 2008 
crash has led to accusations that conventional economic teaching cannot 
adequately explain the complex dynamics and risks of modern economies.


Among those championing reform have been disgruntled students, who have 
demanded that a more “pluralist 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pluralism_in_economics>”, diverse, range of 
theories be taught on their undergraduate degrees.

What success have they had so far? After years of campaigning, universities 
are making modifications to their courses, or adding new ones.

Pressure groups

The Post-Crash Economics Society <http://www.post-crasheconomics.com/> at the 
University of Manchester has received much coverage for its campaigning, while 
theRethinking Economics <http://www.rethinkeconomics.org/> network is 
connecting like-minded groups at universities throughout the UK. Both have 
links with the widerInternational Student Initiative for Pluralism in Economics 
<http://www.isipe.net/>.


Student critics have been backed up by prominent academics such as Robert 
Skidelsky <http://ineteconomics.org/ideas-papers/blog/post-crash-economics> and 
Ha-Joon Chang 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/may/11/after-crash-need-revolution-in-economics-teaching-chang-aldred>
 and aReteaching Economics <http://reteacheconomics.org/> group has been 
founded alongside the student movement. Meanwhile,surveys of employers 
<http://www.res.org.uk/view/article7Apr13Features.html> have uncovered industry 
demand for changes to university programmes, identifying areas for improvement 
in the skills and knowledge of economics graduates.

New modules

Now a growing number of UK universities are implementing changes to adapt 
their degrees to a “post-crisis” world. For some institutions, this has meant 
the launch of additional modules within existing undergraduate programmes.

Lecturer Alan Fernihough says the economic history module added to the course 
at Queen’s University Belfast “gives students a long-run perspective on 
economic conditions and helps contextualise the recent state of the global 
economy”.

A new first-year module at Royal Holloway, University of London, covers 
non-market voices in economics; growth from an historical perspective; 
difficult allocations for markets to handle; and behavioural economics. 
Professor Jeff Frank says he and and his colleagues saw a “market opportunity” 
to make changes to the course.

“Students realised that the dry-as-a-bone economics they were being taught 
couldn’t deal with the complexities of economic issues,” Frank says.

Real world 

The real-world application of economic theories is an important part of these 
new curriculum initiatives. With this in mind, Goldsmiths, University of London 
is launching anew single-discipline degree 
<http://www.rethinkeconomics.org/news/2015/10/pluralism-real-world-economics-a-new-curriculum-at-goldsmiths/>
 in economics in October. Lecturer Constaninos Repapis says it has been 
developed in consultation with student and academic reformers with “an interest 
to develop a curriculum that better prepares economic graduates for the 
challenges of the modern world”.

The University of Greenwich, which introduced modules in economic history, the 
history of economic thought, and international development and finance in 2014, 
says it too isresponding to student demands for pluralist teaching.

“We’ve included more pluralism and real-world application in the classroom in 
order to explain current economic events,” says lecturer Sara Gorgoni.

At Kingston University, Professor Steve Keen teaches a module on “becoming an 
economist”, which explores disagreements between economic thinkers, and a range 
of schools of thought. Kingston, he says, “has set itself the objective of 
being the leading pluralist school of economics in the UK – and possibly the 
world”.


Others, including University College London and the University of Bristol, 
have worked on an open-source curriculum programme,the CORE project 
<http://www.core-econ.org/> (Curriculum Open-Access Resources in Economics), 
which takes a restructured approach to the format of the traditional economics 
degree. Materials from this programme have also been made availableas an online 
learning tool <http://www.core-econ.org/>.


Universities say they are also trying to address concerns from employers. “As 
a direct response to employer demands that economic graduates are better able 
to communicate their knowledge to non-economists, Goldsmiths has developed a 
third-year module called communication and presentation skills that focuses on 
how economists present their findings to non-specialists in an accessible way,” 
says Repapis.

Way ahead

This collaboration between students, lecturers and employers has begun to 
generate greater reflection on the way in which universities teach economics 
more generally.

Frank argues that more resources need to be allocated to these departments. 
“Economics departments in particular operate on the cheap, with very high 
student-to-staff ratios,” he points out.

“There is a myth that electronic resources can substitute for academic time. 
It can, for superficial textbook learning. But what students really want is a 
chance to interact with academics, engage with ideas.”

Perhaps this is the next step in improving economics courses.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
