
My partner of 13 years is having an affair with a woman he meets on work 
trips. It started 18 months ago and they first had sex in the summer. I 
confronted him a few months ago and he admitted it. She is 14 years younger, 
lives abroad and wants my partner to be with her and her young children. We do 
not have children. Her husband doesn’t know of the affair, but they are 
separating on grounds of his behaviour toward her – and apparently because he 
didn’t want children. I am heartbroken and feel betrayed. Things have been so 
good between us, though we have both experienced several losses and big life 
events. We have applied for counselling, but although he shows remorse, the 
affair goes on remotely and I don’t hear him say he wants to fight for our 
relationship. Is it worth having counselling? Should I just ask him to leave? 
And how can I stay strong?

• When leaving a message on this page, please be sensitive to the fact that 
you are responding to a real person in the grip of a real-life dilemma, who 
wrote to Private Lives asking for help, and may well view your comments here. 
Please consider especially how your words or the tone of your message could be 
perceived by someone in this situation, and be aware that comments that appear 
to be disruptive or disrespectful to the individual concerned will be removed.

• If you would like fellow readers to respond to a dilemma of yours, send us 
an outline of the situation of about 150 words. For advice from Pamela 
Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your 
concerns.

• All correspondence should reach us by Wednesday morning. Email: 
private.lives@theguardian.com <> (please don’t send attachments).
