
Ecologist Mark Browne knew he’d found something big when, after months of 
tediously examining sediment along shorelines around the world, he noticed 
something no one had predicted: fibers. Everywhere. They were tiny and 
synthetic and he was finding them in the greatest concentration near sewage 
outflows. In other words, they were coming from us.


In fact, 85% of the human-made material found on the shoreline were 
microfibers, and matched the types of material, such as nylon and acrylic, used 
in clothing.

It is not news that microplastic – which the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration defines as plastic fragments 5mm or smaller – is ubiquitous in 
all five majorocean gyres <http://5gyres.org/what_is_the_issue/the_problem/>. 
And numerous studies have shown that small organisms readily ingest 
microplastics, introducing toxic pollutants to the food chain.

But Browne’s 2011 paper announcing his findings 
<http://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/es201811s> marked a milestone, according 
to Abigail Barrows, an independent marine research scientist based in 
Stonington, Maine, who has helped to check for plastic in more than 150 
one-liter water samples collected around the world. “He’s fantastic – very well 
respected” among marine science researchers, says Barrows. “He is a pioneer in 
microplastics research.”

By sampling wastewater from domestic washing machines, Browne estimated that 
around 1,900 individual fibers can be rinsed off a single synthetic garment - 
ending up in our oceans.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F42mmh%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F42mmh%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F24%2F1414190206606%2F1d11dfa9-6221-4daf-8f49-b72a6123a6e0-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inside%20the%20lonely%20fight%20against%20the%20biggest%20environmental%20problem%20you've%20never%20heard%20of&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F42mmh%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inside+the+lonely+fight+against+the+biggest+environmental+problem+you%27ve+never+heard+of&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F42mmh%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F24%2F1414190206606%2F1d11dfa9-6221-4daf-8f49-b72a6123a6e0-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Tiny plastic fibers taken from a water sample in Blue Hill Bay in the gulf of 
Maine. Photograph: Marine Environmental Research Institute 
Alarmed by his findings, Browne reached out to prominent clothing brands for 
help. He sought partnerships to try to determine the flow of synthetic fibers 
from clothing to the washing machine to the ocean. He also hoped his research 
might help develop better textile design to prevent the migration of toxic 
fibers into water systems.

The reaction wasn’t what he expected.

He contacted leaders in the outdoor apparel industry - big purveyors of 
synthetic fabrics - including Patagonia, Nike and Polartec. But none of these 
companies agreed to lend support.

“Perhaps it’s my pitch,” Browne joked. “We want to look for new, more durable 
materials that do not emit so much microplastic.”

In 2013, Brown presented his vision for a program called Benign by Design, 
backed by a team of engineers and scientists from academic institutions around 
the world as well as from the Environmental Protection Agency. The group’s goal 
is to help the industry tackle the problem of synthetic microfiber migration 
into waterways and marine ecosystems. He proposed creating a range of working 
groups where scientists and industry representatives would work together to 
develop synthetic materials that do not shed synthetic fibers – or do so 
minimally but are still cost-effective, high-performing and, if possible, rely 
on recycled materials.

Only one firm, women’s clothing brand Eileen Fisher, offered to support him. 
The company’s $10,000 grant has supported a section of Browne’s research over 
the past year.

“Any lifecycle issue, especially when it’s about a huge consumer product like 
clothing, is important,” says Shona Quinn, sustainability leader with Eileen 
Fisher. “[Browne] is raising an issue no one else has been studying.”

While Browne sees the grant as a validation of his efforts, 90% of the 
products Eileen Fisher sells are made of natural fibers. He’s still hoping to 
find a clothing company that will collaborate on research and development of 
new synthetic fabrics that will not shed microfibers.

While pitching his idea at the Launch innovation conference 
<http://www.launch.org/process/summit>, Browne spoke to Jim Zieba, vice 
president of Polartec’s advanced concepts and business development group. In a 
follow-up email, Browne asked if Zeiba could provide him with polymers from 
Polartec textiles so that Browne could grow the database of materials he 
maintains to help discern the unidentified fibers in his samples. He did not 
hear back from Zeiba.

Allon Cohne, global marketing director at Polartec, says he’s familiar with 
Browne and his research, but that Polartec has already done an internal study 
to analyze the effluent at its Lawrence, Massachusetts, manufacturing plant. 
Aside from characterizing the amount of microfibers contained in the effluent 
as “minimal”, Cohne said he could not publicly share the study or any details – 
such as what minimal means.

Browne says he’s glad to hear that Polartec conducted a study, but maintains 
that any truly scientific study would be open to peer review. (As it happens, 
the words “Committed to Science” are currently presented onPolartec’s website 
<http://polartec.com/>, above a video describing Polatec’s approach to fabric 
innovation.)

Patagonia, a company known for its strong environmental ethic and sustainable 
manufacturing processes, has also declined to work with Browne. The company’s 
strategic environmental responsibility manager, Todd Copeland, says the company 
considers Browne’s findings too preliminary to commit resources directly to a 
project like Benign by Design, until it sees more solid evidence that specific 
types of products or materials, such as fleece jackets or polyester base 
layers, are contributing to a major environmental threat. “I don’t know how 
much effort we want to spend looking for the solution before we know where the 
problem is,” Copeland says.

Browne says that, without industry support, he doesn’t know how he can move 
ahead with his efforts to address microfiber migration from textiles at their 
source.

“I think [clothing companies] have all put a lot of marketing money into 
environmental programs, but I’ve not seen evidence that they’ve put much money 
into research,” says Browne.

In fact, Patagonia maintains a policy to not directly support research, its 
spokesman Adam Fetcher told me. Instead, it supports non-profit groups doing 
environmental advocacy work. Over the past five years, Patagonia has awarded 
close to $70,000 in grants to groups focused on the microplastics pollution 
issue. These include Algalita Marine Research Foundation (founded by captain 
Charles Moore, who first raised the issue of microplastics in oceans), 5 Gyres, 
and Adventurers and Scientists for Conservation (ASC), with whom Abigail 
Barrows works to collect surface water samples from around the world for her 
research into microfibers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F42mmh%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F42mmh%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F24%2F1414190327447%2F08919758-8491-48c3-a75e-0a4ddabd82b3-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inside%20the%20lonely%20fight%20against%20the%20biggest%20environmental%20problem%20you've%20never%20heard%20of&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F42mmh%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inside+the+lonely+fight+against+the+biggest+environmental+problem+you%27ve+never+heard+of&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F42mmh%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F24%2F1414190327447%2F08919758-8491-48c3-a75e-0a4ddabd82b3-1020x612.jpeg>
 Microplastic researcher Abigail Barrows draws water samples from a lobster 
boat. Photograph: Veronica Young 
Perhaps Browne would have more luck if he were an environmental advocate 
rather than a scientist.

Still, Gregg Treinish, ASC executive director, says he would need to raise a 
great deal more money to fund the level of research he feels microfibers 
deserve. “Determining what type of plastic is in the water is hard and 
expensive – up to $1000 per sample.”

Bad chemistry

Browne’s difficulty in finding companies to cooperate might be compounded by 
the fact that the industry that is already under scrutiny for different 
environmental issues.According to the World Bank 
<https://www.beaconreader.com/climate-confidential/but%20according%20to%20the%20World%20Bank>
, textile manufacturing generates up to 20% of industrial wastewater in China, 
and a number of environmental groups, chiefly Greenpeace, have launched 
campaigns to pressure clothing makers to rid their supply chains of toxic 
chemicals, such as perfluorinated chemicals (PFCs) used in textile processing. 
PFCs are linked to environmental toxicity and human health problems, and Kevin 
Brigden, a chemist and Greenpeace honorary research fellow, says some 
manufacturers are finally beginning to phase them out.

But Brigden fears microfibers released from synthetic fibers could just as 
chemically hazardous. “Some chemicals are very water soluble, so they wash out 
[into wastewater during textile manufacturing],” Brigden says. “Others are less 
soluble so they take time to wash off. If fabrics break down then [microfibers] 
are another pathway for those [chemicals into the environment].”

Those fighting the use of microbeads in beauty products are finding more 
traction, Barrows says, because phasing them out is straightforward. Getting 
rid of synthetic fibers, on the other hand, would be extremely difficult. Not 
only are synthetic fabrics durable and versatile, but they can have smaller 
water and energy footprint than natural fabrics. “Synthetic fabrics have many 
great applications,” Barrows concedes, and determining how to measure their 
environmental impacts is an overwhelming challenge.

Other sources, other solutions

Polartec’s Cohne argues that too much emphasis is being placed on the clothing 
industry and that carpet and upholstery manufactures ought to be considered as 
equally important sources of synthetic microfiber runoff in the industrial 
sector. Professional carpet cleaners might be another vector.

Cohne also believes more onus should be put on washing machine manufacturers 
to find ways to capture the clothing fibers so that they do not ultimately 
enter wastewater treatment systems.

Browne has reached out to appliance manufacturers Siemens, Dyson (which sells 
washing machines in Europe), and LG, hoping to engage their design or research 
teams in a discussion about how they might be able to develop microfiber 
filters to prevent them from entering the water.

None has responded.

However, a Canadian tinkerer turned entrepreneur named Blair Jollimore is 
working on a solution. After his septic tank backed up and flooded his home, he 
discovered the main culprit was lint from his washing machine. So the former 
airplane engine mechanic, based in Nova Scotia, created a filter for his home 
laundry machine. “I’m a mechanical engineer, so I modified a water filter and 
added stainless steel screen,” says Jollimore. “I’ve been using it for 14 
years.”

In 2003, some of his neighbors who were also having septic tank problems asked 
if he could make filters for their machines, too, and a home business was born. 
Jollimore has sold more than 1,000 of his filters to homeowners from England to 
Hawaii and now, with Browne’s encouragement, is preparing to pitch his filter 
to appliance makers as a way to rid wastewater of microfibers.

While he has found a screen that would capture strands down to 1 micron – 
necessary to stop all microfibers – he is still experimenting with what forcing 
water through such a fine filter could do to laundry machine function. “Every 
bit of dirt in your laundry would be captured, so it would back up the 
process,” he says.

As for capturing the fibers at their next stop, wastewater treatment plants, 
Browne is not optimistic. He says he has conferred with many engineers who work 
in sewage treatment and none of them thinks removing fibers – or microbeads, 
which enter wastewater through residential plumbing – is viable. Besides, he 
says, even if those microplastics were removed from the liquid waste, they 
would end up in sludge, which in some places ends up being turned into 
fertilizers. In those cases, the plastics would still enter the ecosystem, and 
conceivably the food chain.

Browne concedes that more research is required to better understand the 
sources and impacts of synthetic microfibers in the environment, and he wishes 
he could get the clothing companies on his side. “The [textile] people I’ve 
talked to have not been trained environmental scientists, they’re more often 
marketing people.”

“Industry is saying, ‘you just have to do more work on it’. But that will 
require someone to support it,” he says. “It seems to be a way of avoiding 
dealing with the problem.”
