
The UK has brought water, sanitation 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/sanitation> and hygiene 
improvements to almost 63 million people in poorer countries over the past few 
years, but itsaid <http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/aid> 
programmes still need to be more sustainable, targeted and detailed, according 
to the independent aid watchdog.

In a new report, the Independent Commission for Aid Impact 
<http://icai.independent.gov.uk/> (Icai) says the Department for International 
Development 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/department-for-international-development-dfid>
 (DfID) has made a “significant contribution” to extending global access to
water, sanitation and hygiene 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/aug/28/toilets-lives-un-chief>
, noting that DfID managed to exceed its target of reaching 60 million people 
through its programmes between 2011 and 2015.

The commission says DfID’s claims to have reached 62.9 million people are 
based on sound evidence, and awards the department its second best rating of 
green/amber for a “relatively good achievement on impact and results 
management, but weaker performance on sustainability”.

The review – Assessing DfID’s results in water, sanitation and hygiene 
<http://icai.independent.gov.uk/reports/> – finds that not enough is being done 
to make sure the gains become a “permanent part of people’s lives” because the 
department’s programmes typically last no longer than three to five years.

The assessment calls on DfID to address the long-term problems that thwart 
access for millions of people, such as water insecurity, poor infrastructure 
maintenance, weak local institutions and bad hygiene practices.


The commission also expresses concerns over DfID’s efforts to monitor the 
impact of its aid and, more broadly, whether the department represents value 
for money. Although the department spent £698m from 2010 to 2014 on clean 
water, toilets, handwashing facilities and programmes to encourage better 
hygiene behaviour, it does not routinely collect impact data.

While such investments are thought to have helped reduce infant diarrhoea, 
parasitic worms and other infectious diseases – as well asyielding school 
attendance improvements 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/jul/02/democratic-republic-congo-rape-capital-conflict-sexual-violence>
 and reducing gender inequality by cutting the time women spending fetching 
water – Icai said it was hard to build up a bigger picture.

“While such results may be occurring across the portfolio, we cannot reach 
conclusions as to where and to what extent,” says the report. “This in turn 
makes it difficult to conclude that DfID is doing all it can to maximise 
impact.”


The commission urges the department to collect data to improve its results and 
help it better target those who most need its help.

Richard Gledhill, lead Icai commissioner for the review, said that while DfID 
should be justifiably proud to have reached so many millions, it was worrying 
that the department wasn’t doing more to bring about lasting change.

“DfID also needs to improve how it monitors value for money and the impact of 
its programmes,” he said.

“And although it is already working in the poorest and hardest-to-reach 
communities, the new commitment to ‘leave no one behind’ in theglobal goals 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/sustainable-development-goals> 
means it will also need to target women and girls, the elderly, and people with 
disabilities within these communities.”

DfID said it was collecting data on the number of women and girls who have 
access to water, sanitation and hygiene, and the extent to which UK aid helps 
vulnerable groups access it. The department also said all its programmes in the 
area were intended to build sustainable local and national systems, and that it 
was committed to ensuring value for money in all its work.


A DfID spokeswoman said: “As this report confirms, 60 million of the world’s 
poorest people now have access to clean water and sanitation thanks to British 
aid. We should be proud of this achievement, which is firmly in the UK’s 
interest.


“We will now build on this success by helping a further 60 million people by 
2020.”

Barbara Frost, chief executive of WaterAid <http://www.wateraid.org/uk>, said 
the report highlighted the need for clean water, proper toilets and good 
hygiene.

“Some 315,000 children under five die each year from diarrhoea linked to dirty 
water and poor sanitation,” she added. “Safe water and sanitation are human 
rights and, along with hygiene, they improve health and productivity, help keep 
girls in school, and can save the lives of new mothers and their newborns who 
might otherwise die of infections from being born in an unhygienic environment.”
