
The NHS would be as safe as a pet hamster in the presence of a hungry python 
if Boris Johnson, Michael Gove and Iain Duncan Smith rose to power following 
Brexit, SirJohn Major <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/john-major> has said.

In an extraordinary attack on his fellow Conservatives, Major produced a 
withering assessment of leading members of Vote Leave, calling their campaign 
deceitful, untrue, depressing, awful and “verging on the squalid”.

The former prime minister insisted his intervention was not a personal slight 
against Johnson or Gove, but a more general criticism of the leave campaign’s 
shift to the right on immigration and claims that they would protect theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>.

Related: How do I … vote in the EU referendum? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/05/how-do-i-vote-in-the-eu-referendum>

However, he went on to claim Gove had wanted to privatise the NHS, Johnson 
wished to charge people for health services and Duncan Smith advocated moving 
to a social insurance system.

“The NHS is about as safe with them as a pet hamster would be with a hungry 
python,” Major said on BBC1’s The Andrew Marr Show.

He added Johnson was a “court jester” but not a serious politician and said 
that the Conservatives Johnson had divided would not be loyal to him after 
leaving the EU.

“I think I would offer him this piece of advice – if the leave campaign led by 
Boris continue to divide the Conservative party as they are doing at the 
present time, and if Boris has the laudable ambition, for it is a laudable 
ambition, to become prime minister, he will find if he achieves that that he 
will not have the loyalty of the party he divided.

“Iain Duncan Smith was serially disloyal in the 1990s, when he became leader 
he was surprised that no one was loyal to him and Boris should learn from that.

Turning to Vote Leave’s claims about the economy, Major said they were 
“fundamentally dishonest” about the cost of the EU being £350m a week.

“And on the subject that they have veered towards, having lost the economic 
argument, of immigration, I think their campaign is verging on the squalid,” he 
said.


“I am angry at the way the British people are being misled, this is much more 
important than a general election, this is going to affect people, their 
livelihoods, their future, for a very long time to come and if they are given 
honest, straightforward facts and they decide to leave, then that is the 
decision the British people take.


“But if they decide to leave on the basis of inaccurate information, 
inaccurate information known to be inaccurate, then I regard that as deceitful.”

The attack, which was likely to have been authorised by the official remain 
campaign and Downing Street, is designed to counter the Vote Leave claim that 
it would spend at least £100m more a week on the NHS out of money clawed back 
from Brussels.

Leading Brexit campaigners reacted by taking a serious tone in interviews on 
Sunday morning, rather than launching a counterattack on Major. In an interview 
with Peston on Sunday, Gove said he still believed the party could come back 
together after a vote to leave, and he would not want to choose between his 
close allies Cameron and Johnson.

He also argued that the UK will not actually have left the EU by 2020 in the 
event of a vote for Brexit, implying there will be a long time period to get 
the negotiations right.

“We wouldn’t have left the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> by the end of this parliament but we 
would in due course bring [immigration] down to tens of thousands,” he said.

Related: Nigel Farage: migrant sex attacks to be nuclear bomb of EU referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/05/nigel-farage-migrant-sex-attacks-to-be-nuclear-bomb-of-eu-referendum>

A backbench Brexit campaigner, Bernard Jenkin, tweeted that his side was 
“rising above the personal attacks and bitterness of John Major, with positive 
case for leave”. Andrea Leadsom, a Conservative energy minister, told the BBC 5 
Live’s Pienaar’s Politics: “He’s obviously decided playing the man is going to 
be the better tactic for the remain side.”

Speaking on Marr as well, Johnson dismissed Major’s accusations and said he 
wanted to talk about the arguments.


The former London mayor said it was “absolute nonsense” that he was supporting 
the leave campaign out of personal ambition and added that he did not want it 
to become about “personality politics”.

He also distanced himself from a Vote Leave poster that said: “David Cameron 
cannot be trusted on immigration,” claiming he had never seen it before.

Major’s attack is the latest escalation of hostilities between leading 
Conservative members of the in and out campaigns, which have engaged in vicious 
claims and counterclaims in the last few weeks.

Johnson has previously accused the prime minister of leading a government that 
had eroded trust on immigration by failing to meet its targets.

On Sunday, he wrote jointly with Gove in the Telegraph that the prime minister 
hadput the British economy in “severe danger” 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/06/04/michael-gove-and-boris-johnson-tell-david-cameron-youve-deceived/>
 by giving away a UK veto during talks in Brussels earlier this year.

Related: Poll gives Brexit campaign lead of three percentage points 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/04/poll-eu-brexit-lead-opinium> 

Other leading members of the leave campaign have more directly impugned the 
prime minister’s character, painting him as untrustworthy and damaged as a 
leader.

Three backbench Tory MPs have suggested he should face a leadership challenge 
after the referendum, and more could speak out if he continues to campaign so 
ferociously to stay in the EU.

Duncan Smith last week accused Cameron of insincerity and an attempt to 
deceive the public 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/03/iain-duncan-smith-accuses-cameron-pm-lying-eu-immigration->
 over EU immigration.


From the other side, Michael Heseltine, a Conservative former deputy prime 
minister,accused Johnson of behaving “irresponsibly [and] recklessly” 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/17/johnsons-obscene-remarks-may-have-ruined-his-chances-as-pm-says-heseltine>
 and making “preposterous, obscene political remarks”.

Ken Clarke, a Tory former chancellor and home secretary, said Johnson was not 
serious and justa nicer version of Donald Trump 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/30/boris-johnson-nicer-than-trump-but-as-divisive-ken-clarke>
, while Nick Clegg, the Lib Dem former deputy prime minister, said on Friday 
that the former London mayor was like “Trump with a thesaurus”.

Despite the bitterness of the rows, the prime minister told the Mail on Sunday 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3625530/I-m-going-make-Boris-pay-warns-Cameron-PM-says-Bojo-s-Brexit-argument-nonsense-stilts-WON-T-sack-wins-vote.html>
 that he would want Johnson and Gove to have major roles in the government if 
Britain voted to stay in.

He also warned that quitting the EU would create a “clear and present” danger 
of rocketing mortgage costs by £1,000 on average or £1,500 in the worst-case 
scenario.
