
I recently had a six-month affair with a married woman. We became close, but 
hadn’t explored how things could progress. Then, a year ago, she seemed to 
realise that we had no long-term future. Without warning, she became angry and 
abusive. Despite her husband and children, she threatened to speak to my wife 
and make the affair public. We no longer speak.

After hearing nothing from her for a year, she has become involved with my 
best friend via social media (they have lots of public exchanges online). I’m 
confused by her motives – she doesn’t know him, but clearly knows he is my 
friend. Nobody knows about the affair, including my friend. It doesn’t seem 
coincidental. He is married, and I’m worried that she may put him through a 
similar ordeal. This seems calculated to upset me and create a divide between 
my friends. I am worried how he will react if I tell him, but I’m also 
concerned for him. Do I speak to my friend or remain silent?

• When leaving a message on this page, please be sensitive to the fact that 
you are responding to a real person in the grip of a real-life dilemma, who 
wrote to Private Lives asking for help, and may well view your comments here. 
Please consider especially how your words or the tone of your message could be 
perceived by someone in this situation, and be aware that comments that appear 
to be disruptive or disrespectful to the individual concerned will be removed.

• If you would like fellow readers to respond to a dilemma of yours, send us 
an outline of the situation of about 150 words. For advice from Pamela 
Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your 
concerns.

• All correspondence should reach us by Wednesday morning. Email: 
private.lives@theguardian.com <mailto:private.lives@theguardian.com> (please 
don’t send attachments).
