
Born before the war, I grew up in a south Wales working-class family and went 
on from my local grammar school to study chemistry at Bristol university. I 
stayed on to work for my PhD in the research laboratory. A slightly older 
postgraduate introduced me to the Guardian. I had developed a social democratic 
outlook so I was easily converted, and the paper has been an important part of 
my life ever since.

As was common in the 1960s, I took a one-year postdoctoral fellowship in the 
US. I returned to the UK to a job in the scientific civil service – and to get 
married. The next 30 or so years were occupied by the pleasures of family life 
enriched by the many satisfactions of a scientific career, the Guardian spread 
out on my desk at lunchtimes.

My wife and I retired to Shropshire about 20 years ago. The Guardian is a 
daily must, though oddly I never seem to have quite enough time to do it 
justice. I usually make my way quickly through to the Opinion section. I share
Polly Toynbee <http://www.theguardian.com/profile/pollytoynbee>’s humanistic 
and republican outlook and seem to agree with her generally (though not on 
inheritance tax). Her disclosures of what the government is up to are 
depressing but it is essential that we know these things. I enjoySimon Jenkins 
<http://www.theguardian.com/profile/simonjenkins>’s maverick views and read all 
the other regular contributors. As an oldie, I findMrs Cameron’s Diary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/series/mrs-cameron-s-diary> totes 
hilair.

• If you would like to be interviewed in this space, send a brief note to 
good.to.meet.you@theguardian.com <mailto:good.to.meet.you@theguardian.com>
