
Chefs across the US are turning their back on fancy cooking equipment to 
return to the most elemental way of cooking: by fire.


In 2013, after fork-lifting a hearth and grill into ARC Food & Libations in 
Costa Mesa,California <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california>, 
co-owner and chef Noah von Blöm decided to do everything – including boiling 
water – using wood-generated heat.

“There’s something meditative about coming in every day and building a fire,” 
he explains.

The hearth in ARC burns at up to 2,000F – so hot that Von Blöm can take an 
empty cast-iron pan out of it and cook calamari in the pan on the way to a 
table. There’s flash-cooking for you.

Von Blöm turns out three-quarter-inch-thick bacon that he renders on a flat 
cast iron on the grill, then finishes over the open flame and with maple sherry 
lime-zest glaze, as well as two-and-a-half pound steaks. But what Von Blöm 
really, really loves to do is work with the embers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dayq%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dayq%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F14%2F1444847897690%2F0d8da6ff-69fd-4cf4-a8ec-13a42afa7b72-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fire%3A%20the%20latest%20must-have%20ingredient%20in%20California%20restaurant%20kitchens&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dayq%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fire%3A+the+latest+must-have+ingredient+in+California+restaurant+kitchens&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dayq%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F14%2F1444847897690%2F0d8da6ff-69fd-4cf4-a8ec-13a42afa7b72-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Fire at ARC Food & Libations. Photograph: Ann Watson 
“We bury things like duck and roasted pork butt shoulder in the coals of the 
grill at the end of the night, and in the morning it’s the most beautiful 
you’ve ever made.”

Smoke in Plano, Texas, is known for its Eisenhower steak, which is cooked 
directly in the flames. Executive chef Tim Byres also likes to cook vegetables 
in the flames until they’re black, then purees them and makes them into an 
ashy-flavored salsa.

Joshua Skenes has operated Saison in San Francisco for seven years, and fire 
in some form kisses every dish he serves up. He built his oven himself using 
cement and bricks, and cooks food in cast iron pans and sometimes throws a 
marrowbone directly into the flames to harvest the marrow.

With foods hanging or sitting on nearby metal shelves, he also uses the 
peripheral heat to cook above the fire’s embers. Here he places ingredients 
such as milk and caramel so they gently pick up smoky flavors and impart them 
to an ice cream that is, he says, the restaurant’s best dessert.
 Tim Byres’s ember-cooked meat. Photograph: Tim Byres' ember food 
He too believes the embers are the real gem of a fire and says fire pulls the 
depths of flavor from ingredients. He cooks by instinct and feel, which is 
illustrated perfectly by his method of roasting duck.

He roasts whole ducks over the embers for about a minute, then takes them off 
and hangs them up away from the heat for about 20 minutes. “Then we repeat the 
process eight, 10, 12 times,” he says. “Residual heat is one of the most 
important cooking elements and is often overlooked.”

Saison’s set menu at $398 (he also has à la carte items) may be bringing you 
out in a sweat, but all is not lost: you can cook with fire at home, but do it 
like the pros.

Von Blöm advises using a simple charcoal fire, but adding pieces of wood to 
boost the flavor – and soaking them in water for a smokier taste. But don’t 
pack the charcoal or wood in too tightly, he advises. “Fire is living so it 
needs oxygen.”

Start with shrimp, which cook in moments over fire, he says. Marinate them for 
at least a day and up to four, then after a minute or two on the grill, finish 
them tossed in lemon juice, butter or fresh herbs.

Or try a pork loin. Milk brine it for one to three days, using a gallon of 
milk, half a cup of sugar and half a cup of salt, which will render creamy 
pork. Season it with additions such as peppercorns, clove and bay leaf.

Start a fire outside, in your grill or whatever you use, and let it burn for 
an hour, says Skenes. When the embers are white hot, scoop them into a pile and 
grill a piece of meat about three inches over them until it’s golden brown on 
one side, then flip it over, fanning the embers frequently. Do the same with 
fish, just add a little oil to both your seafood and the grill so it doesn’t 
stick – and make sure your filet is completely dry or you’ll leave half of it 
on the grates.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dayq%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dayq%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F14%2F1444848232140%2F23ec044a-02a6-466b-9213-d800f0410259-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fire%3A%20the%20latest%20must-have%20ingredient%20in%20California%20restaurant%20kitchens&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dayq%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fire%3A+the+latest+must-have+ingredient+in+California+restaurant+kitchens&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dayq%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F14%2F1444848232140%2F23ec044a-02a6-466b-9213-d800f0410259-2060x1236.jpeg>
 ‘When the embers are white hot, scoop them into a pile and grill a piece of 
meat about three inches over them.’ Photograph: Ann Watson 
For green leafy vegetables, Skenes favors a two-part method.

Step one: Heat some seasoned broth and put your vegetables in it. Then quickly 
transfer the entire thing to an ice bath, so the vegetables part-blanch and 
part-poach.

Step two: Oil your veggies and throw them on to the grill over the embers just 
until the tips get a little golden and crispy, which takes a minute or two. 
Serve them with the leftover broth.

For Byres it’s all about the rubs, which he details in his book, Smoke: New 
Firewood Cooking, which create a barrier between the fire and the meat. But 
given that cooking by fire is so basic, he hopes consumers tinker with his rub 
recipes.

And that’s what fire is all about: tinkering, playing around and going with 
your (contented) gut.

Chef Noah von Blöm’s shrimp marinade

Minced garlic

Minced ginger

Ground coriander

Lemon and lime zest

Olive oil

Touch of chili flakes 

Chef Tim Byres’ BBQ beef coffee cure

1/3 cup finely ground dark roast coffee

1/3 cup dark chili powder

1/3 cup smoked paprika

½ cup kosher salt

2/3 cup packed dark brown sugar

3 Tbs sugar

2 Tbs granulated garlic

1 Tbs ground cumin

1 tsp cayenne pepper



