
Change is coming; or so they say. After interviews, backroom strategising and 
deals being struck, the new UN secretary general will assume his or (hopefully) 
her role in January. But what does that mean for the men and women across the 
globe who expect more from the UN and from its humanitarian system as a whole?

Related: Secret aid worker: fixing the humanitarian and development divide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/apr/05/secret-aid-worker-fixing-the-humanitarian-and-development-divide>

As a veteran aid worker of large-scale emergencies at the UN, I have closely 
followed the build up to theWorld Humanitarian Summit (WHS) 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/world-humanitarian-summit>. 
Talking to those doing much of the donkey work for the WHS there are many areas 
of focus – partnerships with the private sector, civil society, humanitarian 
financing, obligations of member states, etc. It’s all very outward looking. 
But there is an elephant in the room: the humanitarian leaders sitting at the 
helm of the system itself.

My work should focus on supporting emergency operations, but I am spending far 
more time than I would like counselling people who are the real energy and 
driving force behind operations, and who should be leading the way forward for 
humanitarian action, but who are instead desperately disheartened by leadership 
decisions that continue to drag the sector down.

I watch with them as our leadership is exposed, unable to manage the 
challenges of responding to multiple crises in the modern world such as the
earthquake in Haiti 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-quake-haiti-relief-idUSTRE61P03N20100226> 
and thePakistan floods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/aug/10/pakistan-flood-international-aid>
 in 2010. Put simply, the current generation of leaders - suffering from the 
negative effects of time, ageing and pride – is past its best.

That’s not to disrespect the great work these men and women have contributed 
to the humanitarian system over the years. In their day they were on the ground 
responding to the famine inEthiopia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ethiopia>
, human-rights violations in Palestine, and conflicts in the Democratic 
Republic of Congo, Sudan, Kosovo and Bosnia. They deserve recognition for that.


Related: The humanitarian system: 'A mammoth machinery losing track of what it 
is for' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/22/humanitarian-aid-system-power-concentrated-hands-of-few-losing-track>

But I also see a generation that peaked during a time of volunteerism and 
improvisation, now trying to keep pace and stay relevant in a time of 
professionalism, mass communications, advanced technology and cost efficiency.


From Sudan to Syria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>, Geneva to New 
York, outdated approaches are holding back progress. We desperately need 
decentralisation, to empty out headquarter offices and get people into regional 
and country offices.


To paraphrase a fellow aid worker during a recent conversation: “if 
humanitarian leadership were a football team it would be a team of forwards who 
only liked playing at home, argue for the ball, seek the glory, and all while 
being oblivious to the opposition walking in goal after goal.”


As humanitarian action has become ever more visible and scrutinised, our old 
leaders are found ever more wanting. There was criticism for failing to 
communicate with affected communities during theIndian Ocean tsunami 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/25/-sp-boxing-day-tsunami-scar-aceh-village-nusa-indonesia>
. Then, despite our “readiness to respond” mantra, we were late, slow paced, 
and highly uncoordinated during the Ebola crisis. There were also moments we 
could have spoken up more – but when a mass of NGOs were expelled from Sudan, 
caught up in bigger political games, humanitarian leadership was at best timid 
in its reaction.

Related: Secret aid worker: what should doctors do when we witness human 
rights abuses? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/apr/12/secret-aid-worker-what-should-doctors-do-when-we-witness-human-rights-abuses>

We need new leaders who will stop rewarding siloed attitudes, because right 
now, decisions, particularly related to resources, are frequently determined by 
agency power rather than humanitarian needs and who is best positioned to 
respond. Our leaders should not be bickering over mandates and who should take 
the lead in co-ordinating the refugee response inSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> and neighbouring countries.

The current leadership has tried to deal with criticisms of efficiency and 
organisational bloating, but as a consequence they have grown too reliant on 
short-term solutions, finding ways to pay people less rather than paying less 
people. This has resulted in many competent colleagues, already fighting to 
achieve results within a stifling system, feeling even more frustrated and 
under-valued, while others do not believe their luck that their roles even 
exist.

In the build up to the summit, I hoped to see the current leadership empower 
young and alternative leaders-in-waiting, but instead I feel it’s grown more 
defensive, micromanaging humanitarian operations and actively preventing the 
growth of emerging talent, especially anyone who could challenge them.

I’ve seen some truly bizarre reasoning for why colleagues have been blocked 
from moving up. People with diverse and relevant skills have been told they 
“need more time”, they “don’t know how it works yet”, or they need someone to 
“sponsor them to get that job”.

So in the end what can I conclude? When I look at the majority of ongoing 
humanitarian operations, I don’t see the current leadership being the driving 
force behind meaningful change, I see quite the opposite. It makes me think 
twice abouta comment 
<http://www.irinnews.org/report/102119/qa-%E2%80%98un-doesn%E2%80%99t-have-change%E2%80%99-says-relief-chief>
 UN under-secretary-general for humanitarian affairs, Stephen O’Brien, made on 
the UN not needing to change. Rather than a temporary blip it was more a 
Freudian slip, revealing the real attitudes of those around him in senior 
management.

Related: The man who deals with disasters: 'If it was an impossible job I 
would not be trying to do it' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/17/stephen-obrien-un-ocha-humanitarian-summit>

But with almost 90 million people in need worldwide and multiple crises the 
new norm, we need inspirational leadership. That is why I implore the new UN 
secretary general to ask the current humanitarian leadership tolet go  
<https://www.odi.org/sites/odi.org.uk/files/resource-documents/10422.pdf>and to 
pass the baton onto the next generation.

When the secretary general comes in, their message should be clear: the system 
needs to change and in order to do so, we too must change.

Do you have a secret aid worker story you’d like to tell? You can contact us 
confidentially atglobaldevpros@theguardian.com 
<mailto:globaldevpros@theguardian.com> – please put “Secret aid worker” in the 
subject line. If you’d like to encrypt your email to us, here’sinstructions 
<https://www.mailvelope.com/help> on how to set up a PGP mail client and our 
public PGP key <https://pgp.theguardian.com/PublicKeys/Global%20Devpros.pub.txt>
.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
