
At the medieval heart of Amsterdam <http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/amsterdam>
 is theOude Kerk <http://www.oudekerk.nl/infoeng.htm>. The church, founded in 
1213, is the city's oldest building, a stripped back Calvinist beauty with 
pearly light pouring through its tall windows, over its gilded carvings and 
across its stone flagged floors. It is the kind of serene interior captured in 
the luminous oils of the Dutch Masters.

Outside, the activities are rather less sacred. The Oude Kerk is at the centre 
of Europe's largest red-light district – theWallen 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/De_Wallen> – and is ringed by hot-pink shopfronts 
where sex workers tap the windows to attract any likely passing trade. Opposite 
the church door is one of dozens of cannabis cafés where you can spark up a 
joint of Lemon Haze and waste the day away.

For decades, such scenes have been regarded as examples of civilised Dutch 
tolerance – a "whatever blows your hair back" attitude – but Amsterdam has had 
enough. The municipality says its tolerance is being abused as the centre is 
being overwhelmed by tawdry sex shows, drug dealing and British stag-party 
weekenders. Organised crime has moved in and many businesses are fronts for 
money-laundering and human trafficking. So the city is rebranding itself, and 
has invested upwards of €700m on remaking its cultural institutions over the 
past decade.

The Van Gogh museum 
<http://www.vangoghmuseum.nl/vgm/index.jsp?page=101&lang=en> has been renovated 
and reopens in May, theNational Maritime Museum 
<http://www.amsterdam.info/museums/netherlands_maritime_museum/> has been made 
ship-shape and the newEYE Film Institute Netherlands 
<http://www.iamsterdam.com/en-GB/Ndtrc/EYE%20Film%20Instituut%20Nederland> has 
opened in a futuristic building in the Overhoeks neighbourhood. TheStedelijk 
Museum <http://www.stedelijk.nl/en> of contemporary art, meanwhile, has been 
treated to a bath-like extension the size of a city block.
 'The EYE Film Institute Netherlands has opened in a futuristic building': 
Amsterdam's answer to London's National Film Theatre. Photograph: Henk Meijer 
/Alamy 
Crowning these efforts, the Rijksmuseum <https://www.rijksmuseum.nl/en> – the 
Dutch answer to the Louvre – reopened to the public this weekend after a 
decade-long closure. Under a €375m rebuilding project led by the Spanish 
architects Cruz y Ortiz, the museum's two halves have been united by an 
undercroft that joins its two courtyards. The remodelling has been so extensive 
that only Rembrandt'sNight Watch remains in its original location among 8,000 
objects in its 80 rooms. The central Gallery of Honour, containing works by 
Vermeer and Pieter de Hooch, has had a century of whitewash removed and its 
original late 19th-century frescos restored and reinstated.

Elsewhere, canvases are displayed alongside furniture of the same period, 
white-marble busts illuminated dramatically against dark charcoal walls. In the 
special collections section, small items have been gathered to form art 
installations – a wall of intricate metal keys, for example, is displayed 
opposite a vitrine full of locked boxes; an entire fleet of miniature wooden 
ships sails alongside a row of model lighthouses.

Meanwhile Project 1012, named after the red-light district's postcode, aims to 
clean up the neighbourhood. The initiative began in 2007 and plans the closure 
of 200 out of 480 window brothels, and 26 out of 76 cannabis coffee houses; 
there are also plans to turn the sleazy Damrak – the main street into town from 
Centraal railway station – into a "red carpet" of welcome to the city, with 
"upmarket shopping, fashion and cuisine". Right-wing politicians called for 
tourists to be banned entirely from the coffee shops, a step too far for the 
municipality of Amsterdam, which has just won an exemption to the weed law. But 
it has negotiated a €25m deal to buy 18 brothels and gambling dens from their 
owners and put them to new uses, following the 2008 experiments Red Light 
Fashion and Red Light Design in which young Dutch designers were allowed to 
live and work rent free for a year in former brothels and use their windows for 
showcases. Since then, a former gambling house has been transformed into the 
Mata Hari bar, and a micro-brewery, deli, florist and homewares stores have 
also opened nearby.

The poster project for Project 1012 is Anna <http://www.restaurantanna.nl/en/>
, a fine-dining restaurant carved out of an old gallery and printworks by 
former club owner Michiel Kleiss. "You don't need much critical mass around 
here," Kleiss tells me. "If you are doing something classy, it immediately 
works."

The Oude Kerk has been known as Amsterdam's living room throughout its 
history, and these days it is also used as a concert hall and exhibition space 
as part of its restoration. Across the square, Orpheu de Jong runs Red Light 
Radio and has a recording studio in the window. A few doors down his sister 
Afaina, a former architect, has opened theUltra de la Rue 
<http://www.ultradelarue.com/ULTRA_DE_LA_RUE/NEWS.html> gallery. Both were 
brought up only a few minutes from the red-light district but say they didn't 
set foot in it until they were adults. "It's a good thing for the area," says 
Afaina, but both she and Orpheu are wary of the area losing its edge entirely.

Stand in front of the Rijksmuseum's charcoal-painted walls and look again at 
those Golden Age pictures of church interiors and you will find depictions of 
dogs cavorting, gallants chatting up maids and market stalls trading within the 
house of God. There will always be many shades of grey in Amsterdam.

Essentials

KLM (klm.com <https://www.klm.com/travel/pa_en/index.htm?deforigin=BOG>) 
offers flights to Amsterdam Schiphol from £89 return, departing from 
Birmingham, Manchester, London Heathrow, Bristol and Cardiff.  Hotel CC (
hotelcc.nl <http://hotelcc.nl>) has small doubles from €104 a night. Canal 
House (canalhouse.nl <http://www.canalhouse.nl>) has double from €195 a night. 
For further information on Amsterdam, go toholland.com <http://holland.com>

• This article was amended on 1 May 2013. The original said that rooms at 
Canal House start at €240 rather than €195 a night. This has been corrected.
