
On a parched hill in central Bolivia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bolivia>, a blue tanker winds its way past 
half-built houses carrying water to Alto Buena Vista, a hillside settlement in 
the south of the city of Cochabamba. For this particular neighbourhood, trucks 
like this are the only source of water.

Related: The human right to water: Salvadoran NGOs leading a global campaign 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/mar/25/human-right-water-salvadoran-ngos-global-campaign>

 But just a couple of valleys away in the community of Maria Auxiliadora, 
hundreds of households have a steady, piped water connection thanks to a 
community-run well. The 69-metre well taps into an aquifer and the water is 
pumped to the top of the hill, from where it is distributed to around 370 
households.

Cochabamba has a history of water struggles and the tale of these two 
different approaches to water dates back to 1999 and 2000; the city hit 
international headlines after protests broke out when its water system was 
privatised and rates were hiked. The privatisation was overturned, but sixteen 
years later the city is expanding and the municipal water network has still not 
reached newer, poorer areas such as Alto Buena Vista, leaving residents 
dependent on trucked-in water.

“We don’t know where the trucks get the water from, but we still have to drink 
it,” says Aurora Colque Gabriel, who built her house in Alto Buena Vista two 
years ago. One of Cochabamba’s poorest neighbourhoods, it is developing fast; 
under temperatures of more than 30 degrees, workmen cobble unpaved roads and 
dig trenches for gas pipes.

Sometimes my children go to school without even washing their faces because of 
the lack of water
Aurora Colque Gabriel 
The arid barrio has no piped water connections or wells, and it rarely rains 
here. This means no showers or washing machines. “Sometimes my children go to 
school without even washing their faces because of the lack of water,” says 
Colque Gabriel.

But in Maria Auxilidora, families have water meters and pay for what they use 
at an office nearby. The well was funded half by a Swiss NGO PAMS-Suiza and 
half by the community. Each person paid a quota of $60 but as not every lot of 
land was occupied at the time the water system was being built, the community 
took out a loan from NGOPro Habitat 
<http://www.bolivia-online.net/en/la-paz/132/pro-habitat>. Unfortunately, the 
interest on the loan meant that some people arriving in the community later had 
to pay more than others.
Map of Bolivia 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/maps/embed/mar/2016-03-22T16:15:20.html> 
Maria Auxiliadora is one of around 700 neighbourhoods with community water 
projects in Cochabamba and its surrounding towns, according to Stefano 
Archidiacono, whose NGO CeVI works with Cochabamba water rights organisation 
Fundación Abril <http://www.fundacionabril.org/>. The size, water quality and 
reliability of these projects varies, he says, and “almost no one [in these 
projects] has support from the government”.

Related: The global water crisis in 13 photographs 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/gallery/2016/mar/22/world-water-day-global-crisis-13-photographs>

“Before the well, it was all water trucks,” says Juana Aguilar Zeballos who 
has lived in Maria Auxiliadora, which was set up in 1999 as a co-operative 
community, for 10 years. “That was more difficult, especially for the families 
at the top of the hill. The trucks didn’t want to drive up.”

Getting your water from trucks is an expensive system, currently costing 
between 30 and 35 bolivianos (roughly £3 to £3.50) per 1000 litres. For those 
using the community well, the price is just two bolivianos per 1000 litres plus 
18 bolivianos per month for maintenance. Depending on the size of a family (and 
how frugal they are with water), one family might only use 1000 litres a month, 
while others might use 10,000 litres or more.

Water from the trucks is also less reliable. Tests by hygiene and sanitation 
organisation,Fundación SODIS <http://www.fundacionsodis.org/2013/>, show that 
the water can contain bacterial contamination far in excess of the limit for 
human consumption. This contamination comes from dirty tanks, the ground, and 
instruments used to drill the wells, according to Jeremy Maes, the foundation’s 
associate director. Those hardest hit by drinking contaminated water are 
children under the age of five and pregnant women. “Illness leads to absence 
from school, and it’s very difficult for the children to catch up,” says Maes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hmjc%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hmjc%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc656364b20c353a75720c86fe1dc9770010f8c55%2F0_0_2138_1282%2F2138.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20communities%20of%20Cochabamba%20taking%20control%20of%20their%20own%20water%20supply&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hmjc%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+communities+of+Cochabamba+taking+control+of+their+own+water+supply&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hmjc%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc656364b20c353a75720c86fe1dc9770010f8c55%2F0_0_2138_1282%2F2138.jpg>
 Between 1999 and 2000, Cochabamba hit international headlines when residents 
protested the privatisation of the water system. Photograph: Jeff Schonberg/AP 
Maria Auxiliadora’s system has been licensed by the Bolivian state as an 
entity providing water and sewage services, meaning that there is a protected 
area around the community in which nobody else is allowed to drill. Some 
locals, though, are still concerned that the protection could be violated. “One 
worry is that the water could dry up, or that someone could drill into one of 
the veins feeding our water pocket and absorb the water,” says Aguilar Zeballos.

When we built it, we were proud. We were the only neighbourhood in our 
district to have water and sewage.
Juana Aguilar Zeballos 
If the well dried up, the village would have to revert back to water tanks and 
wait for the Misicuni dam, currently under construction around 22 miles 
north-west of Cochabamba. Scheduled for completion next month, the dam will 
collect water from the mountains surrounding the city. To receive water from 
Misicuni, Maria Auxiliadora would need connections to Cochabamba’s municipal 
system, a process which could take a long time.

Managing the water supply locally is not easy; disagreements over who controls 
the water have created problems in Maria Auxiliadora recently. Nonetheless, the 
community would not want municipal water providerSemapa 
<http://www.semapa.gob.bo/> to take control of their system, says Aguilar 
Zeballos. “When we built it, we were proud. We were the only neighbourhood in 
our district to have water and sewage.”

Related: 10 ways to end water pollution in Latin America 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/apr/12/ten-ways-prevent-water-pollution-latin-america>

For Marcela Olivera, the Latin American coordinator for Food and Water Watch 
<http://www.foodandwaterwatch.org/>’s Water for All campaign, most people view 
provision of services such as water as a choice between state provision and 
private enterprise. Community water management represents a third option. 
“People don’t see that there can be another way: community-run,” she says. 
“Maybe large-scale projects are not the solution. Maybe the solution is small.”

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter, and have your say on issues 
around water in development using#H2Oideas 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23H2Oideas&src=typd>.
