
It’s been a tough year for plastic recycling, and the culprit is oil.

Over the past two years, petroleum prices have plummeted, at one point 
dropping to70% below June 2014 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2016/business/energy-environment/oil-prices.html>
 levels. As prices have fallen, they’ve dragged down the cost of virgin 
plastic, which is made from oil. In many areas, it now costs more to recycle 
old plastic than to make new containers.

Related: Three ways we will build the cities of the future from waste 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/jun/19/three-ways-we-will-build-the-cities-of-the-future-from-waste>

Environmentally, there’s no question that recycling is the best method for 
dealing with waste.  
<https://www.wm.com/location/california/ventura-county/west-hills/recycle/facts.jsp>
Recycling one ton of aluminum 
<http://www.lessismore.org/materials/28-why-recycle> saves 14,000kWh of 
electricity – compared to making aluminum from raw materials –more energy than 
the average household uses in a year 
<https://www.eia.gov/tools/faqs/faq.cfm?id=97&t=3>. Paper products are less 
profitable, but recyclingone ton of cardboard 
<https://www.wm.com/location/california/ventura-county/west-hills/recycle/facts.jsp>
 still saves 390kWh – more than a week’s worth of electricity.

Some commodities are highly profitable: scrap aluminum, for example, is worth 
$1,491 per ton.Paper or cardboard sells for $90-$140 
<http://www.popularmechanics.com/science/environment/a3757/4291576/> per ton. 
This nets recyclers a handy profit, even after processing costs.

When plastic was more expensive, recycling helped offset the expense of 
recycling less profitable materials, like glass. But as the value of plastic 
has dropped, it has had ripple effects across the recycling industry. Waste 
Management’s recycling divisionposted a $16m loss 
<http://www.triplepundit.com/2015/06/recycling-industry-losing-money-fast/> in 
the first quarter of 2016, and the company has shut almost30% of its recycling 
facilities 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/13/business/energy-environment/skid-in-oil-prices-pulls-the-recycling-industry-down-with-it.html?ref=energy-environment&_r=1>
. Meanwhile, questions about thetreatment of recycling workers 
<http://www.motherjones.com/environment/2016/04/recycling-junkyard-dangerous-job>
 and the large amounts ofrecycled glass 
<http://www.myajc.com/news/news/local-govt-politics/metro-atlanta-recyclers-reject-glass-ship-it-to-la/nprDq/>
 andplastic 
<http://www.crainsnewyork.com/article/20131125/BLOGS04/131129927/the-citys-dirty-recycling-secret>
 that still go to landfill have tarnished its reputation.

The other problem is that many places only collect one or two types of 
plastic, instead of all products that could be processed. And areas that 
collect all plastics sometimes end upsending many types to landfills 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/13/business/energy-environment/skid-in-oil-prices-pulls-the-recycling-industry-down-with-it.html?ref=energy-environment&_r=2>
, even after consumers recycle them, because the returns are too low to make 
recycling it all economical.

But, as recycling costs have gone up 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/local/dc-politics/cities-and-counties-come-to-grips-with-the-high-cost-of-recycling-programs/2015/06/23/b53b98fc-18de-11e5-ab92-c75ae6ab94b5_story.html>
, a combination of technological advancements and increased environmental 
regulation have made other disposal options increasingly viable. Here’s how 
three common waste management options stack up.

Incineration: waste to energy 

Waste-to-energy (WTE) trash incineration, which burns waste to generate 
electricity, is a promising option. In addition to disposing of garbage and 
reducing landfill space, WTE generates  
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/does-burning-garbage-for-electricity-make-sense-1447643515>
500kWh of electricity 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/does-burning-garbage-for-electricity-make-sense-1447643515>
 per ton of waste – roughly the same amount of power generated by a third of a 
ton of coal.

For all these benefits, however, WTE plants are rare: there are only 84 WTE 
facilities 
<http://energyrecoverycouncil.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/01/ERC_2014_Directory.pdf>
 currently operating in the US. Florida’s  
<http://www.swa.org/375/Palm-Beach-Renewable-Energy-Facility-2>Renewable Energy 
Facility Two <http://www.swa.org/375/Palm-Beach-Renewable-Energy-Facility-2>, 
which opened last year, was the first US WTE plant to open in the past 15 years.

Part of the problem is that WTE plants are costly to construct, and companies 
often offset this by negotiating long-term contracts with cities. “Cities get 
locked into a contract and can end up on the hook for huge fees to waste 
processors, regardless of whether or not there is enough waste for them to 
process,” says Monica Wilson, US and Canada program director at Gaia, a 
nonprofit that fights waste-to-energy garbage incineration.

Pollution is another concern 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/aug/03/why-are-we-still-addicted-to-burning-waste>
. “Whether dioxin, mercury, lead and other toxins go out the stack, are 
captured, or end up in the ash that is left over after incineration – they’re 
still there,” Wilson says.

Nickolas John Themelis, an engineering professor at Columbia University and 
chairman of the Global Waste to Energy Research and Technology Council, argues 
that pollution concerns are overblown. “Studies 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0956053X15300775> have shown 
that the entire US WTE industry produces 3 grams of dioxin per year,” he says. 
“By comparison, there are over 3,000 landfill fires reported every year, and 
they produce 1,400 grams of dioxin.”

As for the high costs of WTE plants, Themelis argues that a large part of the 
expense is caused by critics, whose protests and lawsuits can – he says – tip 
the scales and make the technology unprofitable. “These plants are very 
expensive to build, and years of litigation by a very vocal minority can make 
it too expensive.”

Even so, many communities that are committed to reducing waste continue to use 
WTE. Instead of building new plants, some quietly ship their waste to existing 
facilities: in 2014, for example, New York City committed to send800,000 tons 
of trash 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2013-08-26/covanta-new-york-sign-20-year-garbage-to-energy-contract>
 to a facility in New Jersey.

Related: US may be drastically underestimating landfill emissions – study 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/21/us-may-be-drastically-underestimating-landfill-emissions-study>

Burying the problem: landfill

Landfills are the most common and economical waste management solution. Their 
cost varies widely across the country, averaging out to$48.27 per ton 
<http://waste360.com/operations/west-coast-boasts-highest-average-tip-fees-nation>
. This covers the entire lifetime cost of a landfill, from the purchase and 
preparation of the land to maintenance and monitoring.

Environmentally, of course, landfills have a terrible reputation, and have 
been cited for problems includinggroundwater contamination 
<http://www.hcr-llc.com/blog/the-3-most-common-landfill-problems-solutions> and 
air pollution <https://www3.epa.gov/lmop/faq/public.html>. While the 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) passed rules regulating their 
environmental impact in 1991 and 1993, a large part of the problem is consumer 
behavior. “Many of the things we see in landfills could have been reused or 
recycled, but consumers didn’t put them into the reuse or recycling waste 
streams,” says Anne Germain, the director of waste and recycling at the 
National Waste and Recycling Association.

Landfills can also produce energy. In 1996, the EPA passed laws requiring 
large landfills to capture their gas emissions. “Landfill gas” – which contains
methane <https://www3.epa.gov/lmop/basic-info/index.html>, CO2 and about  
<https://www3.epa.gov/lmop/faq/landfill-gas.html>30 hazardous organic compounds 
<https://www3.epa.gov/lmop/faq/landfill-gas.html> – can be used as an 
alternative to fossil fuels to produce heat and electricity 
<https://www3.epa.gov/lmop/faq/landfill-gas.html>. According to the EPA, 648 of 
the 2,400 municipal solid waste landfills in the US have one or more landfill 
gas collection projects attached to them. Some 400 more could cost effectively 
be used for generating methane; if they were, the EPA says, they couldpower 
473,000 homes <https://www3.epa.gov/lmop/faq/lfg.html>.

Germain argues that landfills represent a realistic, promising solution to 
waste processing.

“The idea that we can divert all of our waste is a dream,” she says. “It’s not 
going to happen soon. In the meantime, landfills have to exist to catch the 
things that we can’t take out of the waste stream.”

Digestion: swallowing our waste

For communities that produce a lot of organic waste, anaerobic digestion 
offers anenvironmentally sound solution.  <>Tim Flanagan, general manager at a 
Monterey, California anaerobic digestion plant, compares the process to a giant 
crock pot: “We put in a mix of material – about 75% food waste and 25% organic 
yard waste – and let it cook for 21 days.” He continues: “It produces methane, 
which we use to run an engine generator. We have a net yield of about 80kW, 
which helps power a nearby sewer agency.”

After fermentation, the leftovers go to an on-site composter, where they are 
turned into a fertilizer that is sold to local farms and vineyards.

The program charges $51.75 per ton, with discounts for separated organic 
material and food wastes. Flanagan says the digester costs slightly more than 
landfilling, but it also uses far less space and produces less pollution and 
more energy. The digestion also takes place in a controlled environment, where 
all the gas it produces can be collected.

The facility’s next step is to begin compressing its methane, which could then 
fuel its garbage trucks. “We’ll have trucks picking up food waste, and 
digesters turning it into fuel to run the trucks, so they can pick up more 
waste,” Flanagan says.
