
Val McDermid, the Scottish independence-supporting author, has put Scotland in 
charge of the remains of the UK in a new adaptation for the BBC which gives 
first ministerNicola Sturgeon 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicola-sturgeon> a role playing herself.

Crime writer McDermid moved the action of John Wyndham’s classic 1953 science 
fiction novel <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Kraken_Wakes>The Kraken Wakes 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Kraken_Wakes>  from North Yorkshire to 
Scotland and gave Sturgeon a part calmly broadcasting instructions to the 
survivors of an alien invasion in her adaptation for Radio 4.

The BBC <http://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> insisted that the dramatisation 
of The Kraken Wakes was delayed until after the Scottish parliamentary 
elections on 5 May as it feared accusations of bias.

“There was a certain concern at the BBC that it might be seen to be endorsing 
Nicola as first minister ahead of an election,” McDermid tells the Radio Times. 
“You know, ‘In the event of an apocalypse, would you want Nicola to be first 
minister?’ Well, by and large, yes I would. I’ve no doubt there will be people 
who get a little aerated about it, but, hey …”

In the original book by Wyndham, who also wrote The Day of the Triffids, the 
government moves to Harrogate and journalist survivors move to Cornwall and use 
the English Broadcasting Corporation. In Fife-born McDermid’s version, 
survivors move to the Scottish Highlands and broadcast over the SBC (Scottish 
Broadcasting Corporation).

“It’s a wee bit of fun, but it’s rooted in the reality of the situation,” said 
the writer of almost 40 novels. “This is not me being partial – truly. In the 
book, the protagonists take themselves off to Cornwall, but if the water rose 
that high, there isn’t going to be a Cornwall.

“The part of the UK that’s going to have most of it left is Scotland 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, so I thought that rather than it be 
the English Broadcasting Corporation that reports on the disaster, as it is in 
the book, it made more sense for it to be the SBC, and I thought it would be 
quite amusing to see if Nicola would play herself.”


McDermid, a vocal supporter of Scottish independence in the run-up to the 2014 
referendum, struck up a friendship with the first minister at last year’s 
Edinburgh International Book Festival.

Sturgeon recorded her role in the studio after the professionals, which 
allowed McDermid’s partner, Glasgow University professor Jo Sharp, to get the 
chance to stand in for the first minister. “Ever since, she’s been walking 
about saying, ‘Well I was a better Nicola than Nicola, you know!’”

Asked if that meant Sturgeon was right not to go into acting, McDermid 
replied: “Not at all. There are pitfalls, because however natural politicians 
sound, they’re not actors, but she delivers her lines very well.”

The Kraken Wakes, which deals with an alien attack that culminates in the 
polar ice caps melting and Britain drowning, stars Paul Higgins and Tamsin 
Greig.

It is the first time McDermid, whose crime books featuring Tony Hill and Carol 
Jordan were turned into television series Wire in the Blood, has adapted 
another writer’s work.

• This article was amended on 24 May to make clear that Val McDermid is a 
supporter of Scottish independence but is not party political
