
Vegetables, you might think, are simple enough things to cook. Now that we've 
escaped the dread clutches of Mrs Beeton and her 45-minute carrots, there's not 
much left to learn. After all, just how much culinary mystique can a marrow 
deliver?

Well, you may be surprised. Marrows, according to Elizabeth David, who 
delivered such a scoldinglast week on the subject of the garlic press 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2010/feb/01/garlic-press-chefs-method>
, "should be prepared for cooking in the same way as aubergines; cut, 
preferably unpeeled, into rounds or lengthwise, salted, and left to drain for 
an hour or so." What a lot of fuss for an overgrown courgette.

Now, I regret to admit I don't have much to do with the marrow (my boyfriend 
hates the things, howevercunningly disguised as meat 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2008/aug/31/vegetablesrecipes.pork>), 
but I haven't pre-salted an aubergine in years. After all, that would 
necessitate beginning prep an hour and a half before I wanted to eat, which is 
usually about the time I'm rushing around the shops grabbing the ingredients 
for dinner. It just wouldn't work. But is this mere culinary laziness, akin to 
using teabags or leaving the skin on carrots (more nutritious, I tell myself) – 
or is the tradition agenuine waste of time 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/food/2008/09/aubergine-bitter-salt-upon> and salt?

I'm comforted to learn that Nigel Slater, who is a cook after my own heart (he 
knows the odd jar of shop-bought pesto isn't the end of the world), never 
troubles himself with it:he claims 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2005/oct/23/foodanddrink.shopping> not 
to have tasted a bitter aubergine in years.Larousse Gastronomique 
<http://www.thegastronomersbookshelf.com/3664_the-evolution-of-larousse-gastronomique>
 concurs: "Traditionally, the slightly bitter taste of the vegetable was 
minimised by sprinkling the sliced or cut-up flesh with salt and leaving it for 
30 minutes to draw out the bitter juices. The aubergine was then rinsed and 
dried before cooking. The process of degorging is no longer necessary as 
commercially cultivated aubergines are not as bitter as they used to be."

That should, in theory, be that. The bitterness has been bred out of 
aubergines since Elizabeth David first introduced this magnificent vegetable 
(which, to pre-empt all you pedants, is strictly speaking a fruit) to this 
country, so they no longer require salting. Except that, just to confuse the 
issue, Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall claims that, although degorgement (as it 
seems to be somewhat saucily known) won't make any difference to the flavour, 
it willstop the aubergine 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2009/sep/26/aubergines-peppers-chillies-recipes-hugh-fearnley-whittingstall>
 soaking up as much oil as you can throw at it during cooking.

Delia also salts – but for different reasons 
<http://www.deliaonline.com/ingredients/ingredients-a-z/ingredients-a-c/Aubergines.html>
: "I do take the point that the modern aubergine has evolved to a state where 
it does not contain bitter juices," she says reasonably, "but the juices are 
there, nonetheless, and I find salting and draining gets rid of excess moisture 
and concentrates the flavour – there's nothing worse than a watery aubergine." 
Even Skye Gyngell, who, as head chef at the delectable Petersham Nurseries, 
should know a thing or two about vegetables, is infavour of salting 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/food-and-drink/recipes/aubergine-and-chard-gratin-1764499.html>
. So who's right?
 Salted aubergines with drained juice. Photograph: Felicity Cloake 
Two plump aubergines, of roughly the same size and glossy firmness, should 
settle the matter. I decide to followElizabeth David's instructions 
<http://www.slashfood.com/2009/04/29/italian-food-cookbook-spotlight/> for a 
Sauté of Aubergines, as that's the simplest recipe I can find, leaving out the 
garlic and parsley, so as not to overpower their delicate flavour. One 
aubergine is diced, sprinkled with salt, and left for an hour as instructed. 
I'm surprised to discover, on my return, that it's produced a tablespoon and a 
half of rusty-coloured liquid, which tastes more like seawater than anything 
bitter.

I chop the other into equally sized pieces, and heat two heavy-based pans with 
"a good quantity of olive oil" (a couple of tablespoons), then fry them both 
"rather gently, turning them over from time to time" for 15 minutes. Although 
the non-salted batch soaks up the oil more rapidly, both pans are equally dry 
by the end. And the results? I can detect no greater intensity of aubergine 
flavour in the salted batch – in fact, it just tastes saltier. (David didn't 
tell me to rinse the salted aubergines before cooking, and, to be fair, Delia 
or Skye don't either.) The texture of both aubergines, as far as I can tell, is 
almost exactly the same: neither greasier, nor more watery. So, if it makes so 
little difference to the oil consumption when frying, I'm not inclined to take 
up salting again, particularly as I usually grill or bake the things.
 Unsalted (l) and salted (r) aubergine pieces after shallow frying. 
Photograph: Felicity Cloake 
Perhaps it's fair enough that we're a bit clueless about aubergines – after 
all, we haven't been eating them very long. But to be peddling myths about good 
old brussels sprouts is inexcusable. Step forward,Nigella Lawson 
<http://www.foodnetwork.com/recipes/nigella-lawson/brussels-sprouts-with-chestnuts-pancetta-and-parsley-recipe/index.html>
,Raymond Blanc 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/food-and-drink/features/detested-and-derided-the-humble-brussels-sprout-makes-it-to-the-high-table-of-culinary-fashion-684327.html>
 andSkye Gyngell 
<http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/life_and_style/food_and_drink/article6922965.ece?print=yes&randnum=1151003209000>
: all guilty of advising people to cut a cross in the base of their sprouts to 
help them cook more evenly.

Hugh, Gordon 
<http://www.channel4.com/food/features/interviews/gordon-ramsay-christmas-interview_p_3.html>
 and the chairman of the Brassica Growers Association,Philip Effingham 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/topics/christmas/6866453/Brussels-sprout-sales-jump-as-we-learn-to-cook-them-properly.html>
, are all against the cross on the grounds that it turns the unfortunate 
vegetables to mush – heck, even Delia's changed her mind since publishing her 
Complete Cookery Course back in the 1980s, nowreassuring the public 
<http://www.deliaonline.com/ingredients/ingredients-a-z/ingredients-a-c/Brussels-sprouts.html>
 that there's "no need to make incisions in the stalks".

The thinking behind the cross myth seems to have been to encourage the inside 
of the sprout to cook more quickly, before the outer leaves disintegrated: a 
particular problem in the past, when those on sale tended to be larger than 
they are now. Unfortunately, as recent convertNigel Slater has observed 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2009/jan/11/nigel-slater-recipes-sprouts-blue-cheese-cooking>
, whatever the size of the sprout, cutting into them in this way just leaves 
them waterlogged and soggy. But many Word of Mouthers disagree – quite vocally, 
as wediscovered before Christmas 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2008/dec/10/foodanddrink-christmas>
. So I decided to try out the cross again, just in case.

The first thing I noticed was that anointing each sprout with a festive cross, 
which I had always viewed as a faff, even before deciding it was pointless, is 
actually not that much trouble. Peeling off those tight outer leaves is much 
more time-consuming: the cross is the easy bit. The second batch of sprouts, 
peeled and tailed, but with no cross, took about as long to prepare as the 
first. I then boiled both lots for six minutes.
 Sprouts uncrossed (l) and crossed with a knife before cooking (r). 
Photograph: Felicity Cloake 
The carefully-crossed sprouts brought back memories of canteen Christmas 
dinners past – yellowing and faintly sulphurous on the outside and slightly 
pappy at the core, with a ring of bouncy, undercooked flesh in-between. The 
non-crossed ones were simply overcooked on the outside, and chewy in the 
middle. Neither were satisfactory examples of this mighty vegetable, which is 
why I generally cut mine in half, so they're ready before the outer leaves can 
turn nasty, and remain appetisingly green to boot. I don't often say this, but
I'm with Gordon 
<http://www.channel4.com/food/on-tv/cookalong-live/cookalong-live-the-series/week-7/how-to-cook-brussels-sprouts_p_1.html>
 on this one.

What do you think – are salting and crossing a waste of time, or am I missing 
something? And if you agree, have you got any better advice for stopping your 
aubergines swimming in oil, or cooking the perfect sprouts?
