
More than a quarter of a million people are estimated to have died during the 
recent famine and food crisis in Somalia, and more than half were children 
under five, making it the worst famine in the past 25 years,according to 
figures published on Thursday 
<http://www.fews.net/docs/Publications/Somalia_Mortality_Estimates_Final_Report_1May2013_upload.pdf>
 (pdf).

A study, commissioned and funded by the Food and Agriculture Organisation's 
(FAO) food security and nutrition analysis unit for Somalia (FSNAU) and the 
famine early warning systems network (Fewsnet), estimated that 258,000 people 
died in southern and central parts ofSomalia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/somalia> between October 2010 and April 
2012, including 133,000 children under the age of five.

The figure is significantly higher than the death toll from the country's 1992 
famine, during which an estimated 220,000 people died over 12 months, although 
this famine was considered more severe because a higher percentage of the 
population died.

The study suggests that 4.6% of the total population and 10% of children under 
five died in southern and central Somalia over the crisis period. Lower 
Shabelle, Mogadishu and the Bay area were hardest hit, with the number of child 
deaths estimated to have reached 18%, 17% and 13% respectively.

Death rates peaked at 30,000 a month between May and August 2011. The UN 
declared famine 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2011/jul/20/un-declares-famine-somalia>
 in two regions in Somalia – Bakool and Lower Shabelle – in July 2011, 
following repeated warnings of an impending crisis after severe drought and 
failed harvests. By August, the UN saidthree more regions 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2011/aug/03/somalia-famine-spreads-says-un>
 werein a state of famine 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2011/nov/01/al-qaida-famine-somalia-video>
 (video) – Middle Shabelle, Afgoye and parts of Mogadishu. Other parts of 
Somalia, particularly the south, were in the grip of a severe food crisis by 
this time, with high rates of acute malnutrition.

The drought, the worst in the region for 60 years, led to livestock deaths, 
reduced harvests, and drops in labour demand and household incomes. Poor 
harvests drove food prices to extreme levels, said the report. The situation 
was compounded by conflict and insecurity in Somalia, which impeded the 
delivery of food aid. The Islamist group al-Shabaab was at war with the 
government, and areas the group controlled were some of those worst affected by 
the crisis.

The level of humanitarian assistance to Somalia had decreased between 2010 and 
2011. Donors have been criticised for their slow response to the crisis. 
Fewsnet and the FSNAU first warned of severe drought across the region in 
August 2010 and, in March 2011, said famine was likely if the April to June 
rains failed. They did.

However, major appeals for donations launched in September and October, a drop 
in food prices and a successful rainy season meant that by Novemberthe 
situation had improved 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2011/nov/18/famine-eases-somalia-threat-remains>
. TheUN declared an end to famine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/feb/03/famine-somalia-over-says-un> in 
February 2012.

The FSNAU/Fewsnet study covered all of southern and central Somalia, the areas 
most affected by famine and food insecurity between 2010 and 2011. It also 
assessed mortality rates among new Somali arrivals atDadaab refugee camps 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/interactive/2011/sep/06/famine-somalia-dadaab-refugee-interactive>
 in Kenya and at Dollo Ado in Ethiopia.

Researchers drew on more than 200 mortality surveys carried out by the FSNAU 
since 2007, including 61 from the emergency period, along with data on food 
prices, wages, conflict, humanitarian assistance and epidemics.

The lead authors, Francesco Checchi, from the London School of Hygiene & 
Tropical Medicine in London, and Courtland Robinson, from Johns Hopkins 
Bloomberg School of Public Health in the US, concluded that though their study 
was not designed to investigate the cause of the high death rates, 
"nevertheless, an obvious rational use of our estimates would be to ensure that 
in Somalia and food security-related emergencies elsewhere, future early 
warning and surveillance alerts do translate into tangible, immediate relief 
interventions to support livelihoods, health and nutrition in the affected 
communities."

Chris Hillbruner, decision support adviser for Fewsnet, said: "Estimating 
mortality in emergencies is an imprecise science, but given the quantity and 
quality of data that were available, we are confident in the strength of the 
study. It suggests that what occurred in Somalia was one of the worst famines 
in the last 25 years."

Senait Gebregziabher, country director of Oxfam Somalia, said the number of 
deaths could, and should, have been prevented. "Such a shocking death toll must 
never be allowed to happen again," she said.

"Famines are not natural phenomena, they are catastrophic political failures. 
The world was too slow to respond to stark warnings of drought, exacerbated by 
conflict, in Somalia, and people paid with their lives."

Ben Foot, Somalia country director for Save the Children, said: "While 
conditions in Somalia have improved in recent months, the country still has one 
of the highest rates of child malnutrition and infant mortality in the world."

A Dangerous Delay 
<http://www.oxfamblogs.org/eastafrica/wp-content/uploads/2010/09/bp-dangerous-delay-horn-africa-drought-180112-en.pdf>
 (pdf), a report published last year by Save the Children and Oxfam, showed how 
the international community's slow response to the famine cost tens of 
thousands of lives.

On Tuesday, a conference in London will discuss Somalia's future, with the aim 
to provide international support for the government to rebuild the country.

Gebregziabher said the conference must invest in the country's long-term 
development, creating jobs, supporting farmers and pastoralists and ensuring 
trained, accountable security forces.

"It is crucial that women and men from across Somalia are involved in a 
bottom-up process to determine the country's future. Top down 'solutions' don't 
work. The country is crying out for just and sustainable peace, and the new 
government must grab this moment to secure it," she said.
