
It has been clear for some time that Lynton Crosby’s strategy for a leave win 
is to blame Jeremy Corbyn. On cue, the softening-up process has begun in the 
media, with BBC News foregrounding speculation about how Labour supporters will 
vote and about how far Corbyn is a closet leaver. Steve Richards (Opinion, June 
10 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/10/corbyn-true-party-eu-labour-leader>
) spoilt an otherwise thoughtful piece by concluding “the stakes over the next 
fortnight are stratospherically high”. That plays to the hysteria that has 
characterised the remain campaign from the beginning: if we leave, the sky will 
fall. By contrast, Corbyn has been constructive and judicious, but this is not 
sexy like trading insults and predicting disaster, and hence only two of his 
many speeches have been widely reported.

Crosby may have got this wrong, just as he made a hash of the London mayoral 
election. Perhaps the blame will not stick to Corbyn, but instead the 
electorate will remember thatDavid Cameron 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> didn’t need to call this 
referendum and only did it to buy peace on his backbenches, not expecting to 
have his bluff called by being returned to office in 2015. If the leave 
campaign prevails, or if a remain victory is destabilisingly modest, Cameron 
will be seen to be the author of his own fate. The future is enticingly 
uncertain; who will be in Downing Street by the time of the conference season? 
I am sorely tempted to spoil my ballot paper by writing “Each campaign as vile 
as the other – neither deserves my vote”.
W Stephen Gilbert 
Author, Jeremy Corbyn – Accidental Hero, Corsham, Wiltshire 

• Previous leaders of the Labour party have been very clear about the vital 
importance of a remain vote (Letters, 4 June 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/03/kinnock-beckett-blair-brown-harman-and-miliband-labour-partys-purpose-is-aligned-with-europe>
). No room of doubt there; no ambiguity; no obfuscation of the message. 
However, Jeremy Corbyn appears to want to find grey areas in the debate (Labour 
grandees warn party: redouble efforts now or face Brexit, 11 June 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/10/labour-party-urges-voters-to-prevent-drift-towards-brexit>
). In this referendum, at this stage and with the polls being so close, there 
are none. It just gives the impression that he’s really not that interested in 
winning. But this time winning is all and to lose would herald a calamitous 
descent into Little Englander parochialism, instead of promoting a positive, 
collaborative, outward-looking internationalism. Heart and soul time, Jeremy.
Simon Horne
London

• Only 10 Labour MPs – none of them shadow Ministers – have signed up to the 
leave camp. Yet in a limp and querulous remain campaign the most effective 
voices – after Scotland’s First Minister – are the Tory PM and chancellor who 
got us into this referendum mess in the first place, and who now hector us 
about the damage to big business and the balance of payments if we were to vote 
out. One would expect Labour MPs to have internationalist instincts and to be 
capable – while acknowledging the unease which loss of local identity is 
causing in the localities to which EU migrants come – to nevertheless extol the 
benefits of this immigration to Britain. Yet this is not happening. It would be 
truly shocking if it were revealed that the majority of the PLP are more 
motivated by seeking the means to unseatJeremy Corbyn 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> from their own leadership 
than they are by making a once-in-a-lifetime campaign to stay in the EU.
Nick Watts
Chippenham, Wiltshire

• Your report notes that Labour voters back remain at 61%, compared with only 
39% ofConservatives <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives>. Surely 
your headline should have read “Cameron fails to rally Tory support” and 
perhaps a subheading “Labour determined to increase their remain support and 
fill the breach”. The thrust of the article, that Labour may be blamed for 
Brexit, must be wrong. There is only one culprit here – Cameron. He has acted 
with gross irresponsibility in calling for a referendum and has taken a huge 
and unnecessary gamble with this country’s long-term future. He is shouting 
loudly now about the dangers of Brexit, but who believes him – only six months 
ago, during his negotiations with the EU, he was quite happy for the UK to 
leave if he didn’t get an acceptable deal. Regardless of the outcome of the 
referendum, I think the Guardian should be calling for Cameron’s resignation. 
He is not fit to be our prime minister.
Michael Brown
Worthing, West Sussex

• Tony Blair <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair>, as the winner of 
three elections, might have been seen by history as one of the past century’s 
more successful prime ministers had it not been for his decision to join Bush 
in the invasion of Iraq. By that decision he was damned to go down in history 
as a liar, the good things he undoubtedly achieved, lost in the shadow of Iraq. 
With Cameron, if the decision is to leave the EU, his damnation will come not 
from any dishonesty or manipulation of parliament, but from the sheer stupidity 
of his decision to call a referendum.

This will be seen not only as a massive error of judgment, and a wholly 
unnecessary kowtowing to the Eurosceptics in his party, but the most 
devastating demonstration of the reason why true democracy does not involve 
taking major and complex decisions by referendum.

What is certain is that for the rest of their lives both Blair and Cameron 
will carry the burden of the knowledge that they each, by their inexcusable 
decisions, inflicted immeasurable damage: Blair’s measured in loss of life and 
suffering; Cameron’s by the advent of a new era of nationalism.
Martin Allen
Shoreham, West Sussex

• Jeremy Corbyn’s reluctance to share a platform with the prime minister to 
promote a remain vote is ludicrous (Firefighter Watson adds EU to his list of 
battles, 11 June 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/10/tom-watson-the-canny-peacemaker-combatting-conspiracy-theorists>
). We shouldn’t be surprised that Corbyn and the hard left are weak on Europe, 
but for Labour to rule out the one thing that could have real impact – Cameron 
and Corbyn side by side, government and opposition united – is shockingly 
infantile.

Sadly, this is yet further evidence that modern British Labourism is becoming 
increasingly narrow and self-deluded under the influence of the current 
leadership. There is still time for a sensible change of heart.
Tony Samphier
London

• Jeremy Corbyn has been making a positive case for our EU membership. Cameron 
and Osborne and others might have been wiser to have taken this approach too. 
Instead they’ve given us their “project fear”, adopting relatively selfish 
arguments about whether we would be better or worse off financially, with falls 
in house prices, increases in the cost of European holidays etc unconvincingly 
calculated to the last pound, should we leave. They’ve lacked idealism and 
vision. Their campaign has failed to engage or to enthuse. TheLabour 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> grandees should direct their fire 
at them, not at Corbyn.
John Boaler
Calne, Wiltshire

• Is it me or are Labour grandees less grand than they used to be?
Pete Bibby
Sheffield

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
