 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hhy5%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hhy5%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa729047fa7e54b7f587b595d43b70fd18df62855%2F0_0_1583_2340%2F1583.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Male%20friendship%20in%20teen%20books%20-%20yes%2C%20really&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hhy5%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Male+friendship+in+teen+books+-+yes%2C+really&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hhy5%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa729047fa7e54b7f587b595d43b70fd18df62855%2F0_0_1583_2340%2F1583.jpg>
My new YA novel, The Bombs That Brought Us Together 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/360448/>, focuses, 
among other things, on the friendship between two fourteen year-old boys. What? 
Boys? Friendship? In a book? Yes, it does happen from time to time.

 Invariably when a list of any kind is compiled there is always a glut of 
creative activists ready to claw it to pieces.

What about…? 

How could you not include…?

Are you off your nut? 

Why didn’t you mention…? 

WAIT! That’s not YA! 

I make no apologies; in fact, I hope my list of “male friendships” in the 
books I’ve chosen will elicit the same debate and/or fury against me. Bring it 
on. I can take it. But wait until I give a few of my mates a call first.

The books below have resonated and remained with me over the years and in many 
ways shaped how I write about friendships in my own books.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hhy5%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hhy5%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76946c42f45d9f0311fee3289f21869c95e51d17%2F0_583_1790_1075%2F1790.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Male%20friendship%20in%20teen%20books%20-%20yes%2C%20really&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hhy5%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Male+friendship+in+teen+books+-+yes%2C+really&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hhy5%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76946c42f45d9f0311fee3289f21869c95e51d17%2F0_583_1790_1075%2F1790.jpg>
 Brian Conaghan: I’ve always considered Trainspotting a book about camaraderie 
and companionship, and not simply a reductive book about heroin abuse. 
Photograph: Ben Turner/Ben Turner Photography (www.bent 
Trainspotting <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/trainspotting-2.html> by Irvine 
Welsh

Okay, so an older YA readership certainly isn’t the market for Welsh’s tour de 
force but try telling that to a group of 16-18 year olds. I tried. I failed. 
When I taught this book in schools my students salivated – not purely on the 
ubiquitous drug use or the wanton acts of violence – but on the honest, 
accurate and chaotic friendships between Renton, Sickboy, Spud, Tommy and 
Begby. To me, I’ve always considered Trainspotting a book about camaraderie and 
companionship, and not simply a reductive book about heroin abuse.

Related: Phil Earle: I hate my books being called 'issues' books! 
<http://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/jul/08/phil-earle-i-hate-my-books-being-called-issues-books>

The Bubble Wrap Boy <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/bubble-wrap-boy.html> by 
Phil Earle

Being “outcasts” from their school’s social circle Charlie Han and Sinus (real 
name Linus) naturally gravitate towards each other, ensuing a friendship that 
is as fraught as it is gratifying. The fact that Charlie and Sinus lug 
society’s scars around with them not only serves to layer and nuance each of 
their character, but also breathes life into a friendship that is often 
hilarious yet always heart-warming.

Related: The Lord of the Flies by William Golding - review 
<http://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2012/jan/24/review-lord-flies-william-golding>

Lord Of The  <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/lord-of-the-flies-8.html>Flies 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/lord-of-the-flies-8.html> by William Golding

A plane crashes on an uninhabited island and the only survivors, a group of 
schoolboys, assemble on the beach and wait to be rescued. By day they inhabit a 
land of bright fantastic birds and dark blue seas, but at night their dreams 
are haunted by the image of a terrifying beast.

 William Golding gave the traditional adventure story an ironic, devastating 
twist. The boys’ delicate sense of order fades, and their childish fears are 
transformed into something deeper and more primitive. Their games take on a 
horrible significance, and before long the well-behaved party of schoolboys 
have turned into a tribe of faceless, murderous savages. Needless to say, 
friendships are tested.

Related: John Boyne: 'You can't sit there weeping over your own stories' 
<http://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/oct/01/john-boyne-you-cant-sit-there-weeping-over-your-own-stories>

Boy In The Striped  
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/boy-in-the-striped-pyjamas.html>Pyjamas 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/boy-in-the-striped-pyjamas.html> by John Boyne

Nine-year-old Bruno and his family leave Berlin to the bleak countryside of 
Germany. There he meets Shmuel behind the tall-wired walls that separate them.

Their friendship defies expectations. Learning about one another’s 
oppositional worlds, the pair’s innocence blurs the evil and horrors of the 
Holocaust for a short while. Yet, as Bruno finally crosses the divide that 
segregates them, their friendship results in devastating and heartbreaking 
consequences.

The Scar Boys by Len Vlahos

Harry’s life is tumultuous. He doesn’t do anything. He isn’t a stellar 
student. His situation is a burden on his parents’ lives and marriage. He 
doesn’t have any friends. But, when Johnny moves to his town and school 
everything changes for both of them. Johnny is an uncontainable force who 
changes everything in his wake, including Harry. They start a band, which 
alters Harry’s life in ways he never thought possible. Without Johnny, however, 
Harry would never have become the young man who wrote his college essay (the 
premise for the story). He never would have experienced all those amazing 
moments, or confidently re-entered society. A brilliant book that enforces the 
very nature of true friendship.

Related: David Levithan: why I wrote my latest novel as a musical - teen books 
podcast 
<http://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/audio/2015/apr/14/david-levithan-interview-hold-me-closer>

Boy Meets Boy <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/boy-meets-boy.html> by David 
Levithan

Paul, who’s gay, lives in a gay-friendly small town in New Jersey, where all 
forms of sexuality is accepted and embraced. His best friends at this stage are 
Joni, who he has known since early childhood and who he came out to in second 
grade, and Tony, who is also gay and who lives in a not-so-gay-friendly town 
with his strict religious parents.


 Completely blowing up the stereotype of the misunderstood gay boy feeling 
lost and isolated in a heteronormative high school, Levithan creates a school 
environment in his debut novel that pushes boundaries and challenges the social 
order: the star quarterback is a drag queen, there’s a school bookie on hand to 
make odds about who will get with whom, and report cards say things like 
“definitely gay.”

Related: Guardian children's books podcast: Roddy Doyle on A Greyhound of A 
Girl 
<http://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/audio/2011/oct/19/childrens-books-roddy-doyle-podcast>

Paddy Clarke Ha Ha  
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/paddy-clarke-ha-ha-ha.html>Ha 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/paddy-clarke-ha-ha-ha.html> by Roddy Doyle

Set in the 1960s North Dublin and narrated by 10-year old Paddy Clarke, the 
eldest child of his family. Paddy has a glut of friends; he’s probably closest 
to Kevin Conway, a rather unlikeable kid, and James O’Keefe, is a good deal 
more - despite being, quite possibly, the biggest liar in Barrytown. The most 
adorable of Paddy’s friends, however, are a pair of brothers called Liam and 
Aidan. The boys’ mother is dead, and though their father is trying his best, he 
seems to be a little lost.

 It’s set at a time when not only society is changing, but Paddy’s home life 
and friendships are dramatically changing too. There’s a certain sadness about 
watching Paddy grow up as the story unfolds; witnessing his trajectory from the 
warmth of the book’s beginning to the tragedy of the book’s denouement.

A Separate Peace <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/separate-peace.html> by John 
Knowles

A Separate Peace – set on the eve of the second world war - focuses on the 
friendship of Phineas (Finny) and Gene. Phineas’ apparent perfection creates a 
jealously in Gene that results in a tragedy that will forever change both of 
their lives. Knowles sheds light on the boys’ complex friendship, the ascent 
from adolescence to adulthood and the reader’s sense of humanity. With its rich 
tapestry of imagery and symbolism the friendship Finny and Gene enjoy is 
emotional and uplifting, however there is a smattering of a darker undercurrent 
that will keep you in a mild suspense.

Related: The Kite Runner by Khaled Hosseini - review 
<http://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/jul/30/review-khaled-hosseini-the-kite-runner>

The Kite  <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/kite-runner-10.html>Runner 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/kite-runner-10.html> by Khaled Hosseini

The affecting story of an improbable friendship between the wealthy, Amir, and 
the son (Hassan) of his father’s servant, set in a country that is in the 
process of being destroyed. The Kite Runner is about the power of reading, the 
price of betrayal, and the possibility of redemption; and an exploration of the 
power of fathers over sons -their love, their sacrifices, their lies. This 
sweeping story of family, love, and friendship - told against the devastating 
backdrop of the history of Afghanistan over the last 30 years - is an unusual 
and powerful novel that has become a much loved, one-of-a-kind classic.

Harris and Me by Gary Paulsen

Paulsen’s books deal with the trials and tribulations of childhood - parental 
disharmony, alcoholism, abusive behaviour, etc - more candidly and honestly 
than any other YA writer I’ve encountered.
 Harris and Me is told by a boy whose “pure drunk” parents have sent him to 
live with distant relatives on their farm in Minnesota. Harris’ whose family 
has the farm becomes the unnamed narrator’s proxy brother and role model for 
carefree enjoyment of boyish devilment. The narrator understands that his own 
nature is different from Harris’ but still treasures his wild and rambunctious 
spirit. Harris’ character is infectious and helps our narrator let down his 
guard. As a reader we get, in many ways, to live vicariously through both 
characters throughout their humorous adventures.

Do you agree with Brian’s choices? What other books would you put on the list? 
Let us know by email childrens.books@theguardian.com or on Twitter 
@GdnChildrensBks and we’ll share what you say on this blog.
— alisonwaller (@alisonwaller) April 15, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/alisonwaller/status/720964069117861889> 
You could definitely add @MelvinBurgess <https://twitter.com/MelvinBurgess>'s 
Doing It to this list@GuardianBooks <https://twitter.com/GuardianBooks> 
@BrianConaghan <https://twitter.com/BrianConaghan> @GdnChildrensBks 
<https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks>
 <https://twitter.com/alisonwaller/status/720964069117861889> — Suzanne Curley 
(@suzanne_curley) April 15, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/suzanne_curley/status/720971763107164160> 
@GdnChildrensBks <https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks> @alisonwaller 
<https://twitter.com/alisonwaller> @GuardianBooks 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianBooks> @BrianConaghan 
<https://twitter.com/BrianConaghan> 
I would add The Universe Versus Alex Woods. Complex but very loyal friendship!
 <https://twitter.com/suzanne_curley/status/720971763107164160> — Jenna aka 
Mrs Brown (@MrsBrownsBooks) April 15, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/MrsBrownsBooks/status/720992241993543680> 
@playbythebook <https://twitter.com/playbythebook> The Outsiders by S.E. 
Hinton and The Great Brain by John D. Fitzgerald should not be missed!
@GdnChildrensBks <https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks>
 <https://twitter.com/MrsBrownsBooks/status/720992241993543680> — Barbara 
Henderson (@scattyscribbler) April 15, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/scattyscribbler/status/720995719939825664> 
@GdnChildrensBks <https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks> Where-oh-where is 
Ostrich Boys by Keith Gray? If there is a better book on teen boy friendship 
I'm yet to find it!
 <https://twitter.com/scattyscribbler/status/720995719939825664> — Rachel 
Maskelyne (@RachelMaskelyne) April 15, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/RachelMaskelyne/status/721009036951449600> 
@GdnChildrensBks <https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks> @BrianConaghan 
<https://twitter.com/BrianConaghan> Favourites of mine: Because You'll Never 
Meet Me, Grasshopper Jungle & Up On Cloud Nine.
 <https://twitter.com/RachelMaskelyne/status/721009036951449600> 