
In less than a year, Rio de Janeiro will become the first South American city 
to host the Olympic Games. In anew series 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/series/rio-voices-our-olympic-odyssey>
 looking at life in Rio, we hear from two residents describing how their city 
is changing. Young citizen journalist Thaís Cavalcante describes how 
preparation for the games hasmade life worse 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/05/rio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-the-games-have-made-things-worse>
 in her favela, as families are forced from their homes and protests continue 
to mount. Another young journalist, Michel Silva, writes about thenegative 
impact of tourism 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/05/rio-olympic-games-2016-favela-not-ready-for-another-mega-event>
 to his neighbourhood, as well as other developments he hopes will improve his 
community.

In India, women are fighting to end a seventh-century custom allowing Muslim 
men to divorce their wives by saying“talaq” three times 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/10/india-muslim-women-fight-triple-talaq-law-instant-divorce>
. The triple talaq law yields instant divorce and can even be sent via social 
media. “During fights, I used to argue back but if it got too heated, I stopped 
because I was frightened my husband might say talaq,” one woman said. You can 
read more onwomen’s rights and gender equality around the world 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/series/womens-rights-and-gender-equality-in-focus>
 on our site.





Related: Rio Olympics: view from the favelas – 'The Games have made things 
worse' | Thaís Cavalcante 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/05/rio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-the-games-have-made-things-worse>

Elsewhere on the site

 * Sierra Leone celebrates lifting of ban on public gatherings due to Ebola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/10/sierra-leone-ebola-public-gatherings-ban-lifted-president-koroma>
 * Magoso school in Nairobi’s Kibera slum hits the right note with music that 
heals 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/07/kenya-magoso-school-kibera-slum-nairobi-music-therapy>
 * Ban Ki-moon: sustainable development goals “leave no one behind” 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/03/ban-ki-moon-hails-sdgs-agreed-by-193-nations-as-leaving-no-one-behind>
 * Zambian villagers take mining giant Vedanta to court in UK over toxic leaks 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/01/vedanta-zambia-copper-mining-toxic-leaks>
 * Mexico: the graphic tale of Lucha Castro’s struggle to defend women’s rights
 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/05/la-lucha-the-story-of-lucha-castro-and-human-rights-in-mexico-graphic-novel>
Opinion

Kenyan anti-corruption campaigner John Githongo shared his views on the 
current state of graft in Kenya, with claims that President Uhuru Kenyatta’s 
regime hadallowed corruption to flourish 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/06/kenya-barack-obama-visit-anti-corruption-plan-democracy>
 and pushed civil society to the margins. Meanwhile,Jonathan Glennie and Andy 
Sumner argued 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/05/aid-should-be-seen-as-foreign-public-investment-not-just-charity>
 that aid should be seen as foreign public investment, not just charity. The 
pair said that aid and international development needed to be repositioned. And 
finally, Emma Troutman argued that donations to survivors of the Nepal 
earthquakes would bemore effective 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/04/aid-donations-local-knowledge-grassroots-organisations-nepal-earthquake>
 if they went to local organisations instead of international aid agencies. She 
said large agencies often incur overheads by subcontracting relief work to 
groups with local knowledge.

Multimedia

Podcast: Counting the cost of the Boko Haram crisis 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/audio/2015/jul/25/boko-haram-niger-nigeria-podcast>

Video: How migrants were trafficked to work on Britain’s free-range egg farms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2015/aug/10/migrants-trafficked-work-britain-free-range-farms-video>

Pictures: Lesbos landings: Migrants risk all to reach Greek island by boat  
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2015/aug/07/lesbos-migrants-greek-island-boat-in-pictures>

What you said: top reader comment

On the piece Kenya’s rampant corruption is eating away at the very fabric of 
democracy 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/06/kenya-barack-obama-visit-anti-corruption-plan-democracy#comments>
 ,RichardTrillo wrote:

John Githongo is right, corruption in Kenya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/kenya> is on a barely imaginable scale. It 
gets into the day-to-day lives of every single Kenyan, all of whom are 
unavoidably involved in buying, selling and trading rights and responsibilities 
(for cash, land, jobs or contracts) that are already enshrined in Kenya’s 
brilliant new constitution – said to be the best in the world but largely 
ignored and rarely enforced.


Two points. First, generosity and willingness to share is part of the problem: 
nobody stopped by a traffic cop to pay a bribe to be allowed to continue ever 
questions the bribe, only how much these poorly paid police are demanding these 
days. And second, “police lines”: as far as I know, all police live in these 
ghettoes, separated from the rest of the community, and a breeding ground for 
corruption and resentment. Make the police part of the community, start at the 
bottom. When people with no power treat each other as if the law mattered, and 
the constitution mattered, then things will start to change.

Highlight from the blogosphere

Devex: 5 things needed to turn the SDGs into reality 
<https://www.devex.com/news/5-things-needed-to-turn-the-sdgs-into-reality-86617>


And finally …

Poverty matters will return in two weeks with another roundup of the latest 
news and comment. In the meantime, keep up to date on theGlobal Development 
website <http://www.theguardian.com/global-development>. Follow @gdndevelopment 
<https://twitter.com/gdndevelopment> and the team – @swajones 
<https://twitter.com/swajones>, @LizFordGuardian 
<https://twitter.com/lizfordguardian>, @MarkC_Anderson 
<https://twitter.com/MarkC_Anderson> and @CarlaOkai 
<https://twitter.com/CarlaOkai> – on Twitter, and joinGuardian Global 
Development on Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardianglobaldevelopment>.
