
Size matters. For men, the general rule is the bigger the better. For women, 
it is the opposite — at least when it comes to dress size. Hence the 
re-emergence of the size zero debate, reignited with the appearance of size 
triple zero. The original size zero, first brought to our attention ten years 
ago, is a British size 4. But now we have the triple zero — recently introduced 
by American retailerJ Crew <http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/j-crew> and used 
by Abercrombie & Fitch which is available in the UK — is a British size zero. 
It would fit a 23 inch waist, the typical size for a child age 6 - 8.

Of course there is outrage about such a dress size being promoted for adult 
women and and I completely agree with condemning this ridiculous move. But the 
way many articles report the incident — “Oh no, its back again, women are once 
again trying to make themselves unhealthily skinny.” — doesn’t make sense. It 
implies that the world’s obsession with skinny and its impact on women’s body 
image had gone away and was only now returning.

It hadn't. It was always with us. And pointing out a problem isn't the same as 
fixing it. At the time of the introduction of double zero, many magazines said 
how terrible it was, included a few positively captioned images of women with 
healthy body weights — and then it was back to the status quo. While so many 
women's magazine correctly say starving yourself skinny is not healthy and 
insist we learn to love ourselves whatever our size, flick through a few pages 
and there they are: extremely slim young women in every fashion spread. Another 
few pages and you find them praising the stylishness of seriously thin women —
Alexa Chung <http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/alexa-chung> and Kate Bosworth 
are consistently held up as the world's most fashionable women but are 
certainly nowhere near the average British women’s size. Occasionally a 
slightly curvier women breaks through — Beyoncé for example — but its a rarity.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4v352%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4v352%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F17%2F1405597060653%2F38882dc7-d37a-43bf-b044-5c16c743c826-1306x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Size%20triple%20zero%3A%20why%20won't%20our%20obsession%20with%20super%20skinny%20disappear%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4v352%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Size+triple+zero%3A+why+won%27t+our+obsession+with+super+skinny+disappear%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4v352%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F17%2F1405597060653%2F38882dc7-d37a-43bf-b044-5c16c743c826-1306x2040.jpeg>
 Alexa Chung is also praised for her stylishness but to many she appears to 
present an unrealistic body weight Photograph: REX 
A recent article in Grazia on the subject points out that “vanity sizing” 
plays a large role in the triple zero phenomenon. Shops re-number normal sizes 
to boost the buyer’s self-esteem — so what was once a size 12 becomes a 10 or 8 
and thus so smaller sizes get labelled “zero” or “double zero”. There has been 
a call to end vanity sizing andGrazia says that there should be a 
standardisation of sizes across retailers in Europe and the US. But will this 
really help? Yes you'll know exactly what size you are in any shop, but why 
would that stop someone from being obsessed with being skinny? It is the images 
that women are bombarded with everyday that make the lasting impact: skinny is 
stylish and putting on weight gets you shame (and often a red circle around the 
offending area). Blaming the sizing itself shifts the blame from the magazines 
and websites to the retailers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4v352%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4v352%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F17%2F1405598620457%2Fec5b7d2b-52d0-49d4-91f7-258158850415-2060x1408.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Size%20triple%20zero%3A%20why%20won't%20our%20obsession%20with%20super%20skinny%20disappear%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4v352%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Size+triple+zero%3A+why+won%27t+our+obsession+with+super+skinny+disappear%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4v352%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F17%2F1405598620457%2Fec5b7d2b-52d0-49d4-91f7-258158850415-2060x1408.jpeg>
 A model on the catwalk during London Fashion Week, 2007, when size zero was in 
the news due to concern over the health issues associated with it. Seven years 
later and we now have size triple zero. Photograph: LEON NEAL/AFP/Getty Images 
Some of the articles have also blamed the rise of Instagram 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/instagram> and the “skinny selfie”, 
saying the celebrities who post pictures of themselves looking extremely slim 
are the cause of the triple zero’s creation. But once again this is shifting 
the blame to those who obviously think their self-worth is connected to their 
slimness. Why do they feel the need to do this? So they get attention, so they 
can be called stylish, so they won’t be called fat. It is important the media 
recognises its role in society’s coveting of skinny and actually addresses it — 
or in the next few years “the rise of the quadruple zero” is likely to be the 
headline. Nothing changes. Literally.

@annamckie <https://twitter.com/Annamckie>

