
BBC Radio 4 <http://www.theguardian.com/media/radio4> presenter Justin Webb 
has said that news broadcasters’ salaries should “keep them on the side of the 
people” – but hinted he may earn more than the prime minister.

His comments come in wake of the white paper unveiled by culture secretary 
John Whittingdale last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/12/bbc-white-paper-key-points-john-whittingdale>
, which outlines the future of the BBC.

Among the measures announced by Whittingdale is a requirement for the BBC to 
publish names of stars and executives earning more than £450,000 a year 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/12/government-to-force-bbc-to-declare-star-salaries>
.

Related: BBC to be forced to reveal pay of stars including Evans, Lineker and 
Norton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/12/government-to-force-bbc-to-declare-star-salaries>

About a dozen stars are said to be paid above this level, including Gary 
Lineker, Chris Evans and Graham Norton.

David Cameron currently earns £142,500 a year; Whittingdale initially pushed 
for the names of BBC staff earning more than this to be published, butthe level 
was raised after David Cameron’s intervention 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/12/david-cameron-intervention-bbc-white-paper-future>
.


Webb’s pay would therefore not have to be disclosed under the new rules if it 
is between £150,000 and £450,000; co-hosts John Humphrys, Nick Robinson, Sarah 
Montague, Mishal Husain and James Naughtie are also thought to be in this 
bracket.


Writing in the Radio <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> Times, Webb 
said: “Yes, I understand the special concern about the BBC, since the salaries 
come straight from licence payers.

“That is – literally and metaphorically – a matter to be decided above my pay 
grade. But perhaps it’s more important that all news broadcasters – on 
commercial stations as well – should be paid in a manner that keeps them on the 
side of the people.”

Referring to a list that was published on the internet, claiming to reveal the 
salaries of numerous high earners, he said his daughter had quizzed him 
comically after his name appeared on the list.

“My daughter is outraged at the suggestion that I might earn more than the 
prime minister, who is paid £143,462,” he wrote. “She has read my name on a 
list on the internet (do they not have bike sheds to smoke behind in modern 
schools?) and is quizzing me on the way home: ‘But you don’t do anything’.”

The Today programme presenter also said he wanted to thank “whoever it was who 
put me on that list”, adding: “If I had a few bob and the time to spare I might 
approach a top lawyer and make a claim that my human rights have been abused.”

Webb appeared to take a swipe at former BBC colleague Robert Peston’s pay 
package at ITV,which has been claimed to be up to £750,000 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/13/robert-peston-paid-more-than-a-third-more-at-itv-than-bbc>
.


Comparing UK presenters’ pay with levels in the US, he said that former NBC 
journalist David Gregory was “reportedly paid $5m to front a Sunday morning 
politics show and then $4m when he was fired”. “Exactly: even more than Robert 
Peston,” Webb wrote.


He ended his column with the observation that he had not been included in a 
more recent list, joking: “My instinct is to be worried. But I suspect it’s for 
the greater good.”
