
If there really is a transformation in the delivery of NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> services in the next few years, it 
will be overwhelmingly thanks to primary care, not hospitals. Primary care is 
the most agile part of the care system, is at the forefront of prevention, and 
is uniquely placed to make a big difference to people’s lives at relatively low 
cost. And despite all the headwinds, progress is being made.

While it is the financial vortex of the acute sector which grabs the 
headlines, primary care is itself under immense pressure; at the extremes there 
are frightening stories about the toll that GP workloads are taking on some 
doctors’ mental health.

Many clinical commissioning groups are struggling to maintain GP involvement 
in the face of huge clinical workloads and the difficulty of the commissioners’ 
work, although the fact that nearly all CCGs will have taken over 
responsibility for primary care commissioning by next year should provide at 
least some encouragement that they can make progress in reshaping local 
services.

Recruitment to general practice is showing modest signs of improvement, with 
the latest figures from Health Education England 
<http://www.hsj.co.uk/topics/workforce/hundreds-fewer-junior-doctors-apply-for-key-specialty-training/7003836.article>
 showing a 1% rise in doctors choosing the discipline. However, the 
government’s pre-election pledge to recruit 5,000 more GPs by 2020 is no longer 
credible.

The government and NHS England are expected to publish their “roadmap” for GPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/gps> next week, outlining a package of 
support such as lighter touch inspections – an attempt to address a major cause 
of complaint – but one thing primary care has never lacked is promises.

While NHS England continually talks up the central importance of primary care, 
its actions are some way from matching the rhetoric. GPs have been waiting in 
vain for a shift in funding from acute to primary care. It is increasingly 
clear that the “you need this more than I do” moment is never going to come; 
the investment will have to be generated through changes in the way primary 
care works.

Greater Manchester – the flagship for health devolution – is just one example. 
It is establishinglocal care organisations 
<http://www.bmj.com/content/352/bmj.i1611.full?ijkey=Lu1RRMLPPtDBEnc&keytype=ref>
 consisting of GPs and community services, which will provide a wide range of 
diagnosis and support functions such as alternatives to emergency admissions 
and more help for discharged patients. This promises to deliver far greater 
integration between general practice, community services and pharmacy. The GPs 
will no longer be independent contractors.

The vanguard programme is eroding the barriers between acute and primary care, 
with nine areas – including south Somerset, Northumberland and Morecambe Bay – 
aiming to establishintegrated primary and acute care systems 
<https://www.england.nhs.uk/ourwork/futurenhs/new-care-models/primary-acute-sites/>
 (Pacs), complete with integrated patient lists. At another Pacs vanguard, a 
subsidiary of Yeovil district hospital foundation trust, isabout to take over 
three Somerset GP practices 
<http://www.hsj.co.uk/sectors/primary-care/vanguard-fts-company-to-take-over-gp-practices/7003586.article>
.

With many GP premises unsuitable for delivering expanded services, buying 
doctors out of their buildings can accelerate the restructuring of services 
into larger organisations with the critical mass to invest. Hull CCG is using 
buyout as part of itsplans to bring its 55 practices together into eight groups 
<http://www.pulsetoday.co.uk/your-practice/practice-topics/commissioning/practices-redundancy-and-premises-costs-could-be-covered-in-ccgs-merger-drive/20031069.fullarticle>
 working as a multidisciplinary teams providing seven-day services.

With factors such as social isolation increasingly recognised as being 
comparable to more obvious risk factors for illness, such as an unhealthy diet, 
CCGs includingCrawley 
<http://www.crawleyccg.nhs.uk/EasysiteWeb/getresource.axd?AssetID=433181&type=full&servicetype=Attachment>
 andwest Leicestershire 
<https://vcsereview.org.uk/2016/01/12/ppg-volunteers-lead-successful-social-prescribing-clinic-pilot/>
 are experimenting with“social prescribing” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/nov/05/social-prescribing-fishing-group-doctor-ordered>
. This gives people access to non-medical community support, often through 
volunteers. While social prescribing is not quite as simple as it sounds – 
requiring considerable upfront GP time – its potential is obvious.

Further ahead, one of the major areas of unfinished business is the role of 
primary care in meeting the objectives of thenational cancer strategy 
<http://www.cancerresearchuk.org/sites/default/files/achieving_world-class_cancer_outcomes_-_a_strategy_for_england_2015-2020.pdf>
, with a transformation in GPs’ access to diagnostic tests as the most 
effective way to spot a cancer early. Making this happen will require huge 
investment in technology, staff and training.

While the primary care lobby will continue to push for a grand gesture in 
terms of moving funding from hospitals, on the ground GPs and CCGs are 
beginning to shift the centre of gravity away from hospitals. Progress is 
desperately slow, and it shouldn’t be this hard, but the signs of change are 
there.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
