
It was, some might say, her Nicola Sturgeon moment. Just as TV viewers across 
the UK were captivated by the SNP leader’s performance in last year’s general 
election debate, this morning it was the turn of one of Scotland’s other female 
leaders, the Conservatives’Ruth Davidson 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/ruth-davidson>, to enjoy the plaudits 
after her contribution to Tuesday night’s BBC referendum debate.

At the end of an ugly campaign, there has been rare cross-party and 
cross-country agreement overnight that Davidson, who spoke for remain alongside 
the newly elected London mayor,Sadiq Khan 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/sadiq-khan>, and the TUC 
<https://www.tuc.org.uk/>’s general secretary, Frances O’Grady 
<http://www.theguardian.com/profile/frances-o-grady>, turned in a stellar 
performance: witty, robust, well informed and passionate.

Formidably well briefed, she pulled apart fellow Conservative Andrea Leadsom’s 
claims about EU lawmaking, saying: “The other side have constantly lied about
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. You deserve the truth.” 
She repeatedly challenged Boris Johnson over leave’s inability to guarantee 
jobs, saying: “That’s not good enough!”. She went on to demolish his attempted 
critique of EU security, pointing out that she was “the only one on this panel 
that has ever worn the Queen’s uniform”. (Davidson served as a signaller in the 
Territorial Army.)

Her passion and articulacy garnered high praise across social media, with 
Conservative Home founder and committed leave campaigner, Tim Montgomerie, 
tweeting:
— Tim Montgomerie ن (@montie) June 21, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/montie/status/745353052119523328> 
If @RuthDavidsonMSP <https://twitter.com/RuthDavidsonMSP> was Ruth Davidson MP 
she'd be a hot tip to be next Tory leader#BBCDebate 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/BBCDebate?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/montie/status/745353052119523328> 
Of particular interest to Ruth-watchers were her combative blue-on-blue 
exchanges with Johnson, after well-sourced press reports earlier on Tuesday 
suggested Davidson was planning a wholly independent breakaway party inScotland 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> should he become the next leader.

It is certainly the case that Davidson – an early protege of David Cameron – 
has led an extraordinary resurgence in Scottish Tory fortunes (remember those
panda jokes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/12/giant-panda-tian-tian-pregnant-edinburgh-zoo>
?) precisely because she has worked so hard to distance herself from the more 
elitist vision of Conservatism that still seem to dominate the Westminster 
party.

She worked hard for Tuesday night’s success, as her close adviser and one of 
the newly expanded cohort of Conservative MSPs in the Scottish parliament, Adam 
Tomkins, explains: “She locked herself in a hotel room for four days to prepare 
for that. She always puts in a big shift. This is the reason why the Tory party 
is doing better in Scotland than it has done for a quarter of a century, why 
new people like me have joined the party, why the new Holyrood group genuinely 
feels like Team Ruth. Imagine having her as your boss!”

Tomkins is one of 31 Conservative MSPs elected to Holyrood in May, many for 
the first time, in what Davidson herself described as a seismic shift in the 
Scottish electoral landscape, as her party more than doubled their seats and 
gained votes not only from Labour in urban centres but also from the SNP in 
more rural seats

Another of those first-time MSPs is Annie Wells, a working-class single mother 
from a Labour-voting family. “I thought she played an absolute blinder,” says 
Wells of her leader’s debate performance. “Maybe because she’s been through the 
independence referendum the fire was more in Ruth.”

Related: Ruth Davidson: I don't want to be prime minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/23/ruth-davidson-conservative-party-prime-minister>

Wells describes what marks Ruth out from her Westminster Tory peers: “With 
Ruth, what you see is what you get. She was the most down-to-earth person there 
last night. She came across as the person to represent hard-working, working 
class people and that’s why we got the result we did up here. She comes from a 
working class background herself and in no way fits the stereotype of a 
Conservative. Everything she does isn’t about what’s going to boost her up the 
ladder, but what will bring success for the people of Scotland.”

Both Tomkins and Wells have told the Guardian in the past how their leader’s 
personal popularity and promotion as the only woman to stand up to Nicola 
Sturgeon cut through powerfully on the doorstep during the Scottish election 
campaign earlier this year. Activists chapping on doors deliberately introduced 
themselves as part of “Team Ruth” rather than using the C-word.

Davidson’s strategy was also based on an understanding that the constitution 
remained the defining faultline in Scottish politics, as she targeted undecided 
voters who had opposed independence in 2014 with her core messages of strong 
opposition to the SNP and defence of the union. She likewise pledged to oppose 
a second independence referendum no matter what the outcome of Thursday’sEU vote
 <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>.
