
My PhD <http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/phd> combines some 
of the most fascinating things and places in the world: archaeology, Cuba and 
concentration camps. I see the amazing, terrible and exotic images flowing into 
people’s minds as I try to summarise my research.

Related: My PhD gives a voice to women abused by their husbands in the '80s 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/apr/11/my-phd-gives-a-voice-to-women-abused-by-their-husbands-in-the-80s>

I am about to submit my thesis on the Cuban war for independence (1895-1898), 
a period that is normally identified by scholars as the one that witnessed the 
invention of the concentration camp.

As usual, things are more complicated than they seem. I took some time to 
realise, for instance, that the term “concentration camp” turns out to be 
pretty useless when comparing the many ways in which people have been confined 
over the last century and a half.

My research challenges the clichés about what a concentration camp is, and 
looks at what archaeologists can do to understand how they worked. I apply 
something called landscape archaeology to study how Spanish colonial 
authorities fought the Cuban insurgency by controlling the local population.

They did this by first gathering hundreds of thousands of civilians into 
fortified towns and villages, and then using them to recolonise the devastated 
countryside. By the time the US intervened in Cuba, more than 150,000 of these 
reconcentrados (about 10% of the total population) had died of starvation and 
epidemic diseases, most of them women, children and the elderly. In Cuba they 
still refer to this episode as the (second) “Spanish genocide”.

Related: My PhD takes me to one of the last truly wild places on earth 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/feb/29/my-phd-takes-me-to-one-of-the-last-truly-wild-places-on-earth>

Many people have established a direct connection between these measures and 
the Nazi extermination camps. That is a tempting link to make but, in fact, the 
Cuban case is conceptually much closer to the camps set up during the second 
Anglo-Boer War, or during the Japanese occupation of Manchuria. They were 
designed to segregate civilians from guerrilla fighters at all costs.

Part of my job is to demonstrate that appearances can be deceptive. People can 
actually suffer bitter confinement in places that resemble lovely model 
villages.

My thesis focuses on Dimas, a small coastal village in western Cuba, in the 
Pinar del Río province. This is a region famous for its beautiful natural 
areas, like the Viñales Valley, and for producing the best tobacco leaf in the 
world. One would certainly not define modern-day Dimas as a vibrant or 
glamorous place, but it has charm and serenity in its isolation.

Lying far away from the main tourist circuits, and with less than 2,600 
residents, the village survives nowadays as a modest community of fishermen and 
tobacco growers. But it was created 125 years ago as one of the main Spanish 
reconcentration camps in the area.

My research has brought me to Cuba several times, and it has changed the way I 
see the world. I still do not like rum, smoking cigars or going to the beach, 
but I know now what being a scholar really means: it means keeping on working 
at a pile of old books and maps, like my Cuban colleagues, even when they 
cannot afford a kilogram of potatoes or a new pair of shoes.

I have found passion in people trying to decipher and preserve the remains of 
their past, not even considering those that we take for granted such as getting 
a proper salary, being able to demonstrate academic impact, or paying attention 
to how many times you have been cited. I owe to my PhD the opportunity of 
having met these extraordinary people and being able to call them my friends.

Related: Five years of hard graft in a pub kitchen fired up my PhD 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/feb/15/five-years-of-hard-graft-in-a-pub-kitchen-fired-up-my-phd>

I am now sure that getting to know yourself through this process is almost as 
important, if not more important, than passing your viva. After all the 
problems, nerves, satisfactions, misfortunes and adventures, we are all just 
tiny, insignificant human beings.

You can use your research to bring you closer to other human beings, or 
isolate yourself in a bubble of ambitions, insecurities, expectations and 
academic rhetoric. In the end, I love my PhD because it has made me a better 
person than I was.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
