
Most investment funds are, first and foremost, about making money. Not New 
Crop Capital <http://www.newcropcapital.com/>, a venture capital fund started 
by animal-welfare activists to support entrepreneurs whose products will save 
the lives of cows, pigs, chickens and fish.

Launched last fall, New Crop has raised $25m and is investing in companies 
like Beyond Meat <http://beyondmeat.com/>, which makes plant-based substitutes 
for burgers and chicken, andPurple Carrot <https://thepurplecarrot.com/>, a 
startup that home delivers vegan meal kits. The money comes from an investor 
who wishes to remain anonymous.

Related: Fake food: the tech companies working to revolutionise how we eat 
protein 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/fake-food-tech-revolutionise-protein>

New Crop’s managing trustees are Bruce Friedrich, who worked for 20 years for 
activist groupsPeople for the Ethical Treatment of Animals 
<http://www.peta.org/> (PETA) and Farm Sanctuary <http://www.farmsanctuary.org/>
, and Nick Cooney, a founder of The Humane League  
<http://www.thehumaneleague.com/> who is now director of education at Mercy for 
Animals <http://www.mercyforanimals.org/>. The firm’s investment manager is 
Chris Kerr, a veteran entrepreneur and investor who previously worked as 
entrepreneur in residence at the Humane Society of the United States 
<http://www.humanesociety.org/>.


The goal of the fund is to eventually replace animal agriculture with 
plant-based and cultured alternatives, according to Friedrich, who has been a 
vegan since reading Diet for a Small Planet 
<http://www.amazon.com/Diet-Small-Planet-Anniversary-Edition/dp/0345321200> as 
a teenager.

Friedrich and Cooney operate out of Washington DC, and launched the fund 
because they believe that markets may be as powerful as morals when it comes to 
alleviating the suffering of farm animals.

Friedrich says animal welfare advocates have to date been largely focused on 
educating consumers about the harms of animal agriculture. “But most people 
make their dining choices principally around the factors of taste, price and 
convenience,” he says. “We’re focused on making plant-based and cultured 
alternatives tastier, cost competitive and more convenient.”

New Crop has plenty of company. Over the years, several Silicon Valley venture 
funds and billionaire investors like Bill Gates and Li Ka-Shing have invested 
in startups such as Beyond Meat,Hampton Creek <https://www.hamptoncreek.com/> 
andImpossible Foods <http://impossiblefoods.com/>, which sell or intend to sell 
alternatives to conventional meat, dairy and egg products.

New Crop’s investments are small, typically $50,000 to $1m. Besides funding, 
Friedrich, Cooney and Kerr provide their portfolio companies with access to 
like-minded investors and to consumers who want to avoid meat. “We’re connected 
with all the leading organizations in the US and abroad that promote 
plant-based eating,” Cooney says. “We can help our companies get the ear of the 
early adopters.”

Already, New Crop is working closely with Stray Dog Capital, a mission-driven 
fund created by animal welfare advocates. Stray Dog was co-founded by Chuck 
Laue, a senior executive at tech company Asurion, and is led by Lisa Feria, a 
former brand manager for Charmin and Puffs at Procter & Gamble.

The Humane Society has also put its money where its mouth is by making small 
investments in Beyond Meat,Veggie Grill <http://veggiegrill.com/>, a small 
chain of meat-free restaurants and Miyoko’s Kitchen <http://miyokoskitchen.com/>
, which makes vegan cheese. It also helped Hampton Creek 
<https://www.hamptoncreek.com/> and Daiya Foods <http://daiyafoods.com/>, which 
make plant-based dairy products, get off the ground. “Our fingerprints are on a 
lot of growing companies out there,” says Kerr, who worked at the Humane 
Society from 2007 to 2014.

While all these investors are mission-focused, they fully expect to make 
money. “We would not be putting many millions of dollars into it if we didn’t 
see it as lucrative opportunity,” Cooney says. All profits from New Crop will 
be reinvested or distributed to animal welfare nonprofits.

Investors are optimistic about plant-based products that compete with meat, 
dairy and egg products because they are one of the fastest growing segments of 
the food industry. According to Radiant Insights 
<https://globenewswire.com/news-release/2015/12/22/797455/0/en/Meat-Substitute-Market-Size-Worth-USD-5810-1-Million-By-2022-Radiant-Insights-Inc.html>
, a research firm, the global meat substitute market, which was worth about 
$3.34bn in 2014, is expected to grow by 7.5% a year and reach $5.8bn by 2022. 
That’s still a very small fraction of the global meat market, which is 
estimated to be worth about $675bn by the US Meat Export Federation.

By comparison, plant-based milks, mostly almond and soy milk, make up about 8% 
of the milk industry. “Plant-based meat has started its trajectory to meet, 
match and surpass plant-based milk in market penetration,” says Friedrich.

Related: From vegan beef to fishless filets: meat substitutes are on the rise 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/food-blog/2014/oct/15/vegan-vegetarian-diet-beef-fishless-filets-meat-substitutes-rise>

The conventional meat industry has taken notice. The March issue of 
Meatingplace <http://www.meatingplace.com/>, a magazine that serves the red 
meat and poultry processing industry, has a cover story about alternatives 
headlined “It Ain’t Meat, Babe”. Beef consumptionhas been falling in the US 
since the 1970s <http://fortune.com/2015/10/27/red-meat-consumption-decline/>, 
although chicken consumption is way up.

John Haugen, who leads the venture investing arm of food giant General Mills, 
which invested in Beyond Meat,explains 
<http://www.blog.generalmills.com/2015/10/investing-in-the-future-of-food/>: 
“If you look at the overall trends – half the population is trying to avoid 
meat and yet there’s a continued demand for protein. And they’re avoiding meat 
for many reasons – whether environmental, health or cost.”

Besides Beyond Meat and Purple Carrot, where former New York Times food 
columnist Mark Bittman is a senior advisor, New Crop’s portfolio includes 
Miyoko’s Kitchen andLyrical Foods <http://www.kite-hill.com/>, which sells 
plant-based cheese and yogurts under the Kite Hill brand.

New Crop has also also invested in Memphis Meats <http://www.memphismeats.com/>
, which is developing technology to cultivate animal cells and grow real meat 
without animals, and Gelzen <http://www.gelzen.com/>, which is making a vegan 
gelatin. Neither have products on the market yet.
