
The pent-up fury and impotence that Iraq war veteran Jay Bell felt when he 
found himself back on Civvy Street could easily have landed him in prison, had 
it not been for a Liverpool-based digital art project aimed at ex-servicemen 
doing time.

The 30-year-old ex boxer, who served in the Royal Electrical and Mechanical 
Engineers from 2004 to 2009, highlights his training to “kill for a living”, to 
underline his astonishment at the way the slide of his life into chaos has been 
reversed by art. He observed the same effect on prisoners he worked with at HMP 
Altcourse and HMP Liverpool, as a volunteer on a project withFact  
<http://www.fact.co.uk/>– the Liverpool-based media, film and digital art 
centre.


Related: Stories of survival: families affected by addiction share advice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/feb/23/drug-alcohol-misuse-addiction-families-advice>

Bell only came to Fact under protest as a one-off to support a fellow 
ex-combatant. But since leaving the army, he has experienced symptoms of 
post-traumatic stress disorder, the loss of his home and a relationship, and 
six years of being unable to hold down a job because of his destructive 
behaviour. Through working in ideas, shapes and performance he feels less 
tortured by memories of past horrors, and has a part-time job with Fact. Most 
of all, he has hope.


“Art is like the reverse of a trigger,” says Bell. “I thought it was a load of 
arse when I first started, but after trying it and learning a little about why 
it works, I’ve had my eyes well and truly wiped. It has been a liberation – 
helping me to visualise new ways of handling what is going on in my current 
life, without words.”


He ended up as a key member of Fact’s pilot project, masterminded by 
communities manager Emily Gee, which involved artists David Blandy and Larry 
Achiampong working with prisoners weekly for six sessions to produce a film 
called FF Gaiden. It used the world created by game Grand Theft Auto V to play 
out a series of personal testimonies, including family perspectives.


Gee launched the project four years ago, because there was nothing for 
veterans in Liverpool. An early project with veteran artist Stuart Griffiths 
paved the way for this one. She says: “The transition from the army into 
civilian life is a trauma, with many layers of complexity.”

There has been fierce controversy about the numbers of veterans in prison; the 
Ministry of Defence says they make up 3.5% 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/more-support-for-veterans-in-the-criminal-justice-system>
 of prisoner population, while the National Association of Prison Officers says 
9%, andone pilot study put the figure as high as 16.75% 
<https://www.britishlegion.org.uk/media/2280/litrev_ukvetscrimjustice.pdf> 
(pdf). The problem is particularly acute in Merseyside, where army recruitment 
is high because of unemployment and deprivation. When discharged, many veterans 
feel lost without the structure of the army, and turn to drink and drugs.

Gee sees the link between crime and a disappointment in the UK to which 
veterans return. She says: “The public rhetoric around veterans in prison does 
not relate much to the experience of the individual veteran transitioning into 
civilian life. They are at the same time a hero, a tragic figure but also a 
criminal.”


In a recently-finished project, funded by the Paul Hamlyn Foundation, Gee 
worked on prisoner veterans’ sense of identity. Each week the Fact team would 
negotiate lengthy security checks to bring PlayStations into the category B 
prisons. The games (with violent content removed) formed a virtual world canvas 
on which this group of inmates could explore their own traumatic experiences. 
Their input became a piece of art in its own right, which was screened at Fact. 
One prisoner at HMP Altcourse said: “I did not know that this project would 
click so well with me. The ideas behind it were so true to how I felt.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzt6%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzt6%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ca3fb084ec115cfc45c2b746a6b317759eee708%2F55_0_1491_895%2F1491.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=PlayStation%20game%20helps%20veterans%20in%20prison%20deal%20with%20trauma&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzt6%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=PlayStation+game+helps+veterans+in+prison+deal+with+trauma&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzt6%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ca3fb084ec115cfc45c2b746a6b317759eee708%2F55_0_1491_895%2F1491.jpg>
 Still from FF Gaiden. Photograph: FF Gaiden: Control (2016) 
The effectiveness of this Veterans in Practice programme has astonished prison 
staff. Following the six weekly sessions, prisoners were better behaved, 
expressed feelings of self worth and were more prepared to participate in other 
activities to improve their rehabilitation. As a result, the Armed Forces 
Covenant Fund has been awarded to Fact funding to work with prisoner veterans 
in HMP Altcourse and Liverpool (and with their families) for a further six 
months.


The Ministry of Justice has announced that from January 2015, every prisoner 
coming into custody will be asked if they have been a member of the armed 
forces. Keith McDonnell, gym manager at HMP Altcourse, hopes the longer term 
programme will produce works which demystify veterans and will lead to better 
understanding of veterans by professionals within the criminal justice system.

Liverpool is now at the cutting-edge nationally when it comes to supporting 
veterans. Ex-veteran Bob Blanchard led the way by establishing the Liverpool 
Veterans Project to provide holistic support for those leaving the forces. Both 
Liverpool and Everton football clubs have schemes, and Liverpool city council 
has set up a Making it Happen group for veterans, covering all areas of care 
including housing and employment.

And a recent conference at Liverpool John Moores University on 10 June looked 
at better ways of serving the ex-service prison population. As organiser Emma 
Murray, a lecturer in criminal justice, says: “Fact’s work raises many 
questions about whether we need to manage military veterans differently in 
prison – after all, they have lived and seen things that other prisoners have 
not.”

 * Images shown in this article are from FF Gaiden: Control (2016), by Larry 
Achiampong and David Blandy with Matt Buckley, Gordon Harding, Adam Rushton, 
Mark Towell, Susan Wardle, Lindsay Wallace. Commissioned and produced by Fact, 
supported by Paul Hamlyn Foundation. With thanks HMP Altcourse, Keith 
McDonnell, Tony Connolly and the HMP Altcourse gym team, HMP Liverpool and 
Partners of Prisoners. 
Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.

 * This article was amended on 21 June 2016 to correct comments about Jay 
Bell’s health status 