
Writing a book is a pretty solitary activity, for the most part. Sending it 
out into the world is a radical step that turns it from a private enterprise 
into a shared and public one. As a nervous author, one of the things you hope 
for most is that your characters and plot will resonate with your readers, and 
live for them in the same way that they’ve lived for you.


 Written reviews give you some idea about whether you’ve succeeded, naturally, 
but it’s not healthy to pay too much attention to reviews, either good or bad. 
And even if they’re brilliantly written (which they often are), they are 
intrinsically anecho of the writer’s reaction to the text. Yes, you get a good 
idea of what they liked or didn’t like, but you don’t experience their response 
first-hand – as something fresh, vibrant and living. Fan art provides precisely 
this effect. As its name implies, it’s both an enthusiastic reaction to your 
book,and an independent creative act in its own right. For the author, that 
makes it doubly thrilling.

Related: A guide to ghosts by Jonathan Stroud 
<http://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/gallery/2014/oct/31/ghosts-guide-jonathan-stroud-halloween>

 When I see beautiful, sophisticated pieces of work, such as those by Kirsty 
Mordaunt and Francesca Resta (see displayed in our fan art gallery 
<http://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/gallery/2015/dec/18/the-wonder-of-book-fan-art>
), I get joy from the artistry on display, and (as a lovely bonus) gratifying 
confirmation that my Lockwood series has successfully crossed over into other 
people’s hearts and minds. If it hadn’t, how could their art be so utterly 
alive? It’s an astonishing thing to enter into an artistic conversation like 
this, to see a character of one’s own skilfully brought to life in a different 
medium, becoming something unique and different while at the same time 
remaining yours.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f3p6%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f3p6%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a1aeb6cc4496b97915c563885733a9cab11b251%2F0_284_1000_908%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jonathan%20Stroud%20on%20why%20he%20loves%20fan%20art&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f3p6%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jonathan+Stroud+on+why+he+loves+fan+art&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f3p6%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a1aeb6cc4496b97915c563885733a9cab11b251%2F0_284_1000_908%2F1000.jpg>
 Kirsty Mordaunt’s Hollow Boy, inspired by Jonathan Stroud’s Lockwood & Co. 
Illustration: KIRSTY MORDAUNT 
 The first time fan art really blew me away was eleven years ago, when I 
toured Japan. My internet connection was rubbish then, so I never looked at 
online fan illustrations, if they even existed then. Lots of schools had taken 
part in a competition to draw scenes from my first Bartimaeus book,The Amulet 
of Samarkand <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/amulet-of-samarkand.html>. One 
of the winners was a 14-year-old girl, who had exuberantly depicted every 
character from the novel (and there are alot in there, humans, djinn and all). 
They were very Japanese, done with spiky hair and big manga eyes – but I knew 
each and every one of them. And I was at once struck by the wonder of the 
process. Characters that I’d seen in my head as I sat scribbling in a study in 
deepest Hertfordshire had been first written down in English, then translated 
into Japanese, a language that I will never read, then read by a school-girl on 
the other side of the world, who then turned them with alchemy of her own into 
vibrant, living images that danced on the page. They had been transmuted into 
something new, but – after all those many stages – they were still recognisably 
the same.

 That’s a kind of magic as miraculous as anything in my books, and that’s the 
miracle of fan art. It’s a living bond between writer and reader, and an 
affirmation of the ongoing creative conversation that we all take part in.

 It starts early. When I was young, I responded to the books I loved with 
little stories and drawings of my own. These first attempts at fashioning my 
own art were crucial to my development as a writer; it’s why I feel so strongly 
about children having time and space to explore their creativity, and why I’ve 
started theFreedom to Think campaign <http://www.freedomtothinksite.tumblr.com> 
to pursue that end. But fan art is not something that’s age-restricted. Quite 
the reverse. Because I’ve never stopped making it. When it comes down to it, 
all books are fan art too. The Bartimaeus sequence was my answer to the great 
fantasy tradition that meant so much to me; today the Lockwood series is a 
response to the ghost tales that I’ve happily hoovered up all my life.

 That’s why I love the fan art generated by my work, and greet each new piece 
with delight and recognition. It’s living proof that the torch is being passed 
on.

Find out more about Jonathan Stroud and his books on the Jonathan Stroud 
website <http://www.jonathanstroud.com>, follow him on Twitter @JonathanAStroud 
<https://twitter.com/JonathanAStroud> and @iamfree2think 
<https://twitter.com/iamfree2think>.

And now see our wonderful fan art gallery 
<http://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/gallery/2015/dec/18/the-wonder-of-book-fan-art>
!
