
Four years ago schools were told everything they did would have to change. 
There would be a new national curriculum, new GCSEs, a new style of A-level. 
The assessments they used would be torn up and thrown in the bin. Why? Partly 
because the then education secretary, Michael Gove, felt like it, but mostly – 
they were told – because without more “rigour” universities would continue 
having to pick up the pieces when poorly educated students crossed 
their thresholds.

Leaving aside the fact that higher education institutions, funded at almost 
twice the per-student rate of schools, really ought to be able to cope with 
such a challenge, the claim they were demanding more rigour doesn’t even seem 
true. Four years on, while schools groan under the workload of rewriting every 
part of their practice, universities are handing out unconditional offers like 
confetti – suggesting that far from being worried about providing remedial work 
for students, some no longer even care if these students complete theirA-levels 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/alevels> at all.

Related: This half-baked A-level reform is being rushed for the election | 
Laura McInerney 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/nov/18/half-baked-a-level-reform-rushed-election>

Earlier this year a survey by the University and College Union found one in 10 
admissions staff said their university was makingunconditional offers 
<https://www.timeshighereducation.com/news/rise-unconditional-offers-causes-concerns-about-fairness>
 based on predicted grades alone. Birmingham University, part of the “elite” 
Russell Group, has built a whole unconditional offerscheme 
<http://www.birmingham.ac.uk/undergraduate/courses/unconditional-offer-scheme-2016.aspx>
, its website declaring that candidates demonstrating exceptional academic 
performance “in their schooling to date” can secure a guaranteed offer, 
regardless of their final results, just so long as they make Birmingham their 
top choice. In 2014, Nottingham University made 176 unconditional offers to 
applicants yet to sit their exams but predicted three or more A grades. At 
least eight students started their degrees without achieving any As. Several 
achievedDs or Es 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/education/universityeducation/11297453/Top-universities-ignoring-final-A-level-grades-in-race-to-sign-up-students.html>
 in at least one subject.

Does this matter? If universities see potential in these pupils, why not let 
them in with lower grades? Here are three reasons why it does matter.

First, the “potential” for which these unconditional offers are given is 
largely decided by the clairvoyant grade predictions of teachers, known to be
incorrect about half the time <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-33818019>.

Second, it’s an almighty slap in the face first to tell schools that their 
poor teaching is the ruin of universities then – as they drown under the 
pressures needed to change it – give out the message that A-levels are so 
unimportant that some students’ grades don’t matter.

And third, it is putting teachers’ jobs at risk. From next summer, sixth forms 
will be measured on a series of performance metrics, two which include pupil 
grades. The measures are published in league tables and if they are 
sufficiently poor will affect the official grading given to the school or 
college by Ofsted.

Related: Fears over unfair university admissions as AS-levels disappear 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/sep/08/university-admissions-as-levels-sixth-form-exams>

Now, imagine you run a sixth form. You have, say, 60 pupils in a year group. 
Ten are given unconditional offers and decide that instead of completing their 
course with characteristic verve and dedication, they’re going to doss about 
instead. Even a fairly studious 18-year-old will put partying before Proust.

That’s a disaster for you. Average grades in your sixth form will plummet, a 
poor inspection will follow and a poor pay review and potentially a P45 could 
follow that. Don’t think you can elbow those students out, either. One of the 
other new metrics is “retention” – points are lost for each excluded student.

Universities aren’t making these decisions to upset schools. It’s simply a 
matter of market forces. New government rules mean they can recruitunlimited 
numbers 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/aug/08/universities-fight-for-students-before-a-level-results>
 and get the cash for doing so, which unfortunately means that just as schools 
are pushing for rigour, universities are getting incentives to bring their 
entry bars down.

If A-levels matter to universities, they should select on the basis of A-level 
results. If they don’t, all this reform is pointless. Michael Gove was right: 
rigour in our educational thinking is vital. It’s just that it is the 
politicians lacking rigour, not the schools.
