
Boris Johnson <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> has said he will 
apologise on national television if Britain were to plunge into recession after 
a vote to leave the EU.

His promise came in response to a caller to radio station LBC, who asked the 
former mayor of London: “If we Brexit and we go into recession, would you have 
the political courage, to go on TV … and say sorry, I made it wrong and I 
apologise?”
Referendum explained: Guardian view 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/05/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=guardian_leader>
Johnson promised he would apologise were the UK to slide into recession 
post-Brexit. “Of course I will,” he said. “I’m not certain what my political 
career holds anyway. This is far more important than any individual political 
career.

“I don’t think London <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> has anything to 
fear from coming out of the EU, and neither does Britain. When has our country 
ever gone wrong by believing in ourselves?”

Financial experts and business leaders have ratcheted up warnings about the 
harm to the economy of a leave vote. In an article in the Guardian on Tuesday, 
theformer currency speculator George Soros said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/20/brexit-crash-pound-living-standards-george-soros>
 if Britain leaves the EU “the value of the pound would decline precipitously”.

“I want people to know what the consequences of a vote to leave the EU would 
be before they cast their votes rather than afterward,” he wrote. “A vote to 
leave could see the week end with a Black Friday and serious consequences for 
ordinary people.”

One of Asia’s richest men, Li Ka-shing, whose portfolio includes mobile phone 
operator Three, Superdrug and Northumbrian Water, has also warned that a vote 
to leave would be “detrimental to the UK”.

Johnson played down the significance of Soros’s intervention, telling LBC on 
Tuesday: “The people I listen to are not people like George Soros, who 
speculate on market movements – that’s how he makes his money. I listen to 
people like Anthony Bamford of JCB, the biggest private manufacturer in this 
country.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJEOx_0I2g2g&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJEOx_0I2g2g&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJEOx_0I2g2g>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJEOx_0I2g2g&media=>
 Boris Johnson on LBC 
Michael Gove, the justice secretary and leading leave campaigner, speaking 
earlier on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, also denied Brexit would have as 
significant an impact as forecast by Soros and others. He had admitted over the 
weekend that there might be “bumps in the road” for the economy after a leave 
vote.

“If economic forecasters were as reliable as doctors or airline pilots, then 
everyone would be a billionaire,” Gove said. “The truth is that economic 
forecasters like George Soros have got things wrong in the past.

“The economic model that the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> embodies is a job-destroying, misery 
inducing, unemployment-creating tragedy and if we vote to leave we can free 
ourselves from a sinking ship and also send Europe in a better, more 
progressive direction,” he said.

Speaking on LBC, Johnson dismissed claims by the chancellor, George Osborne, 
that the government had not made plans for the possibility of a leave vote, 
calling it “incredible with the polls where they are that the British 
government, the cabinet secretary, the whole of the civil service is not 
actively working on it”.

Related: EU referendum live: Corbyn says Labour 'ready' for an early election 
after EU vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/21/eu-referendum-live-george-soros-steve-hilton-bbc-debate>

Downing Street, he said, had leant on business leaders to support a vote to 
remain, though he declined to be specific.

“I can’t tell you the pressure that Project Fear and remain put on senior 
business people not to articulate their views,” he said. “You will get a call 
from certain gentlemen … And they will say, ‘Look, you know, we want to 
continue to have contracts with you … there is an honours system as you know’, 
all this kind of thing. And that’s how it is. There is a bit of leaning on.”

Gove admitted he believed he would need to reconsider his role in government 
were Britain to vote to remain. “Of course, depending on what the result is on 
Friday, I will reflect and decide what is the best course for me,” he told 
Radio 4.
