
The popular 5:2 diet, when you eat normally for five days and heavily restrict 
your intake for two, does work in the short-term, a study has found.

But you can lose about the same amount of weight while on a standard diet of 
reducing your daily calorie intake in a much less restricted way.

The mean weight loss after six months for those on the standard 
calorie-reduced diet was 5.5kg (12lbs), while those on the 5:2 diet lost 5.3kg 
(11.7lbs), according to researchers from AustinHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> and the University of Melbourne.

Related: Fasting facts: is the 5:2 diet too good to be true? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2015/jan/27/fasting-facts-is-the-52-diet-too-good-to-be-true>

The randomised study involved 24 obese male war veterans aged 55-75 years, who 
had five counselling sessions with a dietitian over the six-month study, one of 
the researchers, Margie Conley, told the Dietitians Association of Australia’s 
national conference in Melbourne.

One group went on the 5:2 diet – which originated in the UK – restricting them 
to 2,500kJs, or 600 calories, on two non-consecutive days a week while they ate 
normally on the other five days.

The others, who on average had been consuming around 10,080kJs (2,400 
calories) a day, went on a diet cutting their daily intake by 2,500kJs (600 
calories).

Men in both groups lost body fat and girth, with the standard calorie-reduced 
diet group reducing their percentage body fat by an average 2.3% and their 
waistline by 6.4cm.

The figures for those on the 5:2 group were 1.3% and 8cm.

Related: Light packed lunch ideas for 5:2 dieters | The lunch box 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/mar/22/5-2-diet-packed-lunch-box-recipes>

Eating just 2,500kJ (600 calories) over a day might mean having two poached 
eggs and some spinach for breakfast, 60g to 80g grilled chicken with a side 
salad of cucumber and tomato for lunch, and a small piece of fish with 
vegetables for dinner.

“Compliance rates were similar for the two groups, but the 5:2 diet group 
reported being hungrier, especially early on in the study,” Conley said.

“Interestingly, weight loss slowed at the three-month mark for both groups, 
which was when the dietitian follow-up tapered out, showing support may be the 
key element in continuing success.”
