
Sir Joseph Pilling is to review the independence and effectiveness of the 
Independent Press Standards Organisation 
<https://www.ipso.co.uk/IPSO/index.html> (Ipso). 

The former senior civil servant was appointed to conduct the external review 
by Ipso’s appointments panel,as predicted earlier this month by the regulator’s 
chairman, Sir Alan Moses. 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/10/ipso-appoints-former-civil-servant-review-effectiveness>

One of the recommendations of the Leveson inquiry 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-inquiry> was that a regulator would 
need to be independently inspected.

The appointments panel, which is separate from Ipso 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/ipso> itself, has a majority of non-industry 
members. It is chaired by Wendy Harris.


She said of Pilling’s appointment that the panel was seeking “someone of 
unimpeachable independence, with a track record of conducting high profile 
reviews.” So they were “very pleased”, she said, “that we were able to appoint 
someone as eminent and experienced as Sir Joseph.”

Pilling had a distinguished civil service career, rising to become permanent 
secretary of theNorthern Ireland <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>
 Office in 1997 until his retirement in 2005.

He has since been responsible for conducting reviews, notably into the Civil 
Aviation Authority, and also led the review on behalf of the Church of England 
about issues of human sexuality.

He was a member of the panel, chaired by Daily Mail editor Paul Dacre, which 
reviewed the 30-year-rule covering the release of confidential government 
papers.Its report in 2009 recommended that the restriction should be halved to 
15 years 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/jan/30/freedomofinformation-pauldacre>
.

In a press release statement, Pilling welcomed Ipso’s decision to set up an 
external review at what he described as an important time for the UK newspaper 
and magazine industry.

He is quoted as saying: “I look forward to engaging with a wide range of 
industry stakeholders, as well as the general public, and would encourage 
anyone who has observations and views they wish to submit to contact us.”

In a telephone interview, he said he took on the task because he thought it a 
“potentially interesting’ topic about which he knows very little. “I am used to 
learning about things,” he said, “and I have no personal view.”

Pilling did deal with journalists during his time in Northern Ireland, usually 
in providing background briefings. He said: “I was never let down by the 
journalists. If I was indiscreet, I can say that I never paid a price for it.”

He likes printed newspapers too, buying three titles every Saturday: the 
Guardian, Times andFinancial Times 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/financialtimes>.


Pilling will be assisted by a barrister, Zoe Gannon 
<http://www.11kbw.com/barristers/profile/zoe-gannon>, who is with the 11KBW 
chambers. The aim is to complete the review within six months.


Under the review’s terms of reference, he will report on how Ipso is 
fulfilling its role as the regulator of the overwhelming majority of Britain’s 
newspapers and magazines.*

He will examine the effectiveness of Ipso’s functions and the extent to which 
it operates independently.

 His review will also consider Ipso’s funding; the body’s relationship with 
the editors’ code committee; and the quality of its customer service.

The review will seek input from any interested party, including members of the 
public. To contact the review please go towww.ipsoreview.co.uk 
<http://www.ipsoreview.co.uk>.


*The Guardian, Independent, London Evening Standard and Financial Times have 
not signed up to Ipso. Nor have those papers joined the other regulator,Impress 
<http://impress.press/>, which has signed up 12 small news publishers 
<http://impress-press.php5.hostingweb.co.uk/news/new-era-for-independent-press-regulation.html>
.
