
In a televised debate with the prime minister, Nigel Farage has defended 
himself against claims of racism, saying that comments he made about the 
possibility of Cologne-style sex attacks in Britain were “a tiddly issue 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/jun/07/eu-referendum-tv-debate-cameron-farage-face-brexit-grilling-live?page=with%3Ablock-57572d85e4b06a49db63acdb>
” in the EU referendum campaign.

The Ukip leader told a questioner in the ITV election programme to “calm down 
there” when she asked him about the controversial claims that triggered arobust 
response from the archbishop of Canterbury 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/07/nigel-farage-helping-to-legitimise-racism-justin-welby-says>
, Justin Welby.
Brexit explained: Can I still register to vote? 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/05/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=website_crash#>
During the confrontation, David Cameron warned that a vote to leave the 
European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> at the referendum, which 
takes place in 15 days’ time, could trigger a second Scottish referendum, 
despite previously claiming that the result north of the border in 2014 was 
“decisive”.

He said that a vote to leave the EU would make the British “quitters” rather 
than fighters, adding that he wanted to make the patriotic case.

“I think we’re an amazing country. I say if you love your country, you don’t 
damage its economy, you don’t restrict opportunities for young people, you 
don’t actually isolate your country and reduce its influence in the world,” he 
said.


“Frankly I do worry about a second Scottish referendum 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/26/alex-salmond-scottish-independence-vote-likely-brexit>
 if we vote to leave. You don’t strengthen your country by leading to its break 
up.”

But Cameron faced a difficult question from an audience member who complained 
that immigration had left him without a GP, unable to climb on to the housing 
ladder, and finding the place he had grown up had turned into a “no-go zone”.

The prime minister responded by saying: “There are good ways of controlling 
immigration and bad ways. A good way is saying people can come here, work and 
contribute but pay in before they get out.”

He also hit back at Farage’s claim that there was too much emphasis on GDP and 
not enough on the impact that immigration had on “ordinary decent people”.

“Mr Farage kept on saying GDP is not important. GDP is the size of our 
economy. It is the size of all the wealth our economy creates,” he said. “We 
don’t want to be little England, we want to be Great Britain.”

The prime minister sought to associate the wider leave campaign with his Ukip 
opponent after the chancellor, George Osborne, suggested that his Conservative 
colleagues campaigning for out were fighting for a vision of “Farage’s Britain”.

Farage rejected the idea that he was divisive or racist, telling the audience 
that he was fighting for the rights of immigrants from the Commonwealth. On the 
comments about sex attacks, in which he warned that the issue was the 
referendum’s “nuclear bomb”, he complained that he had been demonised, 
suggesting that Welby should read his actual quotes rather than the headlines.

However, Farage repeated earlier arguments, saying that sex attacks were a 
“huge issue” in Germany 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/05/nigel-farage-migrant-sex-attacks-to-be-nuclear-bomb-of-eu-referendum>
. “A very large number of young single males have settled who come from 
cultures where attitudes are very different,” he said.

The Tory business minister, Anna Soubry, accused Farage of an “awful, 
patronising, slightly chauvinistic attitude” towards the female questioner whom 
he told to calm down.

“That’s the trouble with Nigel: he’s a prickly pear really and he doesn’t like 
it up him when someone asks him a tough question.”

Tom Watson, the deputy Labour leader, said Farage “got flustered and hectored 
the audience” and Cameron did an adequate job. But he also said he wished that 
Labour had the chance to put across “our distinct message on the EU” about 
workers’ rights.

A spokesman for Farage rejected the idea that Scotland would be granted a 
second referendum, while theConservative out campaigner, David Davis 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/26/immigration-could-fall-to-almost-zero-if-uk-leaves-eu-says-david-davis>
, said Cameron’s warning of a UK break up was “a scare story and a very, very, 
ill-founded one”.

Related: EU referendum: our panel on Nigel Farage and David Cameron's TV debate
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/07/eu-referendum-our-panel-nigel-farage-david-cameron-tv-debate>

Vote Leave, the official out campaign, did not attend the event after reacting 
furiously to ITV’s decision to please Downing Street by fielding Farage rather 
than a senior Conservative figure linked to their group.

They accused the prime minister of telling “five outright lies”, including 
about being able to remove EU jobseekers after six months, or stopping foreign 
criminals walking into the UK.

Earlier on Tuesday, Cameron was challenged to a head-to-head TV debate by 
Boris Johnson <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> and Michael Gove, 
after he accused the leave campaign of telling six lies about the EU.


Hours after Cameron said they were “peddling nonsense” and “resorting to total 
untruths” 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/07/cameron-accuses-eu-leave-campaigners-six-lies-brexit>
, the two leading Brexit campaigners said the public deserve to hear the 
arguments debated in person.



The prime minister has declined offers to do any one-on-one events as he does 
not want to be seen to attack senior Tory colleagues in the Brexit camp 
directly. Engaging in a head-to-head debate with another politician would also 
arguably raise the status of his opponent.


Gove and Johnson said: “We think that the public deserve the chance to hear 
these issues debated face-to-face between the prime minister and a spokesman 
for Vote Leave so they can judge for themselves which is the safer choice on 23 
June.
Brexit explained: current polling 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/05/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=current_polling#>
“The prime minister was absolutely right to hold this vote and allow ministers 
the chance to disagree with him. We hope that in the same spirit he will accept 
this invitation.”

Earlier, Cameron gave a surprise press conference to accuse the leaders of the 
Vote Leave camp of lying, amid signs of rising concern in Downing Street about 
the Brexit camp gaining momentum. In recent days somephone polls have shown 
that the leave group is ahead 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/06/eu-referendum-live-cameron-harman-leave-campaign-con-trick?page=with%3Ablock-57551b8ee4b045bc9189f222>
.



Asked if the hastily arranged event was a sign of alarm, the prime minister 
said “not at all” but he wanted to make sure he had debunked all the untruths 
being told by leading Brexit campaigners.
