
We are back to 1993. A Tory prime minister is once again struggling to control 
his Eurosceptic ministers and MPs. David Cameron is suffering from a similar 
headache over an internal revolt to the one that undermined John Major 22 years 
ago (example here 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/1993/jul/25/politicalnews.uk>).

A crop of headlines on Sunday reflected Cameron’s Major-like difficulties: “50 
Tory MPs start anti-EU offensive” 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/newstopics/eureferendum/11657082/conservatives-plot-britains-eu-exit.html>
 (Sunday Telegraph); “Eurosceptics at war” (Mail on Sunday); “Tory EU plot” 
(Sun on Sunday); and “Cameron trying to load EU debate, say No campaigners” 
(Independent on Sunday).

The Observer splashed on a warning to Cameron by a Polish minister “not to 
fool voters” in the referendum 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jun/06/poland-warns-david-cameron-over-eu-referendum>
 plus a two-page analysis of the prime minister’s difficulties in negotiating 
reforms. The Sunday Times’s front page story,“EU can spend millions to back 
‘yes’ vote” 
<http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/news/Politics/article1565863.ece>, touched 
on yet another twist in the story.

Sunday evening TV news bulletins showed Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> sitting alongside Cameron 
during a break in the G7 summit in Germany and giving him unwanted advice on 
the US’s wish for Britain to remain in the EU.

That heralded a crop of front page national newspaper headlines about the EU 
on Monday, most of which would surely generate a wry smile fromJohn Major 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/john-major>.

“Cabinet told: Vote for Europe or resign” 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/newstopics/eureferendum/11658391/david-cameron-cabinet-ultimatum-eu-referendum.html>
 (Daily Telegraph);“PM: I will sack ministers who call for EU exit” 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jun/08/david-cameron-tory-ministers-face-sack-eu-exit>
 (Guardian);“PM: Back me or I will sack you” 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3114613/Back-sack-says-PM-David-Cameron-s-referendum-shock-Eurosceptic-ministers.html>
 (Daily Mail);“New war over EU referendum” 
<http://www.express.co.uk/news/politics/582893/David-Cameron-EU-Conservatives-exit-referendum-Bavaria-G7-summit>
 (Daily Express) and“Cameron to demand ministers quit government if they 
campaign for Brexit” 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/b8be13a8-0d06-11e5-b850-00144feabdc0.html#axzz3cS3tMcTu>
 (Financial Times).

Other papers carried similar articles on inside pages: “PM’s message to his 
Eurosceptic ministers: back my referendum campaign or resign” 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/david-cameron-warns-ministers-will-be-forced-to-quit-if-they-do-not-back-him-over-eu-deal-10303912.html>
 (Independent); “PM: EU either back me or I’ll sack you” (Daily Mirror);“Toe 
line... or I’ll sack you” 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/politics/6491472/David-Cameron-warns-eurosceptics.html>
 (The Sun); “Stay in EU, Obama tells Cameron over a beer” (Metro); and “‘100 
Tory MPs will vote for British exit from EU’” (i).

The Times, picking up on Cameron’s decision to lift the referendum campaign 
spending allowance by 40%, splashed on“Sceptics cry foul as PM raises EU poll 
cash limit” <http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/news/politics/article4463571.ece>.

In other words, the major story of June 2015 is the Major story of July 1993. 
Within weeks of winning an unexpected general election victory, Cameron is 
faced by internal dissension.

No wonder the Labour-supporting Mirror could not help but twist the knife in 
its editorial, “EU poll will skewer PM”. It argued that Cameron’s warning to 
Tory ministers “smacks of weakness rather than strength”... and amounted to “a 
tacit admission” that Cameron’s “‘reforms’ could be mainly cosmetic, the 
hollowest of empty victories”.

It gleefully forecast that Cameron “will struggle to avert a Tory civil war as 
Europhobes in his party realise they were gullible or stupid to believe it was 
ever a principled stand by the PM”. And it concluded:

“Europe is toxic for the Tories and the party will tear itself apart. Again. 
David Cameron <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> is looking 
more like the new John Major every day”.

The Tory-supporting Daily Mail proved the point by adopting an oppositionist 
line to the prime minister. It contended thatthe rules of engagement for the 
in/out EU referendum must be fair 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-3114757/DAILY-MAIL-COMMENT-PM-play-fair-referendum.html>
 and aired its “grave concerns about the plan... to rig the financial rules in 
favour of the government position (which, we suspect, is almost certain to be 
‘yes’ to staying in the Brussels club)”.

But that was only one arm of its argument: 

“We fear Mr Cameron is making a tactical mistake by insisting that all members 
of the government must back his position on how to vote in the referendum, or 
resign.

Allowing ministers a free vote would show absolute confidence in his ability 
to negotiate a better deal from Brussels – including significant curbs on 
migration – then successfully sell it to his party.

By contrast, putting a gun to MPs’ heads will surely sow division, trigger 
resignations and risk opening up the sort of bitter splits onEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> that – as history shows – are 
bad for the Tory Party and, most crucially, Britain”.

Bitter splits that the Mail appears eager to foment. The Times also agreed 
that the row will go on and on, with a group of Eurosceptic MPs looking set to 
enhance — and perhaps dominate — the case for Britain to go it alone 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/opinion/leaders/article4463242.ece>. It 
continued:

“It is hard to believe that Mr Cameron’s efforts will win them over, or indeed 
that they have any true desire to be won”.

The Times <http://www.theguardian.com/media/thetimes> believed that Cameron’s 
“one-nation Conservative” agenda “will be drowned out by Tories debating 
Europe” and that “Tory modernisers may wince at echoes of the travails of John 
Major, leading to the defeat of 1997”.

But the paper remained optimistic about the nature of the debate due to the 
emergence of “a new, more credible lobby” that “could help the prime minister 
to convince fellow EU leaders that, without substantial changes to welfare 
rules, the size of the EU budget and protections from political centralisation, 
the threat of a British departure is real”.

Then again, the Times pointed to the depth of antagonism towards the EU within 
Cameron’s cabinet, suggesting that his “back me or I’ll sack you” threat could 
split the party:

“A good number of leading ministers, including Michael Gove, Chris Grayling, 
Iain Duncan Smith and Sajid Javid, are thought to be sympathetic to Brexit.

Forcing them to sign up to keeping Britain inside the EU on what they might 
regard as unsatisfactory terms could pull his government apart”.

 It concluded that “until now, Britain’s pending referendum has felt like a 
phoney war. This may be where it starts to get real”.

That reality could well lead to Cameron echoing Major, who famously referred 
to his cabinet EU troublemakers in an unguarded moment - caught on a microphone 
he thought had been switched off - as “bastards”.

Some 20 years later, speaking at a Commons press gallery lunch 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/our-man-in-westminster-how-john-major-finally-won-over-the-press-with-his-bastards-gag-8897711.html>
, he told journalists:

“Calling three of my colleagues bastards was absolutely unforgivable. My only 
excuse is that it was true”.

Does Cameron feel the same way about his Eurosceptic ministers? Watch out for 
those microphones, prime minister.
