
Nicola Sturgeon <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicola-sturgeon> is the 
second highest-ranked female from the UK behind the Queen in the latest Forbes 
list of the world’s most powerful women.

The SNP leader, at No 50, features for the first time among the influential UK 
figures in the 2016 tally of world leaders, celebrities and entrepreneurs by 
the US business magazine. The annual list was topped by the German chancellor, 
Angela Merkel, for the sixth successive year.

Merkel was placed ahead of the US presidential hopeful Hillary Clinton, who 
had “a clear shot at No 1 if she wins the nation’s vote”, the list’s compilers 
said

The 2016 list had undergone a celebrity cull, with Taylor Swift, Angelina 
Jolie and Ellen Degeneres making way for rising political talent.

The list’s compilers said Sturgeon, a new entry, had made headlines with a 
renewed bid for Scottish independence, and described her as a vocal critic of 
the Brexit campaign. Her popularity, they said, could be crucial in any new 
independence vote.

Oprah Winfrey was the top-ranked entertainment personality on the 2016 list, 
at 21, ahead of Condé Nast boss Anna Wintour at 28 and US television executive 
Bonnie Hammer at 47.

The editor-in-chief of Guardian News & Media, Katharine Viner, was ranked the 
world’s 68th most powerful woman, and fifth among the UK contenders.

Marissa Mayer, the 41-year-old Yahoo chief executive and former Google boss, 
was the youngest woman on the list at No 55. The second youngest was the EU’s 
foreign policy chief, Federica Mogherini. The 42-year-old was the highest 
climber from last year, jumping from 36 to the world’s 19th most powerful woman.

As the celebrity count subsided, seven world leaders and two philanthropists 
made their debut on the power list.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kge7%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kge7%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65a336d49f8425c306e9ae841c3601e2ff1ec9c7%2F995_1044_2311_1386%2F2311.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nicola%20Sturgeon%20enters%20Forbes%20list%20of%20world's%20most%20powerful%20women&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kge7%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nicola+Sturgeon+enters+Forbes+list+of+world%27s+most+powerful+women&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kge7%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65a336d49f8425c306e9ae841c3601e2ff1ec9c7%2F995_1044_2311_1386%2F2311.jpg>
 Angela Merkel topped the list. Photograph: Maurizio Gambarini/EPA 
Related: Headache for Angela Merkel as German president Joachim Gauck quits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/06/german-president-joachim-gauck-merkel-east-german-civil-rights>

Forbes reported a “visible uptick” in the number of female leaders being 
elected to president or head of state, whose number doubled in the last year, 
according to the Pew Research Centre.

Taiwan, Nepal, Croatia, Mauritius and Lithuania have elected or re-elected 
female leaders to office over the last year. One of the new entrants, Ameenah 
Gurib-Fakim, the first woman to become president in Mauritius, said: “People 
say to have power, you hire and you fire. I don’t subscribe to this notion.

“For me, power is the ability to influence. If you can influence in the long 
term by leaving behind a legacy, to me, that’s real power.”

The Nobel peace prize winner Aung San Suu Kyi, whose party won a landslide 
victory last November in Myanmar’s first democratic elections in 25 years, also 
makes the list for the first time, at No 26.

Related: From Kim Jong-un to Kim Kardashian – the world's most powerful 
millennials 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/15/worlds-most-powerful-millennials>

“Her leadership raises new hope for a country that has long been controlled by 
the military,” said the lists’ compilers.

There were also a couple of notable departures from the list. Brazil’s Dilma 
Rousseff lost her place afterbeing suspended 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/12/dilma-rousseff-brazil-impeachment-vows-fight>
 from the presidency in May.

Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, the former Argentina president who is facing a 
fraud inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/13/argentina-president-cristina-fernandez-kirchner-fraud-investigation>
, was also absent from the tally.

Forbes also dropped Elizabeth Holmes, the entrepreneur whom it previously 
named America’s richest self-made woman. It revised her net worthfrom $4.5bn 
(£3.1bn) to zero 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/01/forbes-downgrades-net-worth-former-richest-woman-zero-elizabeth-holmes>
 due to her 50% stake in troubled blood-testing startup Theranos, which she 
founded in 2003. Explaining its decision to drop her from the list, the 
magazine said her reputation had been “irreversibly tarnished 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/alixmcnamara/2016/06/06/2016-power-women-list-highlights/#5b8becbf5396>
” after claims by former employees that the company’s blood tests were 
unreliable.
