
About 20 years ago I was a UN election observer in an African country. Most of 
the observers were regional UN staff or diplomats. I was one of only two NGO 
participants in the mission.

We drove through devastated countryside to a small town far from the capital. 
In the guesthouse where we stayed my co-workers participated in raucous drunken 
parties that went on until the small hours. It was impossible for those who 
didn’t drink or want to party to get away from the tumult.

Some of the observers started drinking at lunch and drank steadily until the 
parties ended at 2am. A few of the security personnel – Muslims who didn’t 
drink alcohol – quietly withdrew to stay with a local Arab merchant. Eager to 
escape the guesthouse I asked to stay with them, but they politely said no; the 
lodgings were for men only. But they respected my distaste for drunken partying 
and were kind to me.

Related: Secret aid worker: development work broke a piece of me 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/aug/04/secret-aid-worker-development-work-broke-a-piece-of-me>

During the five days of the election we had to get up at 4.30am and drive 
around to inspect polling stations for 12 to 14 hours a day. This was not easy 
or safe work. Several observers had been kidnapped, and gangs of ex-combatants 
were roaming the countryside. The roads were sandy tracks or heavily damaged 
asphalt; the maps basic. We were instructed not to step into roadside ditches 
to pee because mines planted there might go off.


One day I was ordered to do something I believed was unsafe; I refused. Then I 
was publicly humiliated in front of the group’s 18 observers. Several observers 
participated enthusiastically in this degradation ritual, while others stood by 
mystified because they couldn’t understand English well enough to know what was 
going on.

In punishment, I was ordered to drive the observation route alone on the last 
day of the election with a middle eastern police officer, who’d done his best 
to protect me in several dicey situations. This was prohibited by UN rules, 
which mandated four observers in each vehicle.

Meanwhile, the rest of the group went to a foreign military base to party. 
Against the strict rules for convoys they drove to the provincial capital after 
dark, endangering themselves. My colleague and I met them on the road but 
refused to follow them, returning instead to the town where we were staying.

The next day we went to the city where UN officials had an office. I tried to 
register a complaint about the team while one of the observers who’d partied 
with them leaned over my shoulder to read what I was writing. I felt sure that 
my complaint would go nowhere. By that time all I wanted to do was to escape. I 
was desperate to fly away, even on an Aeroflot plane without seatbelts.

Back home I told a couple of people about what had happened. I haven’t spoken 
about it since. For some years I thought I might write a novel about that time, 
but it was too traumatic to revisit. I found myself shaking when I wrote about 
it for the first time in 20 years.

Related: Humanitarian agencies need to stop failing their staff on mental 
health 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jul/31/aid-workers-casualties-mental-health>

I can’t generalise from that experience, but I’ve read psychological studies 
<http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0044948> that 
reach somber conclusions about aid workers in conflict zones. A significant 
proportion witness or suffer horrific attacks, self-medicate with alcohol or 
drugs, sometimes abuse the people they’re supposed to help, try to conceal 
their pain, break down, burn out and end up withpost-traumatic stress disorder 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/mar/03/post-traumantic-stress-disorder-aid-workers>
.

Some agencies and organisations try to prepare personnel by offering 
stress-prevention workshops before they go into the field. Others do not. Some 
discourage workers from reporting their distress, implying that revealing it 
could damage their career prospects. They provide grossly inadequate 
counselling or none at all. The consequences include high rates of mental and 
physical health problems that last for years or decades. Such suffering should 
not be the outcome of good intentions.

I’ve never returned to the country where I went 20 years ago with such keen 
curiosity and enthusiasm to witness its first-ever national election. I’d never 
volunteer again to do that kind of work. But I still admire the courage of 
those who risk so much to help others, and I wish they received more support.

Linda Rabben <http://www.american.edu/sis/faculty/rabben.cfm> is an 
anthropologist, author and human rights activist.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
