
Ask any secondary school teacher to list his or her biggest headaches and, 
along with the usual suspects, you’re likely to hear: “Late exam specs”. The 
delay in Ofqual’s approval of specifications for teaching next year is the 
scourge of the staffroom at the moment. Slow progress means many teachers are 
struggling to cope with planning decisions – and facing tough conversations 
with students and parents.

The current tally doesn’t make for easy reading; just 16 of 156 GCSE and 
A-level specifications 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/new-gcses-as-and-a-levels-accredited-to-be-taught-from-2016/new-gcses-as-levels-and-a-levels-accredited-to-be-taught-from-september-2016>
 due to be taught next September have been signed off, while 14 of 21 subjects 
have no approved specification at all. But what difficulties have teachers 
faced as a result of the delay? Here, a handful of teachers discuss the 
challenges they face:

Related: Teachers, is it worth becoming an examiner?  
<http://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/teacher-blog/2014/oct/16/teachers-examiner-marking-exams>

Parents

“Parents are troubled by the changes and the most engaged of them would like 
to see exam papers and example material, which I don’t have,” says Lucy 
Rycroft-Smith, a maths supply teacher.

“I’m all for confessing ignorance when it comes to a maths problem, but not 
knowing enough about the assessment practices for your subject makes you look 
unprofessional.”

Jo Debens, curriculum leader for geography at Eggar’s school 
<http://www.eggars.net/> in Alton, says it’s particularly difficult with 
parents during open evenings. “We are trying to explain the GCSE course on 
offer, and then we have to say ‘Oh, but hang on, it may well have changed by 
the time your child’s on it’. It makes us feel a bit less professional when we 
can’t speak with authority.

“It’s particularly tough advising pupils and parents who really want to know 
what the geography exam will be like. I can say that at the moment, as far as I 
know, geography is going to have three final exams. Some of them will think 
‘history has only got two, so maybe we should pick that’ . The problem is, we 
can’t yet give them that information for sure.”

Andy Lewis, assistant religious education (RE) leader at a school in 
Upminster, has problems at options evenings, too. “Our sixth form open evenings 
are happening now but we can’t give many answers until Ofqual gives its final 
approval. It’s bit of a shambles – especially when these meetings help students 
make decisions about their futures.”

Planning

Laura Jackson, music teacher and performing arts leader at Belmont school 
<http://www.belmontschool.org.uk/> in Durham, says: “I can’t plan ahead. 
Collecting resources, adapting key stage 3 planning, and even deciding which 
exam board to use: I can’t do any of those things until the specs have been 
confirmed.”


Jackson adds that teachers need information to prepare students for the 
challenges ahead: “Learning for GCSE study doesn’t just begin in year 10; it 
needs to be embedded way before then to allow students to master new skills.”

Sally Thorne, head of history at Matravers school 
<http://www.matravers.wilts.sch.uk/> in Wiltshire, is also concerned: “I ran a 
‘preparing to teach’ inset last week and many of them are teaching the new GCSE 
already to key stage 3 and 4. I’m really glad not to be in that position. 
They’re essentially teaching it blind.”

The other issue, says Thorne, is that with so little time to prepare, schools 
will start with the history unit they’re best prepared for, rather than making 
an informed decision about the order in which to teach the spec. “This might 
result in a chronological mishmash,” Thorne says.


Debens says: “In my school, we haven’t given children of the new system their 
target grades yet. We can’t fully explain them because there are no examples or 
approved assessment materials. I can’t say to a child: ‘you’re aiming for a six 
and this is an example of some six-worthy work’ when we haven’t been given any 
materials that could guide us on that.”

Related: Secret Teacher: exams have left my students incapable of thinking 
<http://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/feb/07/secret-teacher-exams-students-thinking>

Purchasing

New textbooks are being written but can’t go to print until accreditation has 
occurred, according to Thorne. “This will give me almost no time to make an 
informed choice on what will be the biggest departmental purchase in a decade.”

Helen Rogerson, head of science at Westonbirt school 
<http://www.westonbirt.org/> in Gloucestershire, faces similar difficulties: 
“What worries me the most is the quality and availability of the published 
resources. We are a very small department and as the pace of change is so fast 
we are reliant on buying resources to get us started on our schemes. We also 
want to give all our students access to a textbook or workbook to help them 
with their independent study. It’s difficult to make decisions when these 
resources are not finished yet.”

Rogerson says that the number of courses being changed makes buying new 
resources a stretch, even for a well-resourced school such as hers. “If parents 
want resources next summer to help their daughter get a head start then we will 
probably find that difficult.”

It’s not all doom and gloom, though. Sapuran Gill, deputy head at The 
Heathland school 
<http://www.heathland.hounslow.sch.uk/page/default.asp?title=Home&pid=1> in 
Hounslow, says slow progress at Ofqual hasn’t caused his school many problems. 
“If it carries on for months then there will be an issue, but my colleagues and 
I have gotten used to late announcements. We’re used to managing it.”

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<http://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx?CMP=dis_42> for lesson 
resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
