
During the safety briefing on every plane journey adults are reminded that, in 
case of an emergency, they are to secure their own oxygen masks before they 
help their children fit theirs. Why? Because it helps you look after children 
more effectively. The same is true of mental health, and it is something 
teachers should consider. After all, it is difficult to discuss good mental 
wellbeing in front of class if we, as adults, do not practise it ourselves.

Action to improve the mental health of teachers is certainly needed: worries 
aboutteacher workload <http://www.theguardian.com/education/teachersworkload> 
has seen 67% of teachers state that theirjob had adversely impacted their 
mental or physical health <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-31921457>, 
according to a recent NASUWT survey. This has led to suggestions thathalf a 
billion pounds should be transferred to schools 
<https://www.tes.com/news/school-news/breaking-news/hand-schools-ps500m-nhs-funding-deal-mental-health-crisis-says-report>
 to help them tackle the issue.

Which is why it’s worthwhile for teachers to look at these simple ways, 
informed by the latestNHS guidelines 
<http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/stress-anxiety-depression/pages/improve-mental-wellbeing.aspx>
, to boost their mental health.


Connect

Researchers 
<https://www.mentalhealth.org.uk/podcasts-and-videos/relationships-missing-piece-wellbeing-puzzle>
 have shown the importance of having a range of healthy relationships. They 
suggest feeling disconnected from others is as bad for you as smoking 15 
cigarettes a day.The Mental Health Foundation <https://www.mentalhealth.org.uk/>
 states that “people who are more socially connected to family, friends and 
their communities are happier, physically healthier and live longer, with fewer 
mental health problems”.

As well as forming connections on an individual level, evidence suggests 
<http://www.ntu.ac.uk/apps/news/186426-15/happiness_effect_down_to_sense_of_belonging_study_shows.aspx>
 that being part of a group has similar benefits. People who identify closely 
with a group reported being happier.

Be aware 

We live in an age of distraction. Research suggests that we check our phones 
on average85 times a day 
<https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2015/10/151029124647.htm>. This, among 
other distractions limits how much we notice what is going on around us. When 
world famous violinistJoshua Bell <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hnOPu0_YWhw> 
busked at a train station during rush-hour in Washington, of the 1,097 people 
who passed him, only seven stopped to listen. Just a few days before, people 
had paid hundreds of pounds to hear him play the same music.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhnOPu0_YWhw&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhnOPu0_YWhw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhnOPu0_YWhw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhnOPu0_YWhw&media=>
 How engaged with your surroundings are you? 
While looking to the future can be motivating (that’s why psychologists 
encourage people to set goals 
<http://www.innerdrive.co.uk/Release_Your_Inner_Drive/how-to-do-goal-setting-right/>
) thoughts about the past or future can become too dominant, and sometimes it 
is important to focus on the present moment.Practising this skill 
<https://nau.edu/research/feature-stories/mindfulness-training-has-positive-health-benefits/>
 will reduce stress levels, improve your ability to handle future stressful 
situations, and help you develop better relationships.

Keep learning 

Why does learning increase your mental wellbeing? As well as giving a sense of 
achievement, being enjoyable, and helping you cope with stressful events, a
study into adult learning 
<http://eprints.ioe.ac.uk/5506/1/Schuller2002Learning.pdf> (pdf) has found that 
“the most fundamental and pervasive benefit from learning of every kind is a 
growth in self-confidence”.

Related: If you do one thing this week ... have a clay day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/do-something-blog/2015/aug/10/if-you-do-one-thing-this-week-have-a-clay-day>

Learning does not have to mean formal education. It can be anything that 
develops your knowledge in any area. Stepping out of your comfort zone and 
trying something new will enhance this. The feeling of achievement new skills 
can give you can help your emotional wellbeing and will be motivating.

Be active 

As well as known physical benefits, exercise can help improve your mood, 
self-esteem and ability to deal with stress.The World Health Organisation 
<http://www.who.int/dietphysicalactivity/factsheet_adults/en/> suggests that 
adults, on average, should do about 22 minutes of physical activity per day.

It’s easy to be put off when perceived barriers 
<http://www.nhs.uk/Livewell/c25k/Pages/overcoming-the-barriers-to-exercise.aspx>
 such as feeling too tired get in the way of exercise. However, physical 
activity can actually help combat fatigue and doesn’t have to be organised 
sport (eg gym classes or walking). Furthermore, being active can encourage 
better mental health, especially if it helps with socialising or focusing on 
the present.

Give to others 

Most people have heard the phrase “It is better to give than receive”. And 
economics research suggests that we feel a“warm glow” 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Warm-glow_giving> when we help someone else. 
Fans of sitcom Friends will be familiar with this concept from the scene where
Phoebe and Joey debate selfless good deeds 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ahDxg3hc5pM>. 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DahDxg3hc5pM&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DahDxg3hc5pM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DahDxg3hc5pM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DahDxg3hc5pM&media=>
 Is there such a thing as a good deed? At any rate, helping others can make us 
feel better about ourselves. 
The power of giving is supported by psychological research 
<http://sonjalyubomirsky.com/files/2012/09/Lyubomirsky-Layous-20132.pdf> (pdf) 
that found that random acts of kindness result in the giver feeling the benefit 
as well as the receiver. This is an interesting area for those who work in 
schools where, by definition, most of the job involves giving either of time, 
energy or advice. But giving does not have to involve money or be 
time-consuming. Small, almost incidental random acts of kindness can be 
powerful enough.

A final thought

When it comes to mental health, some people don’t know where to begin. These 
five areas offer a starting point. Connecting with others, learning, giving, 
being physically active and improving awareness offer tangible strategies even 
for the most busy of lifestyles. Encouraging everyone to look after their 
mental health makes sense for schools, including teachers.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
