
Michelle Mulvey, a recent arts graduate who now works in the creative industry 
in Dublin


As in any job, the best way to make a good impression is to turn up on time, 
be enthusiastic and to do as you are asked to the best of your ability. If you 
can walk away with the knowledge that you tried your hardest, then that's all 
that matters.

Internships can be stressful, but remember they're not just a route into a job 
– they're also an opportunity to figure out if a particular role or company is 
right for you.

Bronwen Rees, head of design at Wessex Scene, the University of Southampton 
in-house magazine

Never be the "passive" intern, just doing as you are told — go further and be 
adventurous. Being proactive is good; ask for more and push the boundaries. An 
internship will only be as useful as you make it; it's about the people you 
speak to and the questions you ask.

As an intern you aren't expected to know everything. It's ok to make mistakes 
and not know how to do things.

Stevie Mitchell, student at the University for Creative Arts 
<http://www.ucreative.ac.uk/>

Take every opportunity to get to know your colleagues. Attend all social 
events: you'll meet people from departments that you may not come into contact 
with on a day-to-day basis, which will give you a different perspective of the 
business. It will also make you feel more comfortable in the working 
environment when you know the people around the office.

Manage your time effectively and prioritise early on. I performed badly in one 
presentation by letting other projects eat up the time I could've dedicated to 
preparing.

Daisy Lockheart has done work experience with firms including Barclays, 
Drapers Magazine and Thomson Reuters

Use every opportunity to prove your talents and skills. Socialising out of 
work hours is a chance to get in front of people you might not necessarily meet 
during the day.

But don't stretch yourself too thin – it's easy to say yes to everything but 
remember, if you can't deliver this will only backfire.

Alex Daish, student at University College London and founder of Free Hype 
<http://freehype.org/>, the UK's first pro-bono creative agency

My tips for making the most out of an internship is, firstly, to listen to 
everyone in the building – their stories, guidance and advice. But, equally, 
don't be afraid to speak up if you have an idea or useful tip – you may know 
some obscure technology, website or skill that could be useful to your employer.

Use the excuse that you're new to this to do something crazy and come up with 
some far-out ideas for a brief – they may be more feasible than you originally 
thought.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional?guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
. To get more content and advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our 
weekly update and careers ebook 
<https://register.theguardian.com/careers/?guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
.
