
A TV ad featuring Radio X DJ Chris Moyles 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/chris-moyles> shoving people as he walks down 
the street has been cleared by the advertising watchdog despite receiving more 
than 100 complaints that it encouraged antisocial and violent behaviour.

The TV and video-on-demand ad, part of a major campaign to promote the 
rebranding of Xfm to Radio X 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/aug/28/chris-moyles-bbc-radio-1-nick-grimshaw-xfm-radio-x>
, featured Moyles rudely bumping into people including a man holding a cup of 
coffee, a charity worker in a giant rabbit costume, a paramedic and a woman 
holding a cake.

The ad, a pastiche of the music video of the Verve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/verve>’s 1997 song Bitter Sweet Symphony, 
ends with the former BBC Radio 1 DJ walking through a wall into the Radio X 
studio.


Related: Radio X review – Chris Moyles is back with Radio Geezer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/sep/27/radio-x-chris-moyles-review>

The Advertising Standards Authority <http://www.theguardian.com/media/asa> 
received 106 complaints that the ad was offensive, irresponsible and encouraged 
antisocial and violent behaviour. Some believed that it was inappropriate for 
children to watch.

Global Radio <http://www.theguardian.com/media/globalradio>, the parent 
company of Radio X, said that the majority of viewers would realise it was a 
parody of the Verve’s track. The company added that it was a play on Moyles’s 
reputation and his determination to “get into the music and return to radio”.

Global Radio said the ad was slapstick humour that was “common in children’s 
programmes and family films”. It was given an “ex-kids” restriction which means 
it did not air during, or around, children’s programmes.

The ASA said some viewers were unlikely to recognise that the TV ad was a 
parody of the Verve’s music video, even though it used the song as its 
soundtrack.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1lyu1KKwC74&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1lyu1KKwC74&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1lyu1KKwC74>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1lyu1KKwC74&media=>
 The Verve: Bitter Sweet Symphony 
“While recognisable as an ordinary street, we considered the scenario in which 
[Moyles] found himself was likely to be seen as surreal and far removed from 
the mix of people many were likely to encounter when walking down a street,” 
said the ASA.


“We acknowledged that his actions in the ad were likely to be seen as 
unpleasant, but we considered that the context in which it was shown meant 
viewers were unlikely to interpret it as realistic and as an acceptable way to 
behave. In the particular circumstances of the ad, we concluded it was unlikely 
to cause serious or widespread offence or be seen to encourage or condone 
antiocial behaviour or bullying.”
