
It may have been when Gandalf threw Frodo’s ring into the fireplace to reveal 
the dark letters of Sauron’s black speech. Or perhaps it was when the Klingon 
captain ordered his minions to fire photon torpedoes inStar Trek: The Motion 
Picture <http://www.startrek.com/database_article/star-trek-the-motion-picture>
. Or it could have happened when Big Brother introduced thoughtcrime in 1984 
and I realised how doubleplusungood that was.

Related: Which philosopher would fare best in a present-day university? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/30/which-philosopher-would-fare-best-in-a-present-day-university>

But my interest in invented languages most likely began while I was watching a 
battered VHS copy ofStanley Kubrick’s A Clockwork Orange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/may/11/a-clockwork-orange-cannes>, 
smuggled back to the UK from Holland, featuring Malcolm McDowell and his droogs 
expressing their glee about the old ultra-violence in Anthony Burgess’s 
ingenious teen slang.

On the face of it, with more than 5,000 natural human languages spoken in the 
world (not to mention the many extinct ones), the idea of inventing new ones 
can seem odd. But amateur linguists have been creating their own languages for 
centuries – sometimes with the intention of perfecting natural languages, 
sometimes with the aim of simplifying them for learners, and occasionally just 
for the fun of creating a new way to communicate.

One of the earliest examples is a slang invented by third-century Roman 
dilettantes. This is referenced in theDeipnosophistae 
<https://archive.org/details/deipnosophistsor03atheuoft> by Athenaeus of 
Naucratis, also renowned for being the world’s oldest surviving cookbook.

Correcting God

The late Umberto Eco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/20/italian-author-umberto-eco-dies-aged-84>
 was fascinated by this lengthy tradition. In his book The Search for the 
Perfect Language, he identified a wide variety of historical candidates, from 
Old Irish to Flemish, including a lineage of entirely invented options such as 
Esperanto. Some of these invented attempts to emulate the language of the 
angels, such as St Hildegard’s Lingua Ignota, go back almost a millennium.

Although some language inventors were motivated to correct what they saw as 
God’s linguistic errors, others were set out to make languages that were 
aesthetic creations in their own right. JRR Tolkien described this compulsion 
as “a secret vice”, and justified his elaborate linguistic inventions of Elvish 
and Dwarvish by imagining into being the world of Middle Earth. Following in 
his footsteps, writers of fantastical fiction have been at the forefront of 
language creation ever since.

Related: How social media made The Archers cool 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/feb/16/how-social-media-made-the-archers-cool>

Some linguistic innovations, such as Klingon, or Dothraki (the language of the 
brutal horse lords in Game of Thrones) were crowd-created by fans. More than 
300,000 people own the Klingon dictionary, which suggests that this alien 
language may be only half in number of those who speak Welsh. Others, such as 
George Orwell’s Newspeak, or Láadan, a feminist language  
<http://www.laadanlanguage.org/node/19>created by Suzette Haden Elgin with many 
words for menstruation, are useful demonstrations of how language may be used 
to shape what we are able to think.

Today, the secret vice is not so secret. It is shared by thousands of 
enthusiasts globally, who collaborate online inConlang <http://conlang.org/> 
communities, generating languages designed to explore philosophical ideas, test 
logical concepts or fulfil creative expression.

Creativity or conservatism?

At a conference 
<http://www.coventry.ac.uk/events/ponying-the-slovos-symposium/> at Coventry 
University later this week, scholars from as far afield as India, Italy and the 
US will gather to discuss the curious process of translating these invented 
languages. By examining how languages without an originating culture are 
translated, it may be possible to shine a light on the process of translation 
itself.

“There is a fundamental dilemma when translating invented languages, like 
Nadsat, which are based on ordinary speech conventions,” explainsDr Sofia 
Malamatidou 
<http://www.birmingham.ac.uk/staff/profiles/translation/malamatidou-sofia.aspx> 
of the University of Birmingham. “On the one hand, translators can act as 
linguistic innovators and experiment. On the other, the concern about 
comprehensibility and the fear of critical censure might inhibit linguistic 
creativity, and give rise to linguistic conservatism.

Related: Baddies in books: Alex from A Clockwork Orange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/feb/03/baddies-in-books-alex-a-clockwork-orange-anthony-burgess>

“Examining which approach is adopted, creativity or conservatism, in different 
translations allows us to understand how translators view themselves and what 
they believe is expected of them.”

Central to the Ponying the Slovos conference (the title comes from Nadsat, and 
means “understanding the words”) is an international project to examine how 
Burgess’s infamous novella has been translated into more than 30 languages, 
using a linguistic method called parallel translation corpora. This technique 
allows multiple translations to be examined in parallel, and is aimed at 
revealing how Greek, Polish or French translators have made Burgess’s invention 
their own.

Dr Benet Vincent 
<http://wwwm.coventry.ac.uk/researchnet/cucv/Pages/Profile.aspx?profileID=1048> 
at Coventry University, one of the conference organisers, explains: “Taking an 
empirical corpus perspective to A Clockwork Orange allows us to check and even 
falsify past claims about Nadsat.

“We can also quickly identify which Nadsat words are the most frequent and 
what words they commonly co-occur with to get an idea of usage and the types of 
problems translators may face.”

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
