
The Lad Bible has appointed PR group Weber Shandwick’s European digital chief 
to a top role, as the digital upstart prepares for its first trip to theCannes 
Lions <http://www.theguardian.com/media/cannes-lions> global ad event next week.

The youth media company, which has launched a range of spin-offs including 
Sport Bible and female-targeted Pretty52, has appointed Adam Clyne, head of 
Weber Shandwick’s digital and social content operations across Europe, Middle 
East and Africa.

Clyne, who will take the newly created role of chief operating officer at the 
Lad Bible <http://www.theladbible.com/>, has good connections – Facebook’s 
Nicola Mendelsohn, its vice-president for Europe, the Middle East and Africa, 
is his sister.

Related: Cannes Lions 2016: doing well by doing good 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/jun/16/cannes-lions-2016-advertising-social-change>

He has been tasked with day-to-day running of the company and driving its 
strategic growth.

“Adam brings a breadth of operational and digital experience that will help 
take the Lad Bible Group to the next stage of our evolution,” said Solly 
Solomou, chief executive and co-founder. “He will help us build on a period of 
strong growth.”

Clyne is one of a four-strong contingent of the company’s top executives, 
including Solomou, co-founder Arian Kalantari and marketing chief Mimi Turner, 
making the Lad Bible’s first official visit to the world’s pre-eminent 
advertising festival in Cannes next week.

Cannes has proven to be fertile ground for a new wave of digital businesses 
looking to connect with advertisers – agencies, Twitter, Facebook and Snapchat 
have all become Cannes regulars.

It has also proved something of a match-maker for potential investors; late 
last yearthe Lad Bible was considering selling a minority stake to raise as 
much as £25m for expansion 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/09/the-lad-bible-advisers-tom-toumazis-jonathan-durden>
.

The Lad Bible has self-funded its growth from about 30 staff to more than 100 
in the past 18 months, but serious expansion is likely to need a cash injection 
from an investor.



“We have an opportunity to hugely scale this business across categories and 
borders,” said Clyne. “I am looking forward to being part of the team that 
makes this happen.”
