
Tipping in the hospitality sector is in the spotlight, with the government 
proposing a ban on restaurant ownersmaking deductions from discretionary 
service charges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/02/tips-should-go-to-workers-not-employers-government-report-restaurants>
. Unpopular tipping policies at several well-known restaurant groups have 
prompted government attempts to improve the treatment and transparency of tips 
payments for consumers and workers. Last yearmedia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/30/inquiry-tipping-abuse-restaurants-service-charges>
 investigations found some businesses charge an administration fee for handling 
service charges, keep the whole of a service charge or charge workers a fee 
based on table sales.

Consumers are often confused as to whether service charges described as 
discretionary are truly that. Such charges are frequently presented on 
customers’ bills, often without clarifying that the stated service charge is 
voluntary. It can lead to consumers inadvertently double-tipping as they pay 
the discretionary service charge included on their bill and are then prompted 
by the credit card machine to add a gratuity at the point of payment.


The government is proposing a range of options to meet its objectives for 
fair, transparent and discretionary payments for service. Itsconsultation 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/tips-gratuities-cover-and-service-charges-proposals-for-further-action>
 on the proposals closes on 27 June 2016.

Suggested solutions include “opt out” and “opt in” options. 


The opt out option would allow businesses to suggest a discretionary payment 
for service, including by adding this to a customer’s bill. However, the 
business must make clear to consumers that the charge is voluntary.

Related: The price is right. How much should you charge for your product or 
service? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/may/31/pricing-strategy-small-business-charge-product-service>

Meanwhile the opt in option would prevent businesses suggesting any specific 
discretionary payments for service. It would prohibit any mention of a 
suggested percentage service charge on a bill. Discretionary payments for 
service would then become a decision for the consumer. This option would be a 
radical change for many restaurants from their current practice.


While the opt in option allows consumers to make better informed decisions 
about whether and how much to pay for good service, it is not clear how this 
might affect the amount of service charge workers actually receive. There is a 
concern diners might tip less if they are not prompted. Tips cannot be taken 
into account by employers for national minimum wage purposes, but tips and 
service charge payments received by workers often comprise a significant part 
of their overall income.


To ensure workers receive a fair share from discretionary payments for 
service, the options proposed by the government include a complete ban on any 
deductions (other than tax) from such payments, or limiting the deductions an 
employer can make. The latter option would limit deductions so they do not 
exceed costs incurred for credit card charges and payroll processing.

Tronc schemes 
<https://www.gov.uk/guidance/employee-gets-tips-gratuities-or-service-charges-through-a-tronc>
, used in the hospitality sector to distribute discretionary service charge 
payments to workers, are also under review. Proposals include placing tronc 
requirements on a statutory footing and giving additional protection to workers 
acting as troncmasters – responsible for distributing payments. The proposals 
do not cover how this additional protection will work, given that troncmasters 
do not operate under the control of their employer.

Another proposal is that the government’s existing voluntary code of practice, 
which provides businesses with guidance and best practice principles on 
tipping, is given statutory status.

This would not impose legal obligations on businesses but would mean that 
non-compliance with the principles of the code could be taken into account by a 
court or tribunal in relevant cases. The aim is to encourage greater use and 
understanding of the code, but smaller businesses are likely to regard further 
regulation as overbearing and unnecessary.

While government intervention to achieve fairness and transparency in this 
area is welcomed, restaurant and other business owners concerned about the 
proposals still have time and are encouraged tohave their say 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/tips-gratuities-cover-and-service-charges-proposals-for-further-action>
.

Lydia Christie is senior associate in the employment law team at Howard 
Kennedy. She tweets at@LydiaChristie2 <https://twitter.com/lydiachristie2>

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
