
So Ofsted has finally woken up to the misuse of the term “apprenticeship” (Few 
apprenticeships meet employers’ needs – Ofsted chief 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/oct/22/apprenticeships-poor-quality-ofsted-chief>
, 22 October). In October 2011 you publishedour letter highlighting the 
widespread practice of “converting” existing employees into apprentices 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2011/oct/31/real-progress-on-apprenticeships-germany>
. We had originally brought this to light in 2008 when we acted as special 
advisers to a Commons select committee. The committee said government should 
publish data on conversions and ensure all apprentices were receiving training 
and not just having their existing skills accredited. Nothing happened. 
Ministers talk the talk of transforming the UK’s vocational education and 
training system and stand proudly with apprentices from Rolls-Royce and similar 
companies where apprenticeship hasn’t been devalued.

Apprenticeship is a litmus test for the economy. Poor-quality apprenticeships 
reflect the lack of demand for skills beyond the basic level. They also reflect 
the fact that many employers need support to organise training and use it to 
improve their businesses. Far from tackling poor quality, the 3 million target 
will only add to the problem.

We know how to do apprenticeships well in the UK. We need a combination of 
properly resourced full-time vocational courses and apprenticeship. But this 
takes dedicated and consistent effort. It’s time for our politicians and 
employers to do better.
Professor Alison Fuller and Professor Lorna Unwin
UCL Institute of Education

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
