
Ah, airdrops. Burly men in cargo pants heroically slinging bags of grain out 
of the back of cargo planes, gratefully received by the starving hordes below. 
They are a classic aid trope, beloved of movie directors. But they are also 
expensive, complicated and prone to failure – and that’s in best case scenarios.

Prepping for an airdrop

So what is actually involved? A lot of money, for starters. Ilyushin II-76 
planes <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yJzmEwSMI0A> – the type most commonly 
used – come in at a very rough ballpark of $34,000 (£23,300) per sortie. And 
that’s in a benign environment: the more dangerous the situation, the higher 
the additional insurance and associated costs. Then there is the cost of the 
aid itself, plus a specialist and highly experienced staff – in the office, in 
the plane and on the ground. “These don’t grow on trees,” says Mike Whiting, an 
experienced humanitarian logistician and air drop veteran. “It’s a highly 
specialised skill not really used outside humanitarian work.”

Cooking oil, however – essential for food preparation – is trickier as it 
tends to explode

The plane then needs formal overflight permission to fly so it isn’t shot at, 
which still doesn’t guarantee that it won’t be (anyone who wants to know how 
easily mistakes can happen just needs to look at the shooting down of the 
Malaysian Airlines plane in theUkrain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/13/mh17-crash-report-plane-partially-reconstruced-blames-buk-missile-strike>
e 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/13/mh17-crash-report-plane-partially-reconstruced-blames-buk-missile-strike>
). When conflicts involve multiple groups of people with guns, this gets a lot 
harder. There’s a good chance agencies will only be given access to areas 
controlled by the government, so then they need to decide if it’s ethically 
acceptable to provide assistance only to those on one side of a conflict.

In terms of what’s on board, airdrops can be used for anything that’ll survive 
the drop. So far in Syria, it’s been rice, chickpeas and beans, although the
World Food Programme (WFP) <http://www.wfp.org/> says they “aim to diversify”. 
Cooking oil, however – essential for food preparation – is trickier as it tends 
to explode. Roughly speaking, an Ilyushin II-76 can carry 30-35 tonnes. That’s 
not a lot in aid terms: the food WFP tried to drop into Deir ez-Zor, Syria in 
February (around 20 tonnes) would have fed 2,400 people for a month – when at 
least150,000 people on the ground are in need (pdf) 
<http://documents.wfp.org/stellent/groups/public/documents/ep/wfp281747.pdf>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jddc%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jddc%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46916be8631e88f336d59ea80ad992279495378f%2F0_227_4795_2878%2F4795.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98It's%20like%20trying%20to%20hit%20a%20football%20field%20from%20the%20top%20of%20Everest'%20%E2%80%93%20why%20aid%20airdrops%20just%20don%E2%80%99t%20work&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jddc%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98It%27s+like+trying+to+hit+a+football+field+from+the+top+of+Everest%27+%E2%80%93+why+aid+airdrops+just+don%E2%80%99t+work&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jddc%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46916be8631e88f336d59ea80ad992279495378f%2F0_227_4795_2878%2F4795.jpg>
 Darayya, where people are literally starving, has been cut off from aid since 
2012, but some humanitarians say air drops compromise negotiations for ground 
access. Photograph: Anadolu Agency/Getty Images 
Then you need a team on the ground to receive the assistance, and to identify 
and set up a drop zone. This is necessary to avoid civilian casualties (falling 
50kg sacks can cause serious damage and airdrops have killed civilians in 
Afghanistan and elsewhere), and ensure aid can be collected by ground teams. 
Drop zones need to be – at a minimum – the size of a football pitch; more 
commonly 200 metres by 1,000 metres. “Try to avoid swamps, livestock and 
people,” advises one logistician. Areas that are flat and visible from the air 
are ideal. Sites are generally marked (eg with large canvass crosses) so pilots 
can see them. However, finding a team to do this is tricky inSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>, where the main reason airdrops are 
on the table is because it’s too insecure for agencies to have a ground 
presence.

Carrying out an airdrop 

This is a very fraught business. The most immediate challenge presented by 
Syria is that it’s a conflict zone. This means that standard airdrops involving 
commodities in 50kg bags dropped from 1,000ft (300 metres) are out of the 
question – thekind that work well in South Sudan and elsewhere 
<http://intercrossblog.icrc.org/blog/what-you-need-to-know-about-humanitarian-airdrops>
. “Low level flights might end up in tears if any party starts shooting,” says 
one experienced logistician with considerable understatement. So planes need to 
fly above 25,000ft (7.6km) – bearing in mind that Everest is 29,000ft (8.8km) – 
to be out of range.


That is a huge height from which to drop anything, so that means a different 
kind of delivery is needed: large, one-tonne pallets with parachutes. Anything 
lighter will get scattered over kilometres, anything without parachutes will 
just smash into the ground. So technically complex is this challenge that Syria 
is currently the only place in the world attempting humanitarian drops from 
such a height.

This, in turn, makes the drop zones vastly more of a challenge, especially as 
in Syria many areas in need are besieged cities, in which large open areas are 
rare and parachutes can easily become entangled in buildings. Plus at this 
point, the plane is travelling over 270 kilometres an hour. That’s like trying 
to hit that football field, in a built up neighbourhood … from somewhere near 
the top of Everest, while zipping along in a Ferrari.


Even if all that goes right, the weather can change everything. Pallets, which 
can weigh a tonne each, shoot out of the plane and straight into fickle upper 
atmosphere winds. “They’re highly unpredictable at the best of times,” says 
Whiting, “and you haven’t exactly got Met offices in Syria”.

That's like trying to hit a football field from somewhere near the top of 
Everest while zipping along in a Ferrari

Given all this, it’s not surprising that the WFP’s first attempted 
high-altitude airdrop in Syria of21 pallets 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/25/syria-un-wfp-airdrop-food-high-winds-technical-difficulties>
 ended up with 10 drifting off in flight, seven landing in no man’s land and 
four landing damaged after their parachutes failed. “It’s not lack of skill or 
professionalism on the part of the crew,” says Whiting.

Waiting at the drop zone will be the collection team, who will literally pick 
up the aid and manage the subsequent distribution. “If you drop aid without 
having a ground team in place for distribution, who is going to get it? Those 
with the strength to rush in and push and get it – and physically carry it,” 
says protection advisor Dr Michelle Sanson, who has worked with the WFP.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyJzmEwSMI0A&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyJzmEwSMI0A&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyJzmEwSMI0A>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyJzmEwSMI0A&media=>
Being part of the collection team is no picnic either. Even during standard 
drops a lot of the aid will miss the drop zone, so being anywhere near it is 
quite hairy. “The difficult bit for me was trying to make sure that children 
and animals didn’t run into the drop zone at the last minute,” says Anna 
Shotton, who used to manage ground teams in South Sudan for WFP. “I often had 
to rely on the paramilitaries because the police were useless. One day the 
rebels came in guns blazing as I’d just received a drop and they started trying 
to take the pallets for building materials.” Then there’s transporting the 
food. “The first day we paid porters to carry sacks in but by the second day 
they had spent the money and were drunk so they wouldn’t come in,” she 
remembers. “That was tricky.”


So what would aid agencies prefer?

Two words: road access. It may be less glamorous, but it’s cheaper, far more 
efficient and easier to distribute fairly. The 30-35 tonnes carried in that 
$34,000 per mission Il-76 could fit into a large truck, without the losses 
involved in airdrops. And aid taken by land also means aid workers go too, and 
are able to meet the local population who are often as desperate for contact as 
they are for assistance.Aid <http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/aid> 
workers can listen to stories, take pictures, make assessments, and deliver 
enough assistance to be meaningful, unlike the aerial deliveries which are in 
such small amounts they can’t possibly meet the needs of thousands for any 
length of time. 


None of this means that airdrops are impossible or should be ruled out. It is 
difficult, but possible – and in a situation in which people are dying of 
starvation, needs to be on the table as an option. Neither cost nor technical 
difficulty should be a consideration when it comes to saving lives, argue some 
of the humanitarians I spoke to.

Related: Don't blur the lines between development and humanitarian work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/12/dont-blur-the-lines-between-development-and-humanitarian-work>

But most aid workers are dubious – and for many, that’s because the reasons 
that aid drops are coming into the picture in Syria are entirely manmade. It’s 
not earthquake-destroyed roads or remote displacement creating the need for air 
transport, it’s deliberate use of siege tactics. Darayya, where people are 
literally starving, is just 10km from the Four Seasons Hotel in Damascus that 
the UN uses as a base – but has beencut off from international aid since 2012 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/press-releases/2016/04/syria-terrifying-eyewitness-video-of-life-under-siege-and-barrel-bombs/>
. Aid agencies have been plugging away for years to gain road access and fear a 
new focus on air delivery would mean those negotiations are compromised. 
“Systemising airdrops could undermine everything we’ve been trying to do for 
the past few years,” says Robert Mardini, regional director of operations for 
the near and Middle East for the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
.


For those in the no camp, aid drops are a red herring, designed to distract 
from the fact that if the warring parties let them – as they should under 
international law - trucks could be there in a matter of days. As Ben Parker, a 
former UN humanitarian official in Syria, puts it: “This isn’t lifesaving, it’s 
political theatre,” .


Imogen Wall is a humanitarian aid worker and journalist who has worked in 
numerous major emergencies

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.







