
Too busy to get fit? No longer an excuse. The world of workouts is moving to 
ever-shorter bursts of activity.The New York Times recently released 
<http://well.blogs.nytimes.com/2014/10/24/for-a-7-minute-workout-download-our-new-app/>
 a seven-minute workout app based on research showing the benefit of 
high-intensity interval training (HIIT), whilethe Human Performance Laboratory 
at the University of Wisconsin-La Crosse 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-3168423/How-tone-30-minutes-intense-workouts-promising-burn-NINE-calories-hour.html>
 found that 20 minutes of an intense workout burned an average of 15 calories 
per minute – twice the amount used on a long run.

Typically, HIIT involves 60 seconds of exercise near your peak ability, 
followed by a recovery period of the same amount, repeated for 20 minutes, 
three times a week. Your peak ability is around 80 to 90% of your maximum heart 
rate. Roughly, that involves subtracting your age from 220, but it’s more 
reliable to use your “rate of perceived exertion”. If six is sitting on a chair 
calmly and 20 is “I can’t do any more”, you should pitch yourself at no more 
than 18. You can do HIIT on a bike, running, swimming, on gym equipment like a 
cross trainer, or by sprinting up and down the stairs. So has HIIT really 
replaced a gentle jog around the block?

The solution




It may seem counterintuitive, indeed even dangerous, to start exercising as 
hard as you can, but research trials have included couch potatoes and 
overweight and obese people.HIIT has been shown to improve blood glucose levels 
in the latter group 
<http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0111489>, and 
a review of people with heart disease 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22694349> who tried HIIT found improvements 
in their heart function, and also that they even enjoyed it.Most recently, 
people with joint pains from arthritis have been found to benefit 
<http://www.eurekalert.org/pub_releases/2015-07/nuos-hit072915.php> from 
high-intensity spinning.

The studies on people with heart or other medical conditions 
<http://www.csep.ca/cmfiles/publications/parq/par-q.pdf> have been carried out 
under close medical supervision, and if you or your family have a history of 
heart or other diseases you should ask your doctor to see if HIIT is right for 
you.Maureen MacDonald 
<https://www.science.mcmaster.ca/kinesiology/people/faculty/287-Maureen%20MacDonald.html>
, an associate professor of kinesiology at McMaster University says you mustn’t 
go from high impact to a hard stop – keep your legs moving slowly in between 
the bursts. She says this avoids blood pooling in the big muscles in your 
bottom and legs and stops you feeling dizzy. She recommends 10 sets of 
one-minute high-intensity and one minute resting for two periods of 20 minutes 
a week, and says people seem to enjoy this regime more than any other.

The American College of Sports Medicine 
<https://www.acsm.org/docs/brochures/high-intensity-interval-training.pdf> 
claims HIIT continues to burn more calories after the workout than traditional 
exercise. Exercise that is shorter, enjoyable and burns more calories? Of 
course you should try it – but be sensible.
