
First parents had to worry about the emotional fallout of One Direction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/one-direction> splitting up. Now they have 
to fret about what subculture their teens belong to.A study in The Lancet 
Psychiatry 
<http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanpsy/article/PIIS2215-0366(15)00211-4/fulltext>
 shows that if your child is a committed goth, they are three times more likely 
to self-harm than other teenagers. Goths come in various forms but theOxford 
Dictionary definition 
<http://www.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/english/Goth?q=goth> is: 
“A member of a subculture favouring black clothing, white and black makep, and 
goth music.”

This study used data on self-harm and depressive mood from 3,694 teenagers who 
are part of theUK Avon Longitudinal study of Parents and Children 
<http://www.bristol.ac.uk/alspac/>, which surveys its participants annually. At 
the age of 15, they were asked which social group they identified with (for 
example, sporty, keeners, skaters, populars, goths) and how strongly they did 
so. When they reached 18, they were assessed for depression and asked about 
self-harming. Those identifying as goths were more likely to be girls, have 
mothers with a history of depression, to have emotional problems themselves and 
to have been bullied, starting at junior school. Out of 154 people who 
identified strongly as goths, 18% had depression compared with only 6% of the 
1,841 who did not see themselves as goths at all. About 37% of the goths 
reported self-harming. Self-harm rates among young people generally in the UK 
are estimated at between 7% and 14%. In this study, those who said they were 
sporty were the least likely to have depression and to have self-harmed (4% had 
depression and 6% had self-harmed). So should you be pushing your child to stop 
listening toThe Damned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2002/jul/12/artsfeatures> with the curtains 
closed (does my age show?) and get outside and kick a football?

Related: Joy of goth: how sad music can help your mental health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/aug/28/being-a-goth-good-for-mental-health>

The solution

No teenager is going to abandon their subculture, even if you ask really 
nicely. This study replicates findings from amuch smaller study in the British 
Medical Journal of Glasgow <http://www.bmj.com/content/332/7549/1058>, showing 
that 12 out of 25 young goths had harmed themselves, although five had started 
before identifying as goths. Professor Lucy Bowes, the lead author of the 
Lancet Psychiatry paper, is keen to stress that most goths are perfectly happy 
and are not self-harming. Being a goth may indeed be protective because like 
minded people are drawn together and can support each other – stigmatising them 
further is not going to be helpful, she says. The study only shows an 
association between being a goth and self-harming and depression – it does not 
show that being a goth causes either. What the study does suggest is that goth 
teenagers may be a vulnerable sub-group who need more emotional support. Their 
friends and families should just keep a watchful eye on them.
