
Humans can’t go forth without night-time rest to enable body repair. Maximise 
the opportunity for healing with a feather mattress topper that will make you 
feel like you’re sleeping on a cloud, distributing your weight and easing aches 
and pains. (Foam-based toppers are better for those prone to feeling chilly.)

Resting will be easier if you know you’ve done due diligence with your skin, 
too, so make Estée Lauder Advanced Night Repair a key part of your night-time 
beauty routine. Apply this serum after cleansing your face before bed and you 
can rest easy, safe in the knowledge that this beauty-sleep-in-a-bottle is 
doing all the hard work. Your other go-to accessory? Once a week, give your 
skin a reboot with Estée Lauder Advanced Night Repair Concentrated Recovery 
PowerFoil Mask. This indulgent beauty treat allows you to offset the visible 
effects of life’s daily grind, refreshing the look of your skin. Finally, 
practice a little aromatherapy and invest in pure essential oils that aid 
relaxation, such as geranium, rose and lavender. Use them to condition your 
hands and feet – another way to shore up the rejuvenating powers of sleep.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tj3c%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tj3c%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F272227e294412c39cbe478f7e1a3d976fb7c4dfa%2F0_480_1920_2400%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Must-have%20accessories%20for%20a%20good%20night's%20sleep&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tj3c%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Must-have+accessories+for+a+good+night%27s+sleep&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tj3c%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F272227e294412c39cbe478f7e1a3d976fb7c4dfa%2F0_480_1920_2400%2F1920.jpg>
 Estée Lauder Advanced Night Repair: beauty-sleep-in-a-bottle. Photograph: 
Victoria Adamson 
To combat grittier rest issues, turn to solution apps, wearable tech and 
audio. As much as your partner would never admit to snoring, if you gently 
explain that their night-time habits are keeping you awake they might be open 
to exploring a solution. Play the supportive other half by suggesting they try 
an app calledBraci <http://braci.co/snore-detector-pro.html>, which will send 
gentle vibrations to their smartwatch in response to their snoring pattern, 
encouraging them to move into a peaceful position.


A good hypnosis audio can also transform your experience if you find it hard 
to get to sleep, or stay there. “We know that it’s possible to retrain the 
brain, replacing negative thoughts and behaviours with empowering and positive 
habits,” says Tim Smale, a hypnotherapist and “mind coach” with a reputation 
for getting politicians and popstars through stage fright, stress and insomnia. 
“Using the right sleep audio, anyone can learn to hypnotise themselves to fall 
asleep with ease. Ambient soundtracks, such as waves, birdsong and crackling 
fires, can help relax the mind, too – keep the noise level low though.”


New headphones that mould around your ears, pillows that embed a small 
speaker, and earphones integrated into a headband all make downloaded night 
sounds comfortable to administer, and unobtrusive to bedfellows. Himalayan salt 
lamps also make it on to the tech-shopping list, providing a soothing ambient 
light.


Back to straight-up pampering, a pre-bed spa-like bath is mandatory. Featuring 
luxuriously scented candles, soft music and gorgeous oils to calm the mind, 
Himalayan salt to relax muscles and prime the skin. A less obvious item is the 
floating temperature gauge. “I have a ‘thermometer starfish’ that tells me when 
the water is at the optimum heat for relaxation,” says Jeni Dodson, an 
international makeup artist who’s used to overcoming the rigours of being on 
the road.


Busy life coach and writer Fiona Buckland, who’s often in transit, rates a 
bean-filled eye pillow as her go-anywhere sleep accessory. “It’s about comfort, 
and also association,” she says. “An eye pillow is part of my sleep ritual, in 
the same way a soft toy is when you’re young. The feel of it, the lovely 
lavender scent, it signals my mind where we’re about to go.”

