
Japan is preparing to mark five years since a massive earthquake triggered a 
tsunami that devastated much of its north-east coast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/mar/11/japan-earthquake-miyagi-tsunami-warning>
, killing more than 18,000 people and leaving many still unable to return to 
their homes. In the run up to planned memorials, we’d like to collect some of 
your memories.


Shocking images of 10m-high waves reverberated around the world on 11 March 
2011 as the scale of the disaster became clear, with survivorsdescribing the 
agonising moments relatives were swept from their grasp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/mar/13/japan-earthquake-tsunami-miyagi-destruction>
 as livelihoods crumpled.


After death and destruction followed panic and confusion as both Japanese and 
global media struggled to make sense 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/12/japanese-newspaper-apologises-fukushima-sex-slave-errors-asahi-shimbun>
 and communicate the implications of damage done at the Fukushima Daiichi 
nuclear power plant.

Conflicting advice on the radiation risk led to distrust in governments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/mar/17/japan-giving-erratic-information-about-nuclear-crisis>
 as aid agencies scrambled and infastructure nationwide ground to a crawl, with 
the waters muddying further in the days and weeks after the initial tragedy.


Related: Japan: the day after the earthquake and tsunami - in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2011/mar/12/japan-earthquake-tsunami-in-pictures>

We know many readers – whether Japanese or not and both within the country and 
abroad – will have memories of that day and the events following: if you are 
able to share themwe want to make your voices and experiences part of our 
ongoing coverage. 


Were you living in Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> or even 
specifically the areas hit? What are your memories of that day, and how do they 
relate to your longer-term experiences five years on? How have you been 
personally affected?


Even if you weren’t directly affected by the earthquake and tsunami, did you 
leave Japan because of events or ongoing anxiety, or move to a different part 
of the country? Maybe you weren’t in the country but hadfamily or friends who 
were 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/mar/13/japanese-earthquake-foreign-office-helpline>
?


Perhaps you were one of the thousands working and volunteering to help with 
the recovery efforts. There has beenfrustration at the slow pace of rebuilding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/11/japan-remembers-the-18000-victims-of-2011s-triple-disaster-fukushima>
 but alsopockets of hope 
<http://ajw.asahi.com/article/behind_news/people/AJ201203120001>: how have you 
been involved?


You can share your memories and experiences with us, including photos or 
video, by clicking on the blue ‘contribute’ buttons on this article, or if 
you’d prefer, fill out the form below.

 * GuardianWitness 
<http://www.theguardian.com/community/series/guardianwitness> is the home of 
readers’ content on the Guardian. Contribute your video, pictures and stories, 
and browse news, reviews and creations submitted by others. You can also use the
Guardian app 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/global/ng-interactive/2014/may/29/-sp-the-guardian-app-for-ios-and-android>
 and search for ‘GuardianWitness assignments’ – add it to the homepage to keep 
up with all our assignments. 