
It’s 6.53am and I’m driving through the school gates, trying to warm my numb 
hands on the pathetic vents of my car’s heating system. Following a lengthy 
parents’ evening last night, I am returning to work only 11 hours after I left.

Sir Michael Wilshaw, her majesty’s chief inspector of schools, is on the radio 
complaining about teachers who are “flocking abroad” to work in hotter 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/feb/26/uk-schools-suffering-as-new-teachers-flock-abroad-warns-chief-inspector>
, sunnier climes, such as the Middle East, which offer attractive, tax-free 
salaries. How dare they when education in Britain is suffering from a shortage 
of teachers?

As I pull into the dark, empty school car park, an image of an exotic beach 
flashes into my mind. How dare they, indeed.

Sir Michael’s solution to this mass exodus? A “golden “handcuff” that keeps 
teachers within the state school system that trained them “for a period of time”
 <https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/hmcis-monthly-commentary-february-2016>
.

 But Sir Michael’s thinking is flawed on many levels. Firstly, nobody goes 
into teaching for the money. I often ask my teacher friends and colleagues why 
they teach. The answers are wide-ranging, but there is always one that comes up 
– to make a difference.

Teacher training <http://www.theguardian.com/education/teachertraining> 
funding is outrageously unbalanced. Yes, considerable funding and bursaries are 
available for students teaching shortage subjects like maths and science, and 
those who have a first class degree. But actually, very few aspiring teachers 
are entitled to the maximum of £25,000.

A friend of mine, who is about to embark on a primary PGCE, will receive no 
funding whatsoever. She has five years’ of primary school experience and got a 
2:2 in her (very difficult) degree in French and Chinese. On top of the debt 
she has already built up from her first degree, she will now have to take out a 
further loan to pay the course fees and her living costs. Had she got a 2:1, 
she would have accessed a teacher training bursary of £3,000 – not a lot when 
you consider the £9,000 course fees.

Those who do get through the training face constantly changing curricula, 
increased and incessant testing, the hovering threat of anOfsted 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> inspection, 12-hour days, the 
marking we take home at weekends, the relentless challenges of poor student 
conduct and, after all this exhausting work, the implied criticism in the media 
from figures such as Sir Michael. Is it really surprising that so many teachers 
– hamstrung by policy changes and unable to focus on teaching – get on a plane?

This time last year, I was an offending escapee. I had left my job as an 
English teacher in a state school in the UK to work in Malawi. My salary didn’t 
quite correspond to Sir Michael’s picture; I took a pay cut of a third. Sure, 
some teachers are drawn to the Middle East by the inflated, tax-free salaries 
and perks, but outside that area salaries are generally significantly lower 
than what we get here.

Sir Michael didn’t mention any of the reasons I went, so I’ll explain. Schools 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> abroad offer smaller classes, 
lighter timetables and higher standards of behaviour. Funnily enough, they are 
also Ofsted-free. In short, schools abroad offer more freedom for us to do our 
job – to teach. A stint abroad is also mind-broadening. I went to Malawi for an 
adventure; working abroad provides an opportunity to travel and experience a 
different culture – all valuable experience for a subsequent teaching career in 
the UK.

I came home from Malawi because, despite what lay in wait for me, I missed the 
rewards and challenges of working in a state secondary school and teaching in a 
private school in one of the poorest countries in the world did not quite sit 
well with me. Sure, the weekends on safari were great, but that’s not why I 
went into teaching. I also missed my friends and family.

But many teachers are finding that there is no other option but to search for 
a less oppressive environment in which to work. Incidentally, working abroad 
also allows you to lead a personal life that is not hampered by the ludicrous 
hours that a UK teacher’s workload forces upon you.

Instead of forcing us to stay, shouldn’t Sir Michael be questioning how to 
make remaining in the UK a more attractive option? And, with such a teacher 
shortage, how to attract the best teachers from abroad?

As I get out of the car to start another long, fraught, sleep-deprived day, I 
question whether coming home really was the right decision after all.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
