
I’m lucky enough to be able to say that words are my job. I’ve loved them 
since I was a kid – the sheer power of the right phrase in the right place. 
There’s a magic to them – these simple sounds that can cause fights, mend 
friendships, inspire armies and create monsters. A well-chosen word is a 
weapon, and the wrong word can work its way like a splinter into your head so 
you never forget it, no matter how hard you try.


Weak. Cry-baby. Soft. Gay. Girl. Loser. Freak. Not a real man.

 I was bullied as a teenager. I don’t say this with any shame, because it’s 
been 10 years and I’ve made my peace with it, and also because 43% of the UK’s 
young people are going through it right now. It’s your story as well, or a 
story you see out of the corner of your eye every lunch break. And for most of 
us, for a long time, it will be a story of silence.

BE A MAN.

 We learn that on the playground and we have to learn it quick, because if we 
don’t the next lesson has knuckles attached. I’ve never been good at not having 
feelings, to be honest. Things affect me. I worry. I care. I get invested in 
causes and people and books. I have so many emotions I had to invent fictional 
people to put them in, and because I think about words so much…

 I wonder when BEING A MAN meant shutting up and toeing the line. I wonder 
when the Council of the Rules of Men (not a real thing) got together and 
decided thatopen meant weak and that bottling things up was better. That’s not 
how science works (and that is, at base, what feelings are – chemicals reacting 
in your brain, as natural and human as the beating of a heart) They don’t go 
anywhere just because you pretend they have.

Related: Why I wanted to tell the bully's story 
<http://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/may/15/why-i-wanted-to-tell-the-bullys-story>

 Is lying to yourself strength?

 I kept quiet for years, because I thought that was the way to make the 
bullying stop. I was quiet for years after the bullyingdid stop, because in 
order to survive I convinced myself not talking about it meant it wasn’t real, 
because if it was real I’d talk about it.

 And I’ve watched too many time travel shows to obsess a lot about changing my 
past. I am who I am because of my experiences, good and bad. The parts of me 
they targeted – being sensitive, being bookish, being the kid who handed in 
essays five pages too long because I loved words – are the parts of me I am 
proudest of now, the parts that allow me to do what I do.

 But I wish I had have told someone. I wish I hadn’t decided I was alone in a 
room, a class, a school of guys deciding they were alone as well because no-one 
was willing to say the first word.

Related: Bullies in books help us tackle the real life ones 
<http://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/jun/04/bullies-in-literature-sarah-moore-fitzgerald>

 There’s this movie scene. You know the one – the hero gets injured but 
manfully struggles on, refusing the help his companions know he needs. They 
continue, he struggles, lashes out in anger and -

 *dramatic music*

 - he collapses. The wound is infected. People recoil. Cue boiling water and 
sutures.

 We’re taught to ignore injury, to keep going, to not make a fuss. And we 
suppress the pain until the wound festers, and you get angry at yourself for 
getting hurt in the first place. As if being human was your fault. As if the 
smart thing to do isn’t to treat the pain instead.

 The boys who teach us to stay quiet do so because they’re in pain, and like 
the lantern-jawed hero we’re all supposed to be, they’re afraid to look beneath 
the bandage. The pain of treatment would be too great, they think, and they 
attack others because if they’re in pain others must be too.

 Anger and fear are all we boys are allowed. Seems a bit of a raw deal.

 I wouldn’t go back and talk to Younger Me, if I could. He’d have far too many 
questions about how I got there, for one thing, and I don’t want to be 
different than I am now. But I’ve watched bullies live like rats in a wheel, 
playing out the same patterns over and over again because they can’t admit that 
they’re in pain, and I’ve seen young men resolutely fight to hold onto the 
things that make them human, instead of hiding them just to fit in with 
everybody else.That’s strength – the strength to speak up, for yourself and for 
others, the strength to be yourself, instead of what other people decide you 
should be. There’s no power in spending your life in retreat from yourself, and 
I’d rather not wait until I drop from a wound I’m pretending not to have.

I care too much for that.


Dave Rudden’s debut novel Knights of the Borrowed Dark 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/385632/> is available 
from the Guardian bookshop. More on theannual bullying survey here 
<http://www.ditchthelabel.org/annual-bullying-survey-2015/>. If you’re being 
bullied you can get help fromNational bullying helpline 
<http://www.nationalbullyinghelpline.co.uk/kids.html> tel 0845 22 55 787. 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t4bz%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t4bz%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F387f4cfed6c67c3ec325ce36d8f31b74f231ac2e%2F0_0_1523_2339%2F1523.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20teenage%20boys%20are%20told%20not%20to%20feel%2C%20and%20why%20that's%20so%20wrong&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t4bz%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why+teenage+boys+are+told+not+to+feel%2C+and+why+that%27s+so+wrong&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t4bz%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F387f4cfed6c67c3ec325ce36d8f31b74f231ac2e%2F0_0_1523_2339%2F1523.jpg>