
Ecuador has received a formal request from the Swedish authorities to interview
Julian Assange <http://www.theguardian.com/media/julian-assange>, inside its 
London embassy, in a potential breakthrough to the long-running saga.


The WikiLeaks founder, 44, is wanted for questioning over a 2010 rape 
allegation 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/25/swedish-court-upholds-julian-assange-arrest-warrant-wikileaks>
 in Sweden, which he has always denied. He has been living inside Ecuador’s UK 
mission for four years in a bid to avoid extradition to Sweden, saying he fears 
he would then be transferred to the US to face political charges for 
orchestratingleaks of diplomatic cables 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/nov/28/us-embassy-cable-leak-diplomacy-crisis>
.

Ecuador <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ecuador> has been asking throughout 
Assange’s stay that he be interviewed inside the embassy, and said it welcomed 
the apparent Swedish “change of heart, and signs of a new political will”.

Related: 'Angry' Julian Assange starts fifth year living in Ecuador’s London 
embassy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/19/angry-julian-assange-starts-fifth-year-living-in-ecuadors-london-embassy>

Ecuador’s foreign minister, Dr Guillaume Long, said on Monday, however, that 
the country may require fresh legal assurances before it allows Swedish 
prosecutors access.

The Swedish attorney general made a formal request that was being considered, 
Long said.


Long also asked why the UK was unwilling to accept a February ruling 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/24/uk-seeks-review-un-julian-assange-arbitrary-detention>
 by a UN working group that Assange was being arbitrarily detained.

The UK Foreign Office minister Hugo Swire, who met Long on Monday, has called 
for the UN decision to be reviewed, pointing out that Assange was staying in 
the embassy voluntarily, and that the UK had a legal duty to extradite him to
Sweden <https://www.theguardian.com/world/sweden>. Britain claims the UN 
decision is flawed and has no legal status.

The UN found that Sweden was not being diligent enough in its prosecution, 
including its failure at the time to offer to interview him in the embassy.

Long said: “Interviewing Mr Assange inside the embassy has been Ecuador’s 
request for four years. Over 1,400 days we have been asking the Swedes to come 
and interrogate him in our embassy. So it is welcome there has been change of 
heart and some sign of political will.

“But since November 2010 and March 2015 Sweden made 44 such requests to other 
countries to interview suspects in other cases. So it is very common and could 
be easily done, but we faced total refusal for years.”

Long said Ecuador’s legal department needed to examine the request, and must 
also view it in the context of the UN ruling and the lack of sworn guarantees 
from the US. Ecuador would also want assurances that the UK would not seek to 
prosecute Assange for avoiding arrest.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m6dh%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m6dh%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf744b2ae2774359f3377dd22d4429527ec456bc%2F0_81_3757_2254%2F3757.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sweden%20asks%20to%20meet%20Julian%20Assange%20inside%20Ecuador%20embassy&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m6dh%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sweden+asks+to+meet+Julian+Assange+inside+Ecuador+embassy&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m6dh%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf744b2ae2774359f3377dd22d4429527ec456bc%2F0_81_3757_2254%2F3757.jpg>
 The Ecuadorian embassy in London, where Julian Assange has been living since 
June 2012. Photograph: Will Oliver/EPA 
Some in the Foreign Office fear a permanent impasse between the UK and 
Ecuador, and that Assange will stay in the embassy until 2020, by which time a 
statute of limitations applies under Swedish law on the rape case. “I do not 
think waiting for another four years is a solution. That would be quite wrong,” 
Long said.

“Assange is suffering deteriorating health, he has a small space and little 
light. It is an embassy under siege. It is very difficult to make a phone call, 
the internet collapses the whole time, pictures are taken as people enter and 
leave the building.”

 There will be presidential elections in Ecuador in 2017, and although the 
current leader, Rafael Correa, has stated that he will stand aside after 10 
years in office, Long said he was “pretty confident” his Allianza Pais party 
would be re-elected, bucking the trend for leftwing Latin American governments 
to fall or come under intense popular pressure.

Long said the Correa government was still relatively popular, – despite the 
slump in commodity prices and allegations of civil liberties abuse, partly 
because the country had suffered so much political instability before. “What is 
amazing about Correa is that after 10 years in office, he remains consistently 
popular,” he said.

He said inequality remained the driving issue that all governments had to 
confront in Latin America. “Most of Latin America’s problems, social economic 
or political, derive from inequality and any government that does not tackle 
that issue is not tackling Latin America’s main problem,” he said.

• This article was amended on 21 June 2016 to correct a quote from Ecuador’s 
foreign minister; he said Assange had been in the embassy for 1,400 days, not 
4,400.
