
You turn off the narrow lane that runs through Long Crichel, and pull up in a 
small, gravelled yard. In front of you is a large, handsome, 18th-century house 
behind a high, stone wall. To one side is what used to be a stable block. A 
"Shop Entrance" sign points round one side of the block, and outside the shop 
are bags of carrots, spuds and organic flours. Head past them, and you enter 
the Long Crichel Bakery, a world of yeasty, toasty smells. There are honeys and 
oils, Longmans butter and Montgomery cheddar, but what really catches the eye 
are the ranks of golden pain au chocolat, almond croissants dusted with icing 
sugar, hot cross buns, their tops glistening like mushrooms marked with a 
broad, creamy cross, and flammenk√ºche, the Alsatian pizza. Beyond these 
dainties, stacked on shelves, are the breads - spelt sourdough, long-fermented 
white, rye sourdough, pain d'Auvergne, kammut white sourdough and more, all 
high-risen and crusted.

There's something Woosterish about the name Long Crichel. It goes with other 
villages of similar pedigree: Sixpenny Handley, Gussage All Saints and Tollard 
Royal. But in the Long Crichel Bakery there is much more of provincial France, 
of the villages around Tours where Jamie Campbell, Canadian architect and 
artisanal baker, trained with Jacques Mahou, master baker of Tours.

Campbell is a practising architect, but he was making hot cross buns when I 
arrived. The risen dough studded with currants had been divided up into the 
right-sized amounts. Rapidly, he rolled them, one in each hand, until perfectly 
round, then placed them on a tray lined with waxed paper, and moved back to do 
another two. And another... There were several hundred to go. "It's 
therapeutic," he said. "When you design a building, it takes years before 
anything's finished. With baking, you can see the results in a few hours."

When Campbell started out in 2000, he hadn't expected baking to take up quite 
so much of his life. "Let's make good bread," he had said to his wife when they 
were debating what to do with the stables in 1999. It was, he says, "insane - I 
was completely ignorant of the baking business", although he had been making 
bread since he was a kid. Inspired by the breads of France, he wanted to do it 
properly - and that meant training in France and building an oven.

He called on Paul Merry, baker and knowledgable in all things to do with 
wood-fired ovens. The result is something of a monster. It fills up one end of 
the stables, with a deep, curved-roof oven contained within a white-paned brick 
structure. Its door is like a grim mouth. To the right is the fire pit, which 
gives the oven its heat, with the ash pit below. To the right is the damper, 
which controls the temperature by drawing the heat from the fire through the 
oven. And when it gets to 350-400C, long-handled, wooden paddles are used to 
deposit the loaves at the back of the oven and to take them out when they are 
done.

Mixing the dough, and proving, is done in one long area down the side of the 
oven. There are three full-time bakers, as well as Campbell himself, plus a 
stagiaire. They make 12 types of bread, and various cakes, as well as the 
indulgences in the shop. They also sell them through a shop in Wimborne, 
farmers' markets in the area and Abel & Cole. What they don't sell, they send 
to a local school for children with special needs. "I hate waste," Campbell 
said.

He's pleased about training another generation of bakers as he had been 
trained. Good bread has particular qualities; the crust, the texture, the 
nutritional value and, above all, the flavour. "It's a craft," Campbell said. 
"You have to learn it. And most crafts have all but disappeared." Not in Long 
Crichel they haven't.
