
One of Britain’s biggest exam boards has changed its A-level music syllabus to 
include female composers after a studentlaunched an online campaign 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/aug/18/female-composers-a-level-music-syllabus-petition>
 calling for better female representation on the course.

Jessy McCabe, 17, noticed that Edexcel’s A-level music syllabus featured 63 
male composers and no female ones.

She contacted Edexcel to make it aware of the situation, but despite the 
board’s insistence that the music course aims to let students “engage in and 
extend the appreciation of the diverse and dynamic heritage of music”, its head 
of music seemed reluctant to implement any changes.

In response to an email from Jessy, the head of music wrote: “Given that 
female composers were not prominent in the western classical tradition (or 
others for that matter), there would be very few female composers that could be 
included.”


Related: Why the male domination of classical music might be coming to an end 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/feb/28/why-male-domination-of-classical-music-might-end>

A Change.org petition 
<https://www.change.org/p/edexcel-ensure-the-representation-of-women-on-the-a-level-music-syllabus>
 subsequently launched by the student received almost 4,000 signatures. She 
also wrote an open letter to the education secretary, Nicky Morgan, the 
executive director of the exam regulator Ofqual, Ian Stockford, and Pearson 
UK’s managing director, Mark Anderson. Jessy urged them to change next year’s 
syllabus “so that girls are freely able and inspired to become composers, to 
enrich the A-level syllabus and to ultimately ensure that women’s works are 
valued, as they should be”.

 Pearson, the organisation that offers the Edexcel qualifications, has now 
implemented changes to its2016 A-level music specification 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Internet%20Downloads/GCE2016_AL_Music_Issue2%20NEW.pdf>
 to include five new set works by female composers. They include Clara 
Schumann, Rachel Portman, Kate Bush, Anoushka Shankar and Kaija Saariaho.

 Additionally, Pearson has reviewed the wider listening recommendations and 
there are now 12 works by female composers listed.

Speaking about the changes, Anderson said: “We have updated our music AS and 
A-level specification to achieve a better balance of female and male composers. 
We took on board feedback from Jessy and a range of experts to ensure we found 
the right balance.

“We are keen to ensure diversity is reflected through the qualification and we 
hope schools and students are pleased with this outcome. Jessy deserves 
recognition and congratulations for her successful campaign.”

 The 17-year-old said she welcomed Pearson’s response. “The syllabus is now 
more diverse, inclusive and representative, allowing young people across the 
country to engage with a greater variety of composers and works,” she said.
