
A law firm that specialises in contesting claims for children with special 
educational needs (SEN) has apologised after publishing a series of tweets that 
appeared to gloat at parents.

Baker Small <http://www.bakersmall.co.uk/>, a law firm that acts for local 
authorities, triggered widespread anger among parents of children with 
disabilities with the remarks made on social media on Saturday. The firm 
subsequently deleted them and made a donation to charity.

One of the tweets said: “Crikey, had a great ‘win’ last week which sent some 
parents into a storm!”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yx32%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yx32%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F340595e54dc20da1c73e53c546d4746b0a04eda5%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fury%20as%20law%20firm%20boasts%20of%20'great%20win'%20over%20parents%20of%20vulnerable%20children&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yx32%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fury+as+law+firm+boasts+of+%27great+win%27+over+parents+of+vulnerable+children&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yx32%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F340595e54dc20da1c73e53c546d4746b0a04eda5%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
 Baker Small tweet, which has since been deleted. Photograph: web 
Another referred to a tribunal victory over an attempt by parents to get 
funding for an intervention that can help autistic children, called Applied 
Behavioural Analysis (ABA). It said: “Great ABA Trib win this week … 
interesting to see how parents continue to persist with it. Funny thing is 
parents think they won ;)”

Several people reprimanded the law firm for its remarks. “Probably not that 
funny on reflection?” tweeted Daisy Russell in response.

But the person writing on behalf of Baker Small replied: “Whenever someone 
thinks they have won and they have conceded 90% of their case, it does make me 
smile.”

“A little more gravitas might be in order, you are dealing with vulnerable 
children’s lives,” a campaigner for ABA wrote.

Later the Baker Small Twitter account posted another message with a picture of 
a kitten laughing, beneath the words: “Some great tweets received today from 
people who just see a one-sided argument … just shared them with my cat…”

The law firm’s tweets were later deleted, but were still visible on the 
Special Needs Minefield blog 
<http://chaosinkent.com/parenting/sen/dear-baker-small/>. Debs Aspland, the 
blog’s author wrote: “This company was not just celebrating a win, they were 
laughing at the parents who had lost. Somehow, the child at the centre of this 
didn’t appear even to be considered.”

The anger over the law firm’s flippant postings has roots in a deeper unease 
at local authorities’ increasing determination to fight parents at tribunal for 
funding of their children’s special needs provision.

Baker Small is, or has recently been, contracted to provide legal services in 
relation to contesting SEN and disability tribunals to a number of local 
authorities including Buckinghamshire, Norfolk, Hertfordshire and 
Gloucestershire, with total contracts estimated as being worth up to £1m.


The Milton Keynes-based company has for years caused unease among parents 
concerned by the “adversarial” nature of its style on behalf of local 
authorities at SEN tribunals.

In a now-deleted description of Mark Small, the company’s founder, the firm’s 
website appeared to advertise his skills at helping local authorities cut 
costs: “Mark also has experience of advising local authority SEN departments on 
a range of matters including managing and terminating ABA programmes, [and] 
parental complaints.” That had led some parents to refer to him as “the 
Terminator”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yx32%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yx32%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e61bd7a428ca93247cc9323f0e031921d66062e%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fury%20as%20law%20firm%20boasts%20of%20'great%20win'%20over%20parents%20of%20vulnerable%20children&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yx32%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fury+as+law+firm+boasts+of+%27great+win%27+over+parents+of+vulnerable+children&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yx32%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e61bd7a428ca93247cc9323f0e031921d66062e%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
 Baker Small tweet, which has since been deleted. Photograph: web 
The Guardian has been contacted by numerous parents who describe bruising 
experiences during SEN tribunals, when the local authorities were represented 
by Baker Small.

Baker Small posted an apology <https://twitter.com/bakersmall> later, stating: 
“We recognise the strength of feeling following the deletion of some of our 
tweets and for the content. We reiterate our sincere apology.” The company said 
it would make a donation to Children’s Hospice South West; it did not reveal 
the size of the donation.

But the issue is unlikely to blow over. Responding to the apology, one Twitter 
user wrote: “A professional law firm mocking parents who are fighting for the 
rights of their disabled children. Despicable. This not a game.”


Tania Tirraro, who founded the Special Needs Jungle 
<http://www.specialneedsjungle.com/why-unfortunate-series-tweets-must-be-send-gamechanger/>
 blog, wrote: “It is clear that local authorities are in bed with legal firms 
who have a win-at-all costs attitude and who do not take into account – or do 
not care – that a vulnerable child is at the heart of the case”.

She questioned whether councils “should be permitted to spend taxpayers’ money 
hiring expensive solicitors” to act in a process that was not meant to be 
adversarial.

Diane Kay, who has an 11-year-old son with SEN, said there was a widespread 
lack of understanding of how hard it was for parents who had to fight local 
authorities for the services required by their children. “We are treated like 
unreasonable consumers,” she said.

In an emailed response, Mark Small said: “Inappropriate tweets were sent from 
the Baker Small Twitter account which, in the context of the work we undertake 
both for public bodies and parents, were unacceptable and showed a lack of 
sincerity to parents.

“We understand all too well the pressures of the SEN system and the challenges 
faced by parents to secure appropriate provision. We are sincerely sorry for 
the tweets and for the upset caused.”
