
Why Emil Zátopek? 

I think of Zátopek as the patron saint of runners. He didn’t just 
revolutionise his sport – he reinvented it. He rewrote the record books and 
redrew the boundaries of endurance, redefining the whole idea of what was 
humanly possible. No one else, before or since, has dominated distance running 
in a way that he did in the late 1940s and early 1950s. Hisachievements at the 
Helsinki Olympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2012/jun/22/50-olympic-stunning-moments-emil-zatopek>
 will never be equalled. And he did all this with a crazy playfulness and 
generosity of spirit that made him perhaps the most loved Olympian of all time. 
The only comparable figure I can think of in 20th century sport is Muhammad Ali 
– yet Zátopek, unlike Ali, has barely been touched by biographers until now


Do you remember the first time you heard about him yourself? 

I can barely remember a time when I didn’t know about Zátopek. I think I may 
even have been dimly aware of him as a child, from seeing news reports aboutthe 
Prague Spring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2008/aug/21/1968theyearofrevolt.russia>
. But it was when I took up running myself, in my early 20s, that the idea of 
him really started to resonate. The idea of the stoical soldier, toughening 
himself up physically and mentally through sheer self-discipline, without 
losing his wit or humanity, was an inspiring one. I saw him as a role model for 
self-improvement – which is ridiculous, I know, but many other runners felt the 
same. The fact that he was also a martyr to Communist repression (this was 
before the fall of the Berlin Wall), and that no one really knew what had 
happened to him, just added to the mystery and romance. When I set out to write 
about Zátopek, I assumed that everyone knew his story – and I was shocked to 
find that most people, or most people under 40, had never heard of him.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjq8%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjq8%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff590d503d12b38f68692360f218e42924bc8c180%2F0_0_1896_1430%2F1896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Today%20we%20die%20a%20little'%20%E2%80%93%20writing%20the%20story%20of%20Emil%20Z%C3%A1topek&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjq8%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Today+we+die+a+little%27+%E2%80%93+writing+the+story+of+Emil+Z%C3%A1topek&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjq8%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff590d503d12b38f68692360f218e42924bc8c180%2F0_0_1896_1430%2F1896.jpg>
 Zátopek leads Alain Mimoun, Herbert Schade and Chris Chataway during the 
Olympic 5,000m in Helsinki. Photograph: CORR/AFP/Getty Images 
What was he like to write about?

You’d think Zátopek would be an easy person to write a book about. He had such 
an amazing, colourful, inspiring, haunting story: a man who won five Olympic 
medals, set 18 world records, redefined the limits of human endurance, became a 
global byword for sportsmanship and generosity – and was driven into lonely 
obscurity by the communists after standing up for “socialism with a human 
face”. The story tells itself. The author just has to write it down. Yet in 
some ways, he’s also a terribly difficult subject. He’s certainly an 
intimidating one: the greatest, most charismatic, most written-about runner the 
world has ever seen. Writing his biography feels like a huge responsibility. 
You feel presumptuous taking it on.


Why do you think his name is less familiar now?

It was all a long time ago. Emil was born in 1922 and died in 2000 
<http://www.theguardian.com/news/2000/nov/23/guardianobituaries>. 
Contemporaries who survive are in their 90s, and they’re growing fewer all the 
time. Inevitably, some memories are more reliable than others. I found Dana 
Zátopková, Emil’s widow, wonderfully alert and communicative, but even she 
struggled to be precise about detailed sequences of events from 60 or 70 years 
ago. Other eyewitnesses were much shakier.There’s also the question of how 
reliable the evidence was in the first place. Most people in the Czech 
Republic, and perhaps in athletics too, have a Zátopek story they can tell you. 
The question is: where did it come from? Did they witness it themselves, or did 
they just hear it – and if so, from whom? A lot of myths just get repeated 
again and again – for example, the story that Emil used to carry Dana on his 
back when he trained, or that it was in 1968 that he gave his gold medal to Ron 
Clarke, after the Prague Spring and the Mexico Olympics. I’ve read that last 
one repeatedly, in bestselling books and respected newspapers of record. But 
that doesn’t make it true.

So did you find most of those legends were nonsense, then?

No, I think the most surprising thing I learnt was that, despite all the 
embellishments, an amazing amount of the Zátopek legend actually is true. No, 
he didn’t regularly carry Dana on his back, but he did do so at least once (and 
another time he did a whole training session with a small girl on his back). 
No, he didn’t train in the 800m corridor at military academy – but he did train 
in the deep sand of the giant indoor riding school. No, he didn’t give a gold 
medal toRon Clarke <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/18/ron-clarke> 
in 1968, but he did do so in 1966. No, he didn’t give up his bed to an 
Australian journalist the night before the 10,000 metres at the Helsinki 
Olympics. But he did give up his bed to an Australian coach (Percy Cerutty) a 
few nights before the race – and got in trouble for allowing a western “spy” 
into the Communist bloc’s Olympic village. And so it goes on. This 
extraordinary, magical man really did exist. There really was a poor 
carpenter’s son from Moravia, with no special athletic talent, who built 
himself up through sheer hard work and inventiveness to be the most famous 
athlete the world had seen.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjq8%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjq8%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1edd69167a464f80d3a9cd9a347757562f27bd1%2F0_0_2147_3040%2F2147.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Today%20we%20die%20a%20little'%20%E2%80%93%20writing%20the%20story%20of%20Emil%20Z%C3%A1topek&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjq8%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Today+we+die+a+little%27+%E2%80%93+writing+the+story+of+Emil+Z%C3%A1topek&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjq8%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1edd69167a464f80d3a9cd9a347757562f27bd1%2F0_0_2147_3040%2F2147.jpg>
 Zátopek in action Photograph: Keystone/Getty Images 
There really was a runner who single-handedly redrew the boundaries of his 
sport – yet maintained a lightness of heart and a generosity of spirit that 
made the world feel a warmer place during the darkest days of the cold war. He 
really was almost pathologically generous – at one point a Prague campsite 
started redirecting campers it didn’t have room for to the Zátopeks’ house, 
knowing that Emil would always offer them hospitality. And he really did defy 
the Soviet tanks in Wenceslas Square in August 1968, briefly stopping a 
superpower’s invasion in its tracks.

After that they broke him, of course. He spent years as an itinerant labourer, 
including a spell down a uranium mine, living in a caravan, far from his home 
and his beloved wife; and by the time he was rehabilitated he was a shadow of 
the man he had been. The story of the last years of his life is heartbreaking 
at times. Yet the one overwhelming fact that struck me again and again, 
wherever I went and whoever I spoke to, is that Emil Zátopek wasloved. There 
was something child-like about him – he had an effect on people. “He lightened 
people’s lives,” was how one person put it. To me, that was the single most 
important thing about him.

Do you think that Zátopek’s story has any relevance to the modern runner?

Definitely. It’s not the training, though – fascinating though many runners 
find it. His innovations have been so thoroughly accepted, absorbed and 
developed that the details of what he did barely matter any more. Some runners 
still get obsessed by the numbers: did he do 80 fast 400m laps in a day or 100? 
How fast was each lap? How long were the recovery intervals? And so on. Those 
figures do exist – you’ll find some of them in my book. But I don’t think they 
really tell us much. A lot of his sessions were done without a stop-watch, over 
imprecisely measured distances – he did much of his training in the woods. A 
runner with more or less natural speed would derive a different degree of 
benefit from exactly replicating one of his sessions. And of course the kit was 
different, the tracks were different, the nutrition was different. There’s no 
comparison between what he did and what we can do.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3c4Z8cbcIiA&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3c4Z8cbcIiA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3c4Z8cbcIiA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3c4Z8cbcIiA&media=>
 Credit: International Olympic Committee 
What is still relevant, though, in my opinion, is his attitude. I don’t know 
if Emil ever really said, “A runner must run with dreams in his heart, not 
money in his pocket,” but it’s the sort of thing he could well have said, and 
it seems to me to be an incredibly timely message. But the ordinary runner 
might be also inspired by his sheer crazy commitment. Ultimately, we all know 
that you need to be a bit of a nutter to get the most out of yourself as a 
runner – and Emil was as bonkers as they come in that respect. It wasn’t just 
the running in heavy boots, the holding his breath until he passed out, the 
wearing three tracksuits at once while running through deep snow, the running 
in a bath full of laundry for two hours … It was also the philosophy: the idea 
that “Pain is a merciful thing – if it lasts without interruption, it dulls 
itself.”

That was the secret of his success as a runner: he trained himself to be tough 
in mind as well as body. “When a person trains once, nothing happens,” he said. 
“When a person forces himself to do a thing a hundred or a thousand times, he 
develops in ways more than physical. Is it raining? That doesn’t matter. Am I 
tired? That doesn’t matter either. Willpower becomes no longer a problem.”

I’ve found the mere thought of Zátopek’s example an energising, inspiring one 
during several decades as a runner. As Ron Clarke said: it’s not what he did, 
it’s the way he did it.

What’s your favourite piece of Zátopek wisdom?

“When you can’t keep going, go faster.” It’s bonkers, but it’s also the secret 
of everything. Just say it to yourself the next time you feel that you can’t 
keep going.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjq8%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjq8%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F026e86ded6e6bad1b3e580b7eadb498a2a7d16b5%2F0_176_2880_1728%2F2880.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Today%20we%20die%20a%20little'%20%E2%80%93%20writing%20the%20story%20of%20Emil%20Z%C3%A1topek&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjq8%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Today+we+die+a+little%27+%E2%80%93+writing+the+story+of+Emil+Z%C3%A1topek&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjq8%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F026e86ded6e6bad1b3e580b7eadb498a2a7d16b5%2F0_176_2880_1728%2F2880.jpg>
 Zátopek receives a kiss from his wife after winning the gold medal in 1952. 
Photograph: PPP 
The quote you use for the title of the book, is that apocryphal too?

It’s something that Emil is supposed to have said on the starting line of the 
Olympic marathon in Melbourne in 1956. He may not have used those exact words, 
but he certainly said something along those lines. He was still recovering from 
a very recent hernia operation. He was way off peak fitness and in any case he 
was well past his best. The temperature was somewhere between 30 and 35 
degrees. He knew that he could expect nothing from the race ahead except 
extreme physical agony. Yet he embraced it with a cheerful, friendly graveyard 
humour that seems to me to come close to capturing the essence of his nobility.

Do you think he has a natural heir at the moment? Someone who fits that mould, 
however differently they may now train/race?

I can’t think of anyone now running who compares to him. His nearest modern 
equivalent was Haile Gebrselassie – who managed to combine being an incredible 
runner with an infectiously cheerful, generous personality. And there have been 
plenty of others, such as Paula Radcliffe, who have looked to Zátopek as a role 
model. But there are so many differences between then and now. Zátopek put it 
well, towards the end of his life: “Today, the athlete is not an athlete. He’s 
the centre of a team – doctors, scientists, coaches and so on. Sometimes I ran 
like a mad dog, but it was very simple. It was out of myself.”


He seems to have been rather obsessed with 400m reps. Didn’t you ever wonder 
if he could have mixed it up a bit?

Yes, definitely. Apart from anything else, you wonder how he stuck at it. 
Didn’t he ever get bored? Perhaps there was a part of his personality that 
found the endless repetition reassuring. And it’s also worth bearing in mind 
that, for much of his career, he was under huge political pressure to keep 
winning. I don’t think he was exaggerating when he said that sometimes he ran 
in fear of being sent to prison if he lost. So he probably didn’t dare try 
anything that felt like easing off. Having said which, he did sometimes mix 
things up a bit: long slow runs in the mountains with Dana, messing around in 
the woods with a child on his back, jogging on the spot in a bath full of 
washing. He just doesn’t seem to have counted that kind of running – running 
without intensity and pain – as proper training.


Today We Die a Little : The Rise and Fall of Emil Zátopek, Olympic Legend by 
Richard Askwith is published by Vintage Publishing.Buy for £13.59 at the 
Guardian bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/385186/>.
