
“Left below knee amputation” is what I had written on the consent form. I 
asked my patient to sign it with a heavy heart; she was only 45 years old and 
had been through so much to get to this point. She looked up at me tearfully 
and said, “I trust you, I know this is for the best”. She then signed the 
consent form.

Related: Healthcare staff, how do you feel about an all-out junior doctors' 
strike? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/apr/22/healthcare-staff-views-all-out-junior-doctors-strike-nhs>

Over the last three months, she had suffered three attempts to return the 
blood supply to her leg but all had failed. She was exhausted. Her leg was now 
toxic and making the rest of her unwell. She was a shadow of her former self, 
drowsy and slumped over in her chair every morning because of the toxins and 
painkillers she had to take. Her leg was now killing her and it was time to 
stop trying to save it, but instead, amputate it in order to save her. We have 
a mantra in my surgical specialty: “There’s no point trying to save the leg, if 
you end up killing the patient”.Jeremy Hunt 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-hunt>, the health secretary, should 
perhaps take heed. The junior doctors’ contract that is to be imposed in August 
is toxic and will damage the NHS.

In the last few months it has become commonplace to hear and see my colleagues 
on the news, social media, on the streets and evenpleading to the wife of the 
president of the US 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/junior-doctors-contract-strike-michelle-obama-david-cameron-bma-jeremy-hunt-a6995731.html>
 to help us. In the last two weeks there has been a 24-hour, seven-day-a-week 
vigil outside the Department of Health in a bid to get Hunt to engage with the 
nation’s doctors. On 26 April, the NHS will see the first-ever full walkout by 
junior doctors. This represents unprecedented times and a watershed moment for 
the NHS and for the nation.

What is this over? The health secretary would have you believe it’s about 
Saturday pay. We’re gettinga 13.5% pay rise 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-35548091>, but a junior doctor has 
resigned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/25/bma-considers-permanent-strike-for-junior-doctors>
 live on TV. If you were getting a pay rise, would you proceed to the biggest 
industrial action in the history of the NHS for no reason? There’s something 
bigger going on here than pay.

 There is already a seven-day emergency service in the NHS and the contract 
aims to extend five days of planned elective services so they are also provided 
on weekends. OECD data shows thatwe are 26,500 doctors behind the European 
average 
<http://www.nuffieldtrust.org.uk/blog/uk-healthcare-getting-basics-right> at 
the starting gate. That’s not to mention the 47,000 nurses. There is already a 
recruitment crisis.

The contract is discriminatory against females 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/03/david-cameron-women-junior-doctors-contract>
 – those with disabilities, those who work part-time and those who are 
caregivers, particularly those whose partners are also doctors. It will also 
have a significant and detrimental impact on doctors’ training. Life will 
become unsustainable for many under this contract, driving even more to find 
work abroad. More importantly, we don’t have the staffing or resources to 
provide seven days of non-urgent services safely. This government wants to 
increase non-urgent service provision at weekends on the back of a manifesto 
promise they must deliver at all costs. The cost, I would argue, will be the 
wellbeing of the NHS and all that it represents – social equality and 
healthcare provision regardless of a patient’s financial situation.




The full walkout can’t go ahead without the support of our body of more than 
70,000 consultants, GPs and specialist nurses who will all be stepping in. I 
felt uncomfortable with the announcement of a full walkout by the BMA but was 
soon reassured by my consultants who said: “If we’re doing this, let’s do it 
properly. I don’t want to see a single one of you at work”. In turn, my 
consultants then proceeded to volunteer themselves to take on all of the most 
junior roles and perform all the jobs we would never dare ask them to do. They 
all sat patiently as we briefed them on the IT systems and procedures they will 
need.


This full walkout represents so much more than 54,000 junior doctors 
protesting. It represents solidarity and unity like never before between the 
whole of theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> workforce. The 
workforce is trying to tell Hunt that imposition of this contract is too toxic 
for the health service to survive.


This is a watershed moment in healthcare history worldwide. Our health 
secretary has a window of opportunity to stop what is toxic and remove 
imposition of a contract based on weak, or no, evidence. We are asking him to 
pause, and for the public to trust us, because ultimately, we are asking Hunt 
to do what we feel is right – to save an NHS which is suffering and which we 
hope is still able to survive.

If you would like to write a blogpost for Views from the NHS frontline 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline>, 
readour guidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2014/aug/12/highs-lows-nhs-write-guardian>
 and get in touch by emailinghealthcare@theguardian.com 
<mailto:healthcare@theguardian.com>.


Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
