
There are so many companies making sustainable business promises that it’s 
hard to keep up and harder still to know which ones are really make a 
difference. Here are seven initiatives I’ve found inspiring.

Related: Technology and people power: 5 ways to shape the sustainable 
development goals 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jan/15/sustainble-development-goals-technology-participation-africa>

1. Ikea lights the way


Five years ago Ikea promised to phase out all incandescent lighting, later 
committing to sell onlyLED light bulbs 
<http://www.ledsmagazine.com/articles/iif/2012/10/ikea-stores-will-only-sell-led-lighting-by-2016.html>
 by 2016. LED lights are 85% more energy efficient than the traditional 
incandescent bulbs. That’s a big environmental opportunity aslighting 
represents 11% of total electricity consumption 
<http://www.eia.gov/tools/faqs/faq.cfm?id=99&t=3> in the US. In 2010, LEDs cost 
$60 per bulb and had less than 1% market share. The new technology was aided by 
regulatory support, but still faced an uphill climb in terms of cost, consumer 
awareness, and an ecosystem of lighting fixtures that LED lights could be 
paired with.

Those challenges are why Ikea’s commitment was so bold and so important. It 
helped pave the way, andIkea is on track 
<http://www.ikea.com/gb/en/about_ikea/newsitem/FY14-sustainability-report> to 
meet its goal by September this year, ahead of schedule.


2. Ford’s big gamble

For the past 30 years, the best-selling vehicle of any kind 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/money/cars/2015/01/06/pickups-best-selling-vehicles-2014/21334373/>
 in North America has been Ford’s F-150 pickup truck. Customers expect their 
trucks to be tough, powerful and made of steel … like Superman. So who in their 
right mind would mess with the crown jewel by making the engine smaller and the 
truck lighter? The new F-150 is 318kg lighter, with an aluminium rather than 
steel body. The fuel savings per vehicle look modest at first glance but add up 
when multiplied by vehicles sold. This could mean 400m litres less fuel burned 
this year, the equivalent of taking 25% of the cars in Wales off the road. Over 
the next four years it would be the equivalent of taking every car in Wales off 
the road.

For those inclined to shrug and say “no brainer, fuel prices were high”, 
consider this: no other truck manufacturer made the move and automotive writers 
are still penning it “Ford’s big gamble”. Consumers may not embrace the 
lightweight model, factories have to be retooled, and a nation of collision 
repair shops will need to be equipped with the skills and welders needed to 
repair aluminium. This is a bold move fraught with uncertainty and risk but if 
it works it could be a game changer for the industry.


Related: Beyond aid: how do we fund the sustainable development goals? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/may/13/beyond-aid-how-do-we-fund-the-sustainable-development-goals>

3. Intermarché’s ugly vegetables


Call it the supermarket prisoner’s dilemma. As consumers we know that fresh 
produce is unnecessarily wasted because we demand apples of perfect shape, 
colour, and size, but we keep demanding perfection. Supermarkets know they 
could reduce cost and waste, but keep serving up the perfection we demand. If 
only there was a way for consumers and supermarkets to cooperate to optimise 
outcomes. Enter Intermarché with its“inglorious fruits and vegetables” campaign 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/mar/19/how-businesses-can-engage-consumers-in-their-sustainability-stories>
. The third largest supermarket chain in France decided to sell (more cheaply) 
the imperfect fruits and vegetables that are typically barred from the produce 
aisle and launched a brilliant campaign to glorify these rejects through print, 
billboards, TV, radio and social media. Intermarche also designed and 
distributed inglorious vegetable soups and fruit juices.

Consumers get the same quality produce for less money, and the satisfaction 
they are helping to reduce waste. Growers get money for produce that is usually 
thrown away, and Intermarché increased its business and gained consumer loyalty.
 Store traffic increased by 24% <http://itm.marcelww.com/inglorious/> and the 
campaign reached 21 million people within one month .

4. CVS kicks the habit

Tobacco use is the leading cause of preventable death and disease in the US, 
resulting in more than 480,000 deaths per year. But if you think nicotine is 
addictive, imagine trying to give up $1.5bn (£950m) of tobacco product sales. 
On the 50th anniversary of the US Surgeon General’s landmark report linking 
smoking and poor health, American pharmacy and drugstore CVS announced it was 
quitting tobacco product sales at its more than 7,500 stores, saying it was 
“simply the right thing to do for the good of our customers and our company”.

CVS was not the first pharmacy to stop the sale of cigarettes, but the way 
that this decision was delivered was heroic and humble. There was no attempt to 
sugarcoat; President and CEO Larry Merlo said: “Put simply, the sale of tobacco 
products is inconsistent with our purpose.” Merlo’s approach shows that it is 
possible for companies to do the right thing.


6. Espersen’s race to the bottom

You may not have heard of Danish company Espersen but you’ve probably eaten 
its fish. Espersen is a world leader in processed frozen seafood and supplies 
familiar food brands. The company was concerned aboutbottom trawling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/feb/10/bottom-trawling-how-to-empty-the-seas>
, which can have a disruptive impact on animal and plant life on the seabed and 
can result in a loss of marine biodiversity. In partnership with fishing 
operators, scientists and gear designers, Espersen found a solution by 
re-engineering traditional trawler gear.

The innovative gear“floats above” rather than “drags through” the seabed to 
protect the marine environment. But it doesn’t stop there. The new design 
reduced drag, allowing a thinner cable from new materials to be used, which 
reduce the risk of backlash if they break, providing a safer work environment 
for fishing crews. Less drag also means less fuel consumption, lower Co2 
emissions and better incomes for those in the fishing industry. While this 
initiative is still young and has not yet been adopted at scale, Espersen 
estimates that if this was rolled out for all Baltic Sea cod trawlers 13,000 
tonnes of CO2 emissions could be eliminated.

Related: Four multinationals shifting their business models for sustainability 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/jun/17/nrg-sustainability-starbucks-novelis-fibria-syngenta>

6. Coke’s plant bottle

Coke has developed the first-ever recyclable plastic bottle made partially from
plants <http://www.coca-colacompany.com/our-company/introducing-plantbottle> 
(up to 30%). The plant-based bottle is now being used for 30% of the company’s 
packaging volume in North America and 7% globally. This has reduced CO2 
emissions by 240,000 metric tons over the past five years. Coke plans to 
convert all plastic bottles to the new technology by 2020 and is collaborating 
with other companies to expand the application of the technology to other 
industries. From containers to carpets to clothing this innovation has the 
potential to provide a lighter carbon footprint for the world, and the more 
this technology can scale, the more costs can come down.


7. SAB Miller acts local, thinks global

So a guy walks into a pub and orders a beer. But the pub’s in Kampala, not 
London. And the beer is made from sorghum, not European barley. SAB Miller saw 
the potential for African products sourced from local ingredients rather than 
expensive raw materials imported from Europe. This initiative reduces cost, 
reduces transport, lowers carbon footprint, and provides improved livelihoods 
for smallholder farmers. Sorghum is tolerant to heat and drought, making it a 
popular staple crop for smallholder farmers in arid regions of Africa.

Sorghum beer was a hit and now represents 35% of all Ugandan beer by volume 
and SAB Miller is purchasing sorghum from tens of thousands of farmers each 
year. Farmers are also being provided with training to enhance their farming 
and entrepreneurial skills and helped to form growers’ associations to deliver 
their crops directly to the brewery. The product is safer than local fermented 
moonshine, which can be extremely high in alcohol content, and as an 
unregulated industry can sometimes be toxic for consumers.


The sorghum beer has expanded into Tanzania, Zambia, Zimbabwe, and Swaziland, 
with other brewers including Diageo and Heineken also jumping in. Not sitting 
still, SAB Miller sees how this can be expanded across Africa and has now 
introduced a product made from local cassava in Mozambique and Ghana.


This is not intended to be an exhaustive list, but rather serve as the light 
on the hill. These are just seven inspiring examples of what can happen when an 
innovative mindset, technology and collaboration decide to reinvent “business 
as usual”.

David Browning directs corporate partnerships at TechnoServe 
<http://www.technoserve.org/>, a non-profit organisation dedicated to providing 
business solutions to poverty.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development/> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
