
When my two-week-old baby was running a fever of 104F, I panicked. I looked 
down at my helpless newborn’s flushed face, her skin burning hot, her hair 
drenched with sweat, and thought: “Is it something serious?” I remember feeling 
I would give anything to have her well again. How many other parents around the 
world have felt and feared as I did?

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hmk2%2Fsfb%23img-1&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hmk2%2Fsfb%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa00901ca160f78a47919abb65345c57d14108082%2F485_0_1598_1996%2F1598.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Millions%20saved%3A%20how%20to%20make%20sure%20global%20health%20programs%20work&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hmk2%2Fstw%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Millions+saved%3A+how+to+make+sure+global+health+programs+work&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hmk2%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa00901ca160f78a47919abb65345c57d14108082%2F485_0_1598_1996%2F1598.jpg>
 Amanda Glassman, director of global health policy at the Center for Global 
Development, co-authored the book Millions Saved: New Cases of Proven Success 
in Global Health. Photograph: Center for Global Developent 
Our experiences of illness and death are both personal and universal; that’s 
why we share the concern of Brazilian women at risk of Zika who fear their 
babies will be born with microcephaly, a condition in which the head is smaller 
than average. These experiences are part of what has propelled global health to 
the forefront of foreign assistance from countries like the US and UK to the 
world’s poorest countries.One-third of US foreign aid 
<http://www.healthdata.org/sites/default/files/files/policy_report/2015/FGH2014/IHME_PolicyReport_FGH_2014_0.pdf>
 andnearly one-fifth of UK aid 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/482322/SID2015c.pdf>
 goes to global health. When people learn that with very little money we can 
prevent serious diseases and the heartache they cause, most agree health is a 
sound investment.

What we do in global health, broadly speaking, is good. We vaccinate kids to 
prevent diseases like measles, meningitis and polio. We deliver medicines to 
manage and prevent killer diseases such as malaria, Aids and tuberculosis. We 
even implement policies to reduce smoking and traffic accidents, and to support 
poor families to keep their daughters in school.

But how we design and deliver such programs and policies makes the difference 
between doing good and actually improving people’s health on a large scale. If 
we want to effectively tackle the next disease outbreak, and especially if we 
are spending public money to do it, then we need to be sure that what we’re 
doing works.


This was the driving force behind the new book Millions Saved 
<http://millionssaved.cgdev.org/>, written and edited with Miriam Temin and my 
colleagues at the Center for Global Development: to understand how policymakers 
and health professionals in the poorest countries took efforts that made a 
significant, measurable and positive difference on peoples’ health.

Related: Study supports Zika link to microcephaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/15/zika-study-estimates-1-risk-of-microcephaly-in-women-infected-in-early-pregnancy>

With expert advice and extensive research, we selected 18 programs and 
policies that showed through rigorous evaluation that they improved the health 
and wellbeing of a target population on a large scale over several years – and 
by so doing, disprove pessimists who say global health aid is a waste of money. 
The case studies illustrate how health initiatives are having a positive impact 
at low cost.

The results are staggering. Across 26 countries in Africa, meningitis A has 
been a centuries-old scourge, causing membranes around the brain and neck to 
swell with often lethal results. A vaccine had been too expensive for nations 
that needed it most. Yet a global coalition came together, found a drug company 
in India that could produce the inoculation at only 40 cents a shot, then 
rolled it out on a huge scale. Within four years, 217 million people in 15 
countries were vaccinated, equivalent to a million people per week. In those 
areas, meningitis A has been virtually wiped out.

Another case study focuses on Kenya’s deathly HIV epidemic. Orphaned girls in 
some African countries are highly vulnerable: they can be twice as likely as 
nonorphans to contract HIV or develop Aids, or experience a teen pregnancy. A 
program in Kenya that paid families or caretakers $30 cash every two months 
delayed girls’ sexual debut and reduced the odds of them having multiple sexual 
partners – which are both drivers of the HIV epidemic – and delayed pregnancy.

The book extends to things you might not recognize as a global health issue, 
like Vietnam’s dangerous traffic: in 2007, 14,000 people including 2,000 
children died in road accidents, and another 30,000 suffered severe brain 
injuries. A new law incentivizing motorcyclists to wear helmets led to a huge 
drop in deaths and injuries.

From these stories, you might think that creating and distributing a vaccine 
or passing a new law is enough to influence health outcomes, but it’s never 
that simple. Our book also looks at four cases in which a well executed program 
didn’t bring the intended benefits. Sometimes, technologies don’t pan out when 
scaled up, as we saw with a handwashing program in Peru. And programs that make 
sense when a community is poorer might not matter when general conditions get a 
bit better: we witnessed this in Bangladesh, where rapid economic growth 
coincided with the unsuccessful rollout of services aimed at reducing childhood 
deaths from illnesses like diarrhea.
 The Aedes aegypti is one mosquito species that carries the Zika virus, which 
can cause women to give birth to babies with microcephaly. Photograph: Joao 
Paulo Burini/Getty Images/Flickr RF 
There is knowledge in both what works and what doesn’t. From the 22 case 
studies we examined, we found four common features for achieving positive 
health gains. First, choices about interventions were based on the best science 
available. Second, successful programs featured partnerships between local 
governments and international organizations, which helped mobilize technical, 
financial and political resources. Third, political will was sustained over 
time, despite changing leadership and bouts of instability. And finally, each 
program used data and evaluations to adjust course when needed. Together, the 
experiences illustrated in Millions Saved offer valuable lessons for 
policymakers, development and health practitioners, and global health writ 
large.


The next pandemic is a matter of when, not if, and as developing countries’ 
economies grow, burdens of lifestyle diseases like diabetes and cancer loom. 
But interventions to combat these issues at scale are not yet operating in many 
developing countries, and too often the programs and policies in place are not 
rigorously evaluated. This must change if we want to effectively prevent and 
treat new health challenges.

Related: World Health Organisation alters HIV treatment guidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/30/world-heath-organisation-alters-hiv-treatment-guidelines>

We know that global health programs designed and implemented based on the best 
available evidence can work – and now we know why. Such programs also can 
soothe the anxiety of mothers like me who worry when their loved ones get sick. 
My daughter eventually got better, and I am grateful every day. I hope that our 
book helps make my experience the norm, not the exception, for many others 
around the world. Millions saved means millions more able to provide for their 
families and create a better future.

Amanda Glassman is vice president for programs and director of global health 
policy at the Center for Global Development. She has 20 years of experience 
working on health and social protection policy and programs in Latin America 
and elsewhere in the developing world. She is co-author of the bookMillions 
Saved: New Cases of Proven Success in Global Health.

This content is paid for by the Center for Global Development
