
In this week’s EU referendum Q&A our panel 
<http://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/mar/15/small-business-owners-eu-referendum-expert-panel>
 discuss how a Brexit could affect the costs facing UK businesses:

Would UK businesses be more or less competitive in the global market if we 
choose to leave?

If you have a question about the potential impact of the EU referendum on your 
small business,submit it here. 
<http://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/mar/15/question-brexit-ask-expert-panel-eu-referendum>


Larry Elliott
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jfz6%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jfz6%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9222b878b20a25b8dc7c5f919fa9461c4e193242%2F0_74_3684_2210%2F3684.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Would%20Brexit%20make%20UK%20businesses%20less%20competitive%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jfz6%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Would+Brexit+make+UK+businesses+less+competitive%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jfz6%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9222b878b20a25b8dc7c5f919fa9461c4e193242%2F0_74_3684_2210%2F3684.jpg>
 Photograph: Linda Nylind for the Guardian 
Economics editor at the Guardian, he has been with the paper since 1988

A decision to leave the European Union would lead to a fall in the value of 
the pound 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/01/pound-falls-amid-fears-over-eu-vote-brexit>
 as investors react negatively to the uncertainty. A lower pound makes imports 
dearer and exports cheaper, so UK firms would be more competitive in global 
markets and theUK’s hefty current account deficit  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/31/uk-economy-growth-record-trade-deficit>
would be reduced.

Brexit campaigners 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/12/billionaire-brexit-supporter-says-uk-should-emulate-singapore>
 say UK firms would also benefit by being less hampered by EU rules and 
regulations, although there is not a great deal of evidence to support this. 
Germany faces the same amount of Brussels red tape but runs alarge trade surplus
 <https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/scr/2015/cr15188.pdf> with countries 
outside the EU.

The EU remains the most important market 
<https://www.uktradeinfo.com/Statistics/OverseasTradeStatistics/Pages/OTS.aspx> 
for UK goods, so it is possible that any competitive gains from a cheaper pound 
would be negated by trade barriers in the event of a vote to leave. Much would 
depend on the size of the depreciation in the pound, whether the depreciation 
was sustained, and the deal struck with Britain’s former EU partners about 
access to the single market.

In or out, the biggest challenge for the UK is to improve the economy’s recent 
poor productivity performance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/07/uk-productivity-drops-in-final-quarter-of-2015-chancellor>
. This involves factors such as skills, education, management, innovation and 
investment – and they will need to be tackled whatever the result on 23 June.

Swati Dhingra
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jfz6%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jfz6%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41778a63b6a9605beabfebe88eb75855d0f7495d%2F0_172_1365_1705%2F1365.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Would%20Brexit%20make%20UK%20businesses%20less%20competitive%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jfz6%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Would+Brexit+make+UK+businesses+less+competitive%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jfz6%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41778a63b6a9605beabfebe88eb75855d0f7495d%2F0_172_1365_1705%2F1365.jpg>
 Photograph: Federico Protano 
Assistant professor at the department of economics at the London School of 
Economics, researching international economics, globalisation and industrial 
policy, she is co-author ofLife after Brexit 
<http://www.lse.ac.uk/newsAndMedia/news/archives/2016/02/Life-after-Brexit-new-LSE-report-on-UKs-options-outside-the-EU.aspx>
, a report by LSE’s centre for economic performance

After Brexit UK businesses would be less competitive within the EU market 
because they would face highernon-tariff barriers 
<http://stats.oecd.org/glossary/detail.asp?ID=1837> such as rules of origin 
<http://exporthelp.europa.eu/thdapp/display.htm?page=cd%2Fcd_RulesOfOrigin.html&docType=main&languageId=en>
 and the costs of divergence in regulations. Potentially, UK businesses would 
also face tariffs when exporting to the EU and to countries with which the EU 
has negotiated trade agreements. If the business relies heavily on imports from 
the EU or the EU’s trade agreement partners, then it would have to pay higher 
costs for its inputs. The EU is the UK’sbiggest trade and investment partner 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Internet%20Downloads/SN06091.pdf>, so these 
higher trade barriers would make UK businesses less competitive.


There could be some gain in competitiveness from getting rid of EU 
regulations. But the gain would be small as the UK already has one of themost 
flexible <http://cep.lse.ac.uk/pubs/download/brexit02.pdf> employment and 
product market regulations in the world. And half of the estimated costs of EU 
regulations for UK businesses comes from just two sets of policies – theEU’s 
climate change/renewable energy policies 
<http://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/budget/index_en.htm> and the working time 
directives 
<http://ec.europa.eu/social/main.jsp?catId=706&langId=en&intPageId=205> (which 
entitle workers to 20 days of paid leave). Scrapping these seems politically 
infeasible regardless of Brexit.

Depending on the immigration policy adopted after Brexit, UK businesses might 
face higher recruitment costs. In the short term, businesses would also face 
greater uncertainty over the UK’s future relationship with the EU and other 
trade partners, and over the legislation that would be needed to replace EU 
policies.

Ian Cass
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jfz6%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jfz6%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc09b0a8b79201843a81a1a344466fe575c559374%2F0_399_3456_4320%2F3456.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Would%20Brexit%20make%20UK%20businesses%20less%20competitive%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jfz6%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Would+Brexit+make+UK+businesses+less+competitive%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jfz6%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc09b0a8b79201843a81a1a344466fe575c559374%2F0_399_3456_4320%2F3456.jpg>
Managing director of the Forum of Private Business, a business support and 
lobbying group that specialises in helping employers with compliance and growth

We can’t know for certain; it will depend on a number of factors, such as how 
quickly new trade agreements are signed and whether the UK ends up withWorld 
Trade Organisation 
<https://www.wto.org/english/thewto_e/whatis_e/tif_e/org3_e.htm> model, which 
effectively means theyput nothing into the EU 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/hm-treasury-analysis-on-the-eu-referendum-george-osbornes-speech>
 but also get nothing out in terms of preferential access to the market. This 
would mean that, looking even longer term, it is impossible to say whether we 
would be better or worse off compared to overseas competitors.

Regulation wise, small businesses continue to complain about the level of red 
tape 
<http://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/apr/12/would-vote-brexit-help-reduce-red-tape-vat-moss-smes>
 coming out of Europe. Whether red tape would ease in the event of a Brexit 
vote would depend on what changes the UK government made following the 
referendum.

EU customers are likely to remain a big market for UK SMEs and a key issue for 
manufacturers could be thatBSI standard products  
<http://www.bsigroup.com/en-GB/about-bsi/uk-national-standards-body/European-standardization-regulation/>
may not automatically have access to EU markets. Less focus on the EU may mean 
a greater focus on emerging markets, which has been the strategy behindUK Trade 
and Investment 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/ukti-inward-investment-report-2014-to-2015/ukti-inward-investment-report-2014-to-2015-online-viewing>
 for a number of years.


More generally, investment is vital to competing in the global market. Many of 
the barriers to investment such as the UK’soverly complex taxation system 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/small-company-taxation-review> 
(particularly when it comes to innovation),tight planning laws 
<https://www.gov.uk/planning-permission-england-wales/when-you-need-it> and the 
cost of employment <https://www.gov.uk/employing-staff> are predominantly home 
grown.

Atrophy due to a period of uncertainty is, however, the biggest risk to the 
competitiveness of small firms. Firms generally are used to dealing with 
calculated risks, but it is hard to gauge what the final outcome will be and 
whether change will ultimately be better than long term stability.

John Van Reenan

Director of the Centre for Economic Performance, London School of Economics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics>.


In the short run, it is likely there would be negative shocks as uncertainty 
spikes while we negotiate new trading arrangements with the EU and the rest of 
the world. This has potential to hurt investment and hiring.

 In the longer run, there would be an increase in trade costs as we would have 
a looser relationship with theEU single market 
<http://ec.europa.eu/growth/single-market/index_en.htm>. This could potentially 
cause a fall in overall trade and in foreign investment, which could in turn 
depress productivity. Second, access to EU migrants, who provide a valuable 
source of skills to EU businesses,would be restricted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/31/migrants-will-need-good-english-in-post-brexit-uk-says-leave-campaign>
.

The pro-Brexit campaign emphasises that UK businesses would have to contend 
withless red tape 
<http://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/apr/12/would-vote-brexit-help-reduce-red-tape-vat-moss-smes>
. However, we would have to continue to abide by EU export rules to trade with 
the EU without any vote on how these rules are formed. Since we already have 
one of themost lightly regulated 
<http://www.oecd.org/employment/emp/oecdindicatorsofemploymentprotection.htm#data>
 labour markets in the world, there is no political appetite for jettisoning 
the working time directive.

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
