
Michael Gove <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove> has hit out at 
the “invincible arrogance of Europe’s elites” in a bruising interview on Sky 
News, in which he accused the prime minister of scaremongering.

In an astonishing attack on his own party leader, the justice secretary told a 
studio audience that David Cameron and other remain supporters were treating 
British voters as if they were “too small, too poor and … too stupid” to go it 
alone outside the EU.

Speaking about the Tory leader’s appearance on Thursday night, Gove said: “I 
believe that last night, I am afraid, what we heard was depressing and it was 
an exercise in trying to scare you into not following through what you know in 
your heart to be right.”

He said his opponents were guilty of a “depressing litany of projections about 
world war three and global Brexit recession,” saying it was the leave campaign 
that was “project hope”.

In an acrimonious clash, he hit out at the programme’s presenter, Faisal 
Islam, for “sneering condescension” after Sky’s political editor branded him an 
“Oxbridge Trump”. And he ruled himself out of any future Conservative 
leadership battle.

Related: EU referendum: Michael Gove questioned on Sky News - live 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/jun/03/eu-referendum-michael-gove-questioned-on-sky-news>

Gove, who was questioned by Islam and then a live studio audience, also:

 * Agreed to have an independent audit of the Vote Leave claim that Britain 
sends £350m to Brussels every week, which has been described as misleading by 
the head of the UK Statistics Authority.

 * Said he could not offer a guarantee that no one would lose their job in the 
aftermath of Brexit, joking that 73 MEPs would be first. 
 * Claimed that the majority of people in Britain were “suffering because of 
our membership of the EU”, which he said had destroyed his father’s fishing 
business. 
 * Called the EU a “job destroying machine” and said it was time to “say 
you’re fired” to its unelected elites as well as invest “additional millions” 
in the NHS. 
He failed to name a single economic authority or allied foreign leader who was 
backing the campaign for Britain to leave the EU, but was unapologetic, saying: 
“I’m glad all these organisations are not on my side … When we had a debate 
about joining the single currency, a majority of economists then thought we 
should join the single currency.”

He pointed to 300 business figures who had backed Brexit in a newspaper letter 
and said foreign leaders would “never accept a curtailment of their sovereignty 
in the way they are arguing that we should”.

He added that he had no interest in defending banks such as JP Morgan or 
Goldman Sachs, which he claimed had said Greece should join the euro. “I 
explained to my cabinet colleagues that we should not be on the side of the 
undeserving rich.”

Gove defended Vote Leave’s stance on immigration, saying he did believe in a 
multicultural society, but suggested that controlling Britain’s borders would 
allow a “truly inclusive, non-racist immigration policy”.

He appeared most uncomfortable when Islam suggested that part of the £350m 
never actually left the country.

“I’m happy to have it independently audited. We don’t have control of that 
money,” he said. “If you look at every reputable record of how much money we 
send [it] is £20bn gross. There are billions of pounds spent on our account [by 
those] who are unaccountable, elected and who we can’t get rid of. It is wrong 
to say people who want their democracy back are following in the footsteps of 
Donald Trump.”

His claim that more than half the country was suffering as a result of EU 
membership was questioned by Islam, who said Gove had no evidence to back it 
up. In a tetchy response, the justice secretary gave the example of watching 
his father’s “business go to the wall”. He said: “Do not skate over their 
misery. Don’t dismiss the pain that they’ve had. Don’t belittle it.

“Look at the facts, they are a story of human misery. Those jobless young 
people in Greece and Spain are coming here and putting pressure on jobs here.”

Related: EU referendum: our writers on David Cameron's TV questioning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/02/eu-referendum-our-writers-on-david-camerons-tv-questioning>
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fgove-likened-to-first-world-war-general-during-sky-news-debate-video&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fgove-likened-to-first-world-war-general-during-sky-news-debate-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gove%20likened%20to%20first%20world%20war%20general%20during%20Sky%20News%20debate%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fgove-likened-to-first-world-war-general-during-sky-news-debate-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gove+likened+to+first+world+war+general+during+Sky+News+debate+%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fgove-likened-to-first-world-war-general-during-sky-news-debate-video&media=>
Gove likened to first world war general during Sky News debate – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jun/03/gove-likened-to-first-world-war-general-during-sky-news-debate-video>
The interview triggered another blue-on-blue attack: the Tory MP Nick Herbert 
told the Guardian he was disappointed with Gove for making controversial 
arguments about immigration. “This was kind of like Nigel Farage with a wine 
glass. That is what the leave campaign has become, falling back on arguments 
they said they were not going to make because they have lost the economic case.”

Lord Falconer, the shadow justice secretary and remain campaigner, said Gove 
lost the audience as he failed to make a case about the economic impact of 
leaving.

“The purpose of tonight and last night was to put the people making the case 
through their paces. How did [David] Cameron deal with immigration? Incredibly 
well. How did Gove deal with questions about the economy? Not only did he not 
deal with them well, he didn’t deal with them at all. He simply said ‘I have 
faith’. It was not based on argument but his bold assertions.”

Gove’s appearance came after Thursday night’s Sky News 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/sky-news> audience cast doubt on the prime 
minister’s personal integrity, with one woman saying that he was waffling. 
Another audience member accused Cameron of hypocrisy for linking the Labour 
London mayor, Sadiq Khan, to Islamist extremists and then sharing a platform 
with him, while another asked what he thought about his character and 
reputation having been damaged by scaremongering during the campaign.


The out campaign is increasingly stepping up attempts to paint Cameron as 
untrustworthy and damaged as a leader, especially after three backbench Tory 
MPs suggested he should face a leadership challenge after the election.


Iain Duncan Smith accused Cameron of insincerity and making an attempt to 
deceive the public over EU immigration. The former party leader, who resigned 
from Cameron’s cabinet this year, claimed to have identified two lies in two 
sentences spoken by the prime minister on ITV’s Good Morning Britain on Friday.

Related: Iain Duncan Smith accuses PM of lying over EU immigration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/03/iain-duncan-smith-accuses-cameron-pm-lying-eu-immigration->

Cameron told the programme he had negotiated a deal with the EU so that when 
people came to the UK to work they had to go home if they did not find a job 
and they did not get unemployment benefit when they arrived. But Duncan Smith 
claimed there was no legal right to send people home if they did not have a job 
and that EU migrants were entitled to jobseeker’s allowance after three months 
of living in the UK.

In a briefing note, Vote Leave suggested that jobless EU migrants should be 
deported, saying a consequence of the failure to do so had been a stark rise in 
homelessness.

In a significant escalation in the feuding that has ripped through the 
Conservative party during the referendum campaign, Duncan Smith said he was 
astonished at the prime minister’s comments, branding them “deeply insincere – 
and a clear attempt to deceive the British public”.

The former work and pensions secretary added: “The truth is that, for as long 
as we are a member of theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>, 
we are powerless to control the number of people coming to this country. And 
yesterday’s damning home affairs report shows conclusively that even if EU 
migrants commit serious crimes, the government is unable to remove them.”


