
You know that a city’s cultural credibility is on the rise when it acquires a 
contemporary art museum or a cutting-edge arts festival – especially one 
featuring street artists, light installations and open-air music.

Related: Creole cooking and cannon smoke: how Mauritius keeps its heritage 
alive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/ba-guide-to-mauritius-2016/2016/may/26/creole-cooking-and-cannon-smoke-how-mauritius-keeps-its-heritage-alive>

Port Louis, Mauritius’s characterful capital, now has the lot. Its Institute 
for Contemporary Art Indian Ocean, opened in 2015, included thought-provoking 
images by South African photographer Pieter Hugo in its first season. This 
year, it’s showing paintings by Ghanaian-British artist Lynette Yiadom-Boakye, 
a former Turner prize nominee.

In December 2015, the entire city centre became a triumphant work of art, with 
lights and projections trickling like showers across trees and streets during 
PORLWI By Light, a new three-day festival. “It brought local families of all 
backgrounds together,” says Mauritian cultural expert Marcel Noé, as he shows 
me around the city.

The biggest annual bash in Mauritius, the Festival International Kreol (FIK), 
in late November, is the republic’s answer to London’s Notting Hill Carnival, 
with hip-wiggling séga dancers, theatre and flamboyant local food. At its 
signature all-night concert last year, 30 bands played to an audience of 
150,000 – a number equivalent to the entire population of Port Louis.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jftm%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jftm%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8cebd4ac71c1835b0c2d7e94f78e982f1cdc44a8%2F82_0_3165_1900%2F3165.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Culture%2C%20carnivals%20and%20kitesurfing%20on%20Mauritius&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jftm%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Culture%2C+carnivals+and+kitesurfing+on+Mauritius&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jftm%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8cebd4ac71c1835b0c2d7e94f78e982f1cdc44a8%2F82_0_3165_1900%2F3165.jpg>
 Le Caudan Waterfront, Port Louis 
Yet Mauritius is not just for culture lovers; active types have good reason to 
visit, too. The island’s safe, shallow bays and lagoons are excellent for 
watersports, with kitesurfing growing fast. Kiteival takes place over 10 days 
each July. “Pros get invited but anyone can take part,” says kitesurfing 
enthusiast Ornella Arokeum. “The top Mauritian kitesurfers tend to be really 
generous-spirited – they love showing visitors their favourite places. Many are 
fishermen’s sons. They’ve known the ocean since childhood, but rather than 
following in their fathers’ footsteps, they’ve chosen a new way of life.”

Mauritius’s kitesurfing hotspot is a breezy lagoon at the island’s westernmost 
tip. There are wonderful views of its brilliant waters and the breakers beyond 
from Le Morne, a mountain sacred to many locals. I scramble up to the viewpoint 
on a guided hike with Nicolas Quéland of outdoor activity company Yanature. 
“Runaway slaves used to hide up here in the 18th and 19th centuries,” says 
Quéland. “Legend has it that on 1 February 1835, they saw police approaching 
and jumped off the cliff rather than face capture. The tragedy was that the 
police were coming to tell them that slavery had been abolished and they were 
free.”

For wildlife watchers, there are birds, geckos and marine species to discover. 
On the north-west coast, I swim through clouds of fusilier and jack fish, 
flitting over sea fans. My scuba guide, Hugues Vitry of Blue Water Diving 
Center, has a magnetic rapport with giant moray eels – he makes little barking 
noises into his regulator, and a monster emerges to swirl around him. Even more 
extraordinary is my morning snorkelling with and studying sperm whales as an 
eco-volunteer for a marine conservation NGO, which Vitry co-founded.


The Indian Ocean became the world’s first international whale sanctuary in 
1979; the government now plans to increase wildlife protection on the west 
coast by creating a new marine park with a five-knot speed limit. With interest 
in whale and dolphin watching on the rise, it’s a timely idea.

“We mustn’t shield animals with too much legislation,” says Vitry. “We risk 
turning honest tour boat captains and fishermen into outlaws. Once they’re 
stuck with that label, what incentive do they have to operate responsibly? 
However, careful management could be fantastic for conservation.”

This is a nation that will never escape its association with the dodo, the 
bird that’s synonymous with extinction. But, as Letichia Hilaire of the 
Mauritian Wildlife Foundation puts it: “Today, Mauritius feels a duty to 
prevent other species going the same way – and that can only be a good thing.”

British Airways flies direct three times a week from Gatwick to Mauritius. For 
more information and to book, visitbritishairways.com/mauritius 
<https://ad.doubleclick.net/ddm/clk/302966546;130080452;z>
