
For Henrik Anderberg, thinking big comes easily - and there’s little bigger in 
his inbox right now than HS2. The high speed rail scheme is, he says, a once in 
a lifetime opportunity for the UK to redress the economic life of the nation, 
rebalancing the economy away from the dominance of London and the south east 
and placing transport firmly at the heart of a new industrial revolution.

Anderberg is HS2 director for transport engineering company Alstom, and has 
also been the company’s acting managing director for UK and Ireland since the 
beginning of April. A former managing director for the company’s Nordic region, 
Anderberg has worked for Alstom since 2010, switching into the rail industry 
from IT and telecoms.

His enthusiasm for the rail sector is palpable. “It’s very tangible stuff,” he 
points out. For Anderberg, Alstom-built trams running smoothly in a French city 
like in Reims, in the heart of the Champagne district, are “just beautiful”, 
with their combination of clever technology and sleek design. And there little 
to beat, he says, the sheer macho thrill of being in the drivers’ cab of 
Alstom’s “Ferrari” train, going at 300kph between Rome and Bologna.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjc8%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjc8%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1844aab7d9e0eddfebf905296db10ecf5ea3be26%2F0_778_3280_1968%2F3280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We%20want%20a%20whole%20new%20generation%20of%20young%20people%20interested%20in%20engineering'&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjc8%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We+want+a+whole+new+generation+of+young+people+interested+in+engineering%27&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjc8%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1844aab7d9e0eddfebf905296db10ecf5ea3be26%2F0_778_3280_1968%2F3280.jpg>
 Henrik Anderberg Photograph: Alstom 
Anderberg wants to pass on that passion to a whole new generation. After 
almost a year in the UK, he is particularly excited about the prospects for the 
UK rail sector. With investment coming in for all aspects of rail, including 
new infrastructure, signalling, rolling stock and stations, the sector faces a 
bright future. But there is a much bigger prize here than simply transport 
investment. “We want to encourage new skills and young people,” says Anderberg.

This can be done through major projects like HS2, which Anderberg sees as a 
political and social project as much as a transport scheme. “HS2 started as a 
project about travel times and how to get between large cities faster,” he 
points out. “That is still important, but it is now much more about capacity, 
about economic growth and skill development, where we can get a generation of 
new young people interested in engineering.”

Plans for the new north-south high speed rail link are still being developed 
by HS2 Ltd, but the organisation’s chairman, David Higgins,reported in February 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/david-higgins-hs2-already-changing-britain> 
that the project has already started to change the way private investors, as 
well as central and local government, plan for Britain’s future. Local 
authorities and enterprise partnerships not just in Birmingham, Manchester and 
Leeds, but also in the north west, the east and west Midlands and Yorkshire 
were, he said “using HS2 not just to rethink their transport systems, but also 
how they attract private investment to their areas - and business has 
responded.”

Anderberg agrees. He says cities like Leeds, Birmingham, Manchester are 
already very active in thinking about how to use the project to boost skills 
and businesses locally, and points to the experience of high speed rail in 
other countries. “It’s interesting in France, for instance,” he comments. “We 
started with Paris and Lyon in 1981. It was then just a line between two large 
cities. It’s now the backbone of the whole network in France.” Anderberg also 
points out that between 1983 and 1990, property prices close to Lyon station 
rose by 43%.

 Anderberg says the high level of dialogue between suppliers such as Alstom 
and HS2 Ltd is a hallmark of a project that will enhance the UK’s rail skills 
well into the future. HS2 is a demanding project technically, with HS2 Ltd 
interested not just in what manufacturers have available now, but what they 
have in their R&D pipelines. Developing technical skills in high speed rail 
will ensure that once HS2 is built, there will be the capability and skills in 
this country to work on further projects and to export. Building those skills 
will be crucial and Alstom is proud to be part of a cross-sector initiative for 
a new manufacturing and training site in Widnes.

Alstom has capabilities across the whole of the HS2 project, from signalling 
and tracks to train-building. In fact, Anderberg believes it is one of the few 
suppliers who could build the whole thing - and provide maintenance services 
too.

But new skills will be crucial. Anderberg says 25,000 people work in the 
transport sector in the north west, Alstom’s industrial heartland. That’s 13% 
of the whole UK transport sector. Over the next 10 years, 12,500 new workers 
will be needed: 7,000 to cover those due to retire and 5,500 as a result of new 
projects and technology.

 It will also be crucial to have a well-established supply chain. The 
company’s track record in producing high speed trains for France and Italy 
stands it in good stead. “We can use that knowledge on how to create a good 
supply chain, here in the UK,” comments Anderberg. “This is not just about 
assembly. We want to manufacture the key components of the train. That is 
unique if you compare it to our competitors - we want to do much more - and 
that means even more demands on the supply chain and on the skill set.”

Right now, German and French capacity in rail is much bigger thanthe British 
rail sector, but Anderberg says it’s time for that to change. “We know we have 
the expertise in this country and we should take advantage of it,” he says.

Crossrail, Crossrail 2 and HS2 will all help build back that ambition and 
capacity within the industry and help Britain export. By way of comparison, 
Anderberg looks to the British car industry. “No-one looks at Jaguar LandRover 
and says they are not British. Everyone’s proud of them and keen to see them be 
successful overseas and bringing back that money and jobs. Why can’t we be that 
ambitious with rail? We think we should be.”

