
We all want to be fit, healthy and happy but the best intentions – whether 
it’s to jog to the shops, eat a balanced diet or strike a better work-life 
balance – can often elude us.


Related: The eight problems that plague new housing developments – in pictures 
<http://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/gallery/2014/dec/17/new-housing-development-problems-pictures>

At least some of the blame can be laid at the feet of those who design the 
city spaces some of us call home. Many aspects of city living discourage the 
kinds of lifestyles that can contribute to our health and wellbeing. We know 
that car-dependent, city suburbs struggle to create neighbourhoods that 
encourage walking, but they’re not the only ones.

Here are five mistakes that are often made when designing new developments in 
urban areas — and suggestions for how to create healthier communities.

Erecting too many fences, gates and barriers
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4bv76%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4bv76%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F27%2F1437991496447%2Faacb5092-a3ab-4d05-9419-3e2fac47845f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20urban%20design%20mistakes%20that%20create%20unhealthy%20and%20inactive%20communities&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4bv76%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five+urban+design+mistakes+that+create+unhealthy+and+inactive+communities&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4bv76%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F27%2F1437991496447%2Faacb5092-a3ab-4d05-9419-3e2fac47845f-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Developers are keen on gates and fences for security reasons, but they often 
discourage walking and exercising. Photograph: Clare Stephenson/Guardian 
Getting up and out is often the first step in leading a healthier lifestyle. 
But in the name of safety and security, new developments often include too many 
gates and barriers. Developers are often simply doing what they think is 
safest. But while these measures can reduce crime, they also discourage people 
from walking around their neighbourhood. Sometimes imposing too many gates and 
barriers can have the opposite effect and make areas less safe. It can lead to 
empty ground floors where no one walks, or fenced-in courtyards that feel 
uninviting.

Instead of using gates, designers can draw attention to the street by 
encouraging people to walk through outdoor spaces to get to local amenities, 
creating bustling shared spaces that are safe and encourage people to walk.

Failing to find out what residents really want
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4bv76%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4bv76%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F27%2F1437993427464%2Fb506e64d-e7aa-4af7-bd48-1047c982b767-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20urban%20design%20mistakes%20that%20create%20unhealthy%20and%20inactive%20communities&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4bv76%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five+urban+design+mistakes+that+create+unhealthy+and+inactive+communities&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4bv76%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F27%2F1437993427464%2Fb506e64d-e7aa-4af7-bd48-1047c982b767-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Technology allows more residents a say in what type of amenities they want 
from their communities. Photograph: Alamy 
Who better to identify the missing green space, unhealthy food and poor 
exercise facilities in a community than the people themselves? Traditional 
community consultation has always been the traditional method for understanding 
what a community might want, but it can be time-consuming and doesn’t always 
provide the best results as it often attracts the same few voices with the same 
few desires.

But the internet allows many more voices to have their say on where they live. 
Websites such asSpacehive <https://spacehive.com/> allow communities to suggest 
improvements to their areas and crowdfund the money to help it happen. Whether 
it is better running routes, outdoor gyms or cycle paths, developers that 
invest in ideas put forward by the community can get a better idea of what 
their residents actually want and lessen the risk of wasting money on projects 
that they don’t.

Forgetting about the extra services
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4bv76%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4bv76%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F27%2F1437997971793%2F3d5bc430-acc0-45bb-887e-0c7d5aca0285-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20urban%20design%20mistakes%20that%20create%20unhealthy%20and%20inactive%20communities&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4bv76%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five+urban+design+mistakes+that+create+unhealthy+and+inactive+communities&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4bv76%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F27%2F1437997971793%2F3d5bc430-acc0-45bb-887e-0c7d5aca0285-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Services such as secure bike parking can encourage residents to cycle to work 
and remove the hassle of trying to store a bike in a small flat. Photograph: 
Reuters 
Whether it’s providing a car-sharing scheme, a secure bike storage space, a 
co-operative food growing project or having a doorman who takes deliveries and 
lets in the builder, developments that offer healthy lifestyle services and 
save residents time could ease stress and make developments more liveable as 
cities densify.

Shared services in buildings have the added benefit of helping foster a sense 
of shared responsibility, bringing people together to maintain amd enjoy their 
shared spaces, while also freeing up time in people’s schedules to hit the gym, 
go for a run, or spend time with their families. Secure bike lockers or a 
cycle-share scheme can remove the hassle of trying to store a bike in a small 
flat and encourage people to cycle to work.



Designing green spaces nobody wants
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4bv76%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4bv76%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F27%2F1437991823900%2Fe45cd7e8-1231-4f95-b72c-edfa6a453216-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20urban%20design%20mistakes%20that%20create%20unhealthy%20and%20inactive%20communities&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4bv76%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five+urban+design+mistakes+that+create+unhealthy+and+inactive+communities&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4bv76%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F27%2F1437991823900%2Fe45cd7e8-1231-4f95-b72c-edfa6a453216-2060x1236.jpeg>
 New York’s High Line park is an example of the type of green space that 
communities enjoy, but too often they can be an afterthought in the design 
process. Photograph: Alamy 
Getting people to explore their wider neighbourhood by foot or bicycle 
requires it to be an attractive proposition. There’s a reason city-dwellers 
head to large parks to walk the dog or jog. While developers are increasingly 
building green spaces in developments, they tend to be afterthoughts: small, 
isolated patches of grass that seem better suited to dogs doing their business 
than going for walk or exercising.

Developers should instead build networks of green spaces that allow citizens 
to walk through their neighbourhoods surrounded by vegetation and clean air – 
rather than concrete and car fumes. These parks could be new or even be 
repurposed from existing infrastructure –New York’s High Line 
<http://www.thehighline.org/visit> in Manhattan (pictured), for example, is a 
1.5-mile long park built on a disused elevated railroad high above the traffic.

Failing to design a friendly neighbourhood first
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4bv76%2Fsfb%23img-6&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4bv76%2Fsfb%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F27%2F1437996316795%2Fbf3141b0-115c-47ca-b09b-dad4a8772ada-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20urban%20design%20mistakes%20that%20create%20unhealthy%20and%20inactive%20communities&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4bv76%2Fstw%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five+urban+design+mistakes+that+create+unhealthy+and+inactive+communities&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4bv76%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F27%2F1437996316795%2Fbf3141b0-115c-47ca-b09b-dad4a8772ada-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Creating happy and sociable communities are the first step in encouraging 
healthy lifestyles among residents. Photograph: Simon Critchley/Alamy 
A healthy lifestyle isn’t just about being physically active: it’s vital that 
communities provide a friendly environment in which all its members are happy 
and positive about where they live. While building high-quality and attractive 
environments, developers should also ensure that they consider how their future 
residents will interact with each other.

Research suggests that front doors onto the street, balconies with a social 
distance of up to 10m, front porches and steps on which to dwell all contribute 
to neighbours’ tendency to be sociable. Visible life in streets is also 
important to attracting people out, so spaces for children to play and clear 
visibility to the street can create feelings of safety and comfort. Being 
visible to our neighbours — at comfortable distances and not on top of one 
another — is crucial to making neighbourhoods more sociable.

Claire Mookerjee is the project lead for urbanism at Future Cities Catapult

Sign up  <https://register.theguardian.com/housing/>for your free Guardian 
Housing network newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to you every 
Friday. Follow us:@GuardianHousing <https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>
