
The private island

If you’re struggling to get a mortgage, paying exorbitant rental prices, or 
simply in need of a getaway, why not follow inRichard Branson’s shoes 
<http://www.virginlimitededition.com/en/necker-island> and buy a private island 
instead? For as little as £100,000 (less than many central London car parking 
spaces), you could be the owner of a little island in Ireland, or even Fiji.

“We had a young couple in their 30s come to us who were renting an apartment,” 
says Chris Krolow, CEO of Private Islands Inc, “and, instead of buying a place 
on the mainland, they bought an island onGeorgian Bay in Lake Huron, Canada 
<http://travel.nationalgeographic.com/travel/canada/georgian-bay-ontario/>, 
with beautiful views for £265,000 (CAD$500,000) and built a place of their own.”

A simple internet search for reasonably priced private islands can produce a 
few surprises. There’s everything fromInishbigger 
<http://www.privateislandsonline.com/islands/inishbigger-island> off the west 
coast of Ireland for £60,000, which will give you 13 acres of grazing land and 
peat, to an island off the coast of Sweden for £80,000 that comes with two 
separate houses, or evenco-ownership of an island in the Bahamas 
<http://www.privateislandsonline.com/islands/green-island-republic> with 
state-of-the-art facilities for £317,000 – less than the average cost of a 
property in the south-east of England.

So the ultimate dream can become a reality. Indeed, a growing number of people 
are buying islands as trophies. “They don’t even visit the island, they just 
have a picture of it on their office wall or at home to present to 
friends/colleagues, knowing all the time that if they get stressed or depressed 
they can simply retreat there for peace and quiet,” says Farhad Vladi, 
president ofVladi Private Islands <http://www.vladi-private-islands.de/en/home/>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k8jh%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k8jh%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78cc240f012e170f1b2ea7a922842fc5b4f19fb7%2F0_147_4500_2701%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20live%20like%20a%20billionaire%20on%20the%20cheap&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k8jh%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+live+like+a+billionaire+on+the+cheap&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k8jh%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78cc240f012e170f1b2ea7a922842fc5b4f19fb7%2F0_147_4500_2701%2F4500.jpg>
 ‘The quickest route is to buy a freehold island, but these are often more 
expensive.’ Photograph: privateislandsonline.com 
But for those actually looking to live on their island, there are a lot of 
factors to consider, especially where and why you want to buy, what planning 
permission is available, travel logistics, management fees and whether the 
secluded life is really for you.

“We get a lot of crazy people calling us. [That] goes hand in hand with buying 
islands,” says Krolow.

“We try to gauge how serious they are by their answers to our questions. First 
off, which regions they are interested in. If they haven’t got a clue, then 
usually they haven’t got a clue. If it’s the whole world with a budget of 
£300,000, it’s going to take about two weeks of my time, and that will probably 
cost about £10,000 alone.”

For those who are serious, they need to be aware the process can be costly and 
time-consuming before the island is ready for habitation. The quickest route is 
to buy a freehold island, but these are often more expensive, costing anywhere 
between £1m and £300m, unless you’re willing to buy in a less glamorous 
location. “There are beautiful islands in places like Sweden, Scotland and 
Canada with small properties already in place,” says Vladi.

The alternative is shared ownership or leasehold in slightly more glamorous 
places such as Fiji, but the problem is you don’t own the island outright, the 
ownership can be cancelled and, unlike freehold, the longer you own a 
leasehold, the less valuable the island becomes.

“In Belize, you can buy an island under the category of ‘right of possession’, 
which is good in that you can build on it and don’t pay any taxes,” says 
Krolow, “but if you have any disputes, squatters or troubling neighbours then 
it can be problematic.

“Most people who take the step of buying an island already know they want to 
buy one, it’s just a case of where and how.”

The yacht
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k8jh%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k8jh%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcdbade0a68e9ae1fd4330e0c6e10d7c54c1659c6%2F0_0_1570_995%2F1570.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20live%20like%20a%20billionaire%20on%20the%20cheap&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k8jh%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+live+like+a+billionaire+on+the+cheap&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k8jh%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcdbade0a68e9ae1fd4330e0c6e10d7c54c1659c6%2F0_0_1570_995%2F1570.jpg>
 ‘We get a variety of people on our yachts, from sailors keen to try before 
they buy to first-timers who are like: ‘Blimey, can I really do this?’’ 
Photograph: Getty Images 
Over the coming months, the media will be saturated with images of A-listers 
such as Leonardo DiCaprio and Lewis Hamilton sunning themselves on superyachts 
in stylish locations. You can do the same for as little as £50 a night.


An Airbnb-style site, bedsonboard.com <https://www.bedsonboard.com/>, offers 
guests the chance to stay onboard luxury yachts and be waited on hand and foot 
by a professional crew. There are hundreds to choose from all over the world, 
including the Southern Cross in Barcelona, which was built for the royal family 
and has since been owned by major celebrities. Yours for £90 a person.

The process is straightforward: once customers register, they can make 
bookings after specifying their dates, the number of people and payment method. 
The owners then have 48 hours to accept or reject requests.

The only drawback is you won’t be sailing (or motoring) off into the sunset as 
the yachts are moored at all times during your stay. They’re basically like 
floating hotels, but with the cachet of being able to stroll around the deck 
like you own the vessel.

“We get a variety of people calling up to stay on our yachts, from experienced 
sailors keen to try before they buy to first-timers who are like: ‘Blimey, can 
I really do this?’” says Tim Ludlow, co-founder of Beds on Board. “We’ve been 
doing this for a year, and now have a variety of vessels to offer, including a 
120ft towboat on the Mississippi river.”

Related: Sun, sea and silver service: what’s it like crewing on a superyacht? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/07/crewing-on-superyachts-wealth-careers>

Beds on Board is not alone in the static yacht accommodation market, though. 
There are other specialists, such asstaticboatholidays.com 
<http://staticboatholidays.com/>, and even the likes of Airbnb and Trip Advisor 
advertise moored vessel accommodation. Plus, for those who wish to push the 
boat out and actually charter, there are inexpensive options, including sites 
such asclickandboat.com <https://www.clickandboat.com/> offering everything 
from speedboats to barges.

The private jet
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k8jh%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k8jh%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81cadb367aed12556d4aabc08a216369929e2eb1%2F0_168_4288_2572%2F4288.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20live%20like%20a%20billionaire%20on%20the%20cheap&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k8jh%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+live+like+a+billionaire+on+the+cheap&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k8jh%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81cadb367aed12556d4aabc08a216369929e2eb1%2F0_168_4288_2572%2F4288.jpg>
 ‘The captain won’t fly until you and your fellow travellers are ready.’ 
Photograph: Privatefly/Courtesy of Cessna 
Why spend hours parking your car miles from the main terminal, queuing to drop 
off your luggage and buying an oversized Toblerone in duty free, when you and 
friends can be driven directly to the steps of your own private jet and fly off 
to Paris for as little as £100?

Hard to believe, but this scenario is possible thanks to peer-to-peer site 
privatefly.com <http://www.privatefly.com/> – you just need to be a little 
flexible with your dates and timings.

“We provide access to [anything] from small four-seater propeller planes to 
converted Boeing 737 business jets complete with state rooms, showers, bars and 
all sorts,” explains PrivateFly’s CEO, Adam Twidell, a former RAF pilot.

The booking process works much the same way as it does for a normal airline. 
You put a request in for a location, date and time and you receive about 10 
different aircraft options back. Costs vary depending on the length of the 
flight and the size of the aircraft you book.

To get the cheapest seats, customers need to book on an empty leg. This is 
when someone has already booked to fly from, say, Nice to London Luton in the 
morning, and the plane then needs to reposition back to Nice in the afternoon, 
so PrivateFly will try to sell tickets for that journey. Prices can be as much 
as 80% cheaper than a normal private flight.

“This is ideal for a group of friends who are flexible on locations and can 
pack their bags and be ready to go. It’s the element of surprise that really 
appeals,” says Twidell. “The obvious problem is the original customer could 
delay or even cancel their flight at any time, which would prevent you from 
flying.”

But possibly the biggest draw of private-jet flying is the ease of travel and 
service. Customers flying from Luton, for example, would go to the separate 
private terminal (FBO – Fixed Base Operations) where, if they are regulars, 
they would head straight to the jet, or, if first-timers, would have lunch with 
the captain first in the lounge, and then be airborne less than five minutes 
later.

“The captain won’t fly until you and your fellow travellers are ready,” says 
Twidell.

Just be warned that if you fly on one of the smaller jets there’s limited 
space. On theCessna Citation Mustang <http://cessna.txtav.com/citation/mustang>
, for example, if you’re desperate to go, the only toilet is a spare seat known 
as an “emergency potty” between the passengers and the pilot, with a curtain 
you pull across for privacy.

As with the superyachts, there are a few other private jet providers out there 
offering discounted flights, including new outfitStrataJet 
<https://www.stratajet.com/>, which has access to 500 private jets.

The luxury hotel

The market for luxury accommodation is bigger than ever and hotels are bending 
over backwards with lower prices and additional perks. The Four Seasons in 
Florence, for example, offers guests exclusive meals on the Ponte Vecchio, 
while a major hotel in Amsterdam provides guided tours of the city with a 
descendent of Van Gogh. Both of these stays cost from £150 a night.

“There are ways to secure a quality stay without paying full whack,” says 
James Lohan, founder of luxury boutique hotels websiteMr & Mrs Smith 
<https://www.mrandmrssmith.com>. “Signing up to a travel club will often mean 
access to exclusive deals; private-sale sites can be a great source, but look 
carefully before you buy – don’t be blinded by offers that chain you to 
travelling in the middle of the night.”

Lohan also points out that, if you can, travel in a shoulder (off-peak) 
season. Ideally, fly midweek rather than on Friday night, and – if you don’t 
have children – outside of school holidays; your journey will be quieter and 
better value. Country-house hotels often have lower rates on weeknights.

Furthermore, for long-haul trips, it pays to do your homework. In Mauritius, 
for example, you will see February billed as “rainy season”, but it can rain 
for less than an hour a day: totally manageable, especially when you see the 
price difference with peak season.

“Hotels that require an extra leg to get to often have lower rates than those 
close to an airport with direct flights. If you consider a short drive through 
unfamiliar countryside, or a ferry ride in Greece past stunning islands, as 
part of the holiday you’re on to a winner,” says Lohan.
