
It’s been a challenging year for those working in universities: we know, 
because you’ve told us. OurAcademics Anonymous 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/series/academics-anonymous>
 series has provided a platform for our higher education community to tell it 
like it really is and you’ve made the most of it, with fascinating results. 
Here are our most popular pieces from the past 12 months.

My students have paid £9,000 and now they think they own me 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/dec/18/my-students-have-paid-9000-and-now-they-think-they-own-me>

The introduction of £9,000 fees has had many consequences – but an unintended 
one has been the impact on students’ perception of scholarship, says this 
frustrated academic. “Learning has shifted from an intellectual achievement to 
a commodity,” they write, in a blog that strikes a chord with so many that it 
has received more 4,000 comments so far.

Academics are being hoodwinked into writing books nobody can buy 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/sep/04/academics-are-being-hoodwinked-into-writing-books-nobody-can-buy>

“An editor called me up to ask me if I’d like to write a book. I smelled a 
rat, but I played along …” So begins a strange tale of aggressive publishing 
practices, duped academics, and libraries stuffed with tomes of dubious 
quality. An engrossing read.

Only the rich can afford to work at Oxford and Cambridge 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/nov/20/only-the-rich-can-afford-to-work-at-oxford-and-cambridge>

As the first of their family to go to university, this young academic was 
delighted to win a place to study, and then work, at a prestigious Oxbridge 
college – only to be battered by the low salary, exorbitant cost of living and 
enormous workload. “The Oxbridge name does open many doors but other 
opportunities, like home ownership and quality family time, are closed to me as 
long as I am here.”

‘My professor demands to be listed as an author on many of my papers’ 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/jun/05/my-professor-demand-to-be-listed-author-on-research-paper>

Integrity is everything in scientific publishing – except when it comes to 
claiming authorship of papers, says this researcher. Dodgy practices are put 
under the spotlight here, along with the power imbalance that traps young 
academics. “He could refuse to assign any master’s students to my projects, or 
to nominate me for prizes, and he could be less likely to ask me to collaborate 
with him; unfortunately, these things are essential.”

Bad PhD supervisors can ruin research. So why aren’t they accountable? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/dec/11/bad-phd-supervisors-can-ruin-research-so-why-arent-they-accountable>

The right research supervisor can be inspirational – but the wrong one can 
have a devastating impact, as the author of this personal account explains: 
“The most negatively couched feedback not only hampered my progress, but left 
me wondering if I should be doing a PhD at all.” Could a better system of 
accountability be the answer?

Academics, you need to be managed. It’s time to accept that 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/aug/21/academics-you-need-to-be-managed-its-time-to-accept-that>

Universities are spaces for world-changing thought and reflection, right? Yep, 
says this professor, but they are also huge institutions and therefore require 
organisation and management. “This can be done well, it can be done 
indifferently, and it can be done badly … But academic managers are mostly just 
trying to ensure we all still have a university to work in.”

Teaching at a university means constant pressure - for about £5 an hour 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/dec/04/phd-student-poor-pay-making-me-want-to-quit>

The use of casual contracts in academia is a thorny topic – and one that 
doesn’t seem to be going anywhere any time soon. The problem, writes this young 
researcher, is that such cost-cutting can make the job feel dangerously 
pressurised and nigh-on unbearable: “Why do I feel like giving it all up? 
Because the reality of teaching in a university is becoming less and less 
appealing.”

What’s wrong with academics making friends with students? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/jun/26/whats-wrong-with-academics-making-friends-with-students>

Is it OK to host a party for your class at the end of their course? How about 
staying the night at a student’s house? We’re all adults, says this academic, 
adding: “The mollycoddling of students is reaching an excessive level, with 
lecturers expected to treat them like schoolchildren.”

I’m a mother but I can still do serious research 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/apr/09/im-a-mother-but-i-can-still-do-serious-research>

“My maternity leave saw me morph from a distractable PhD candidate, constantly 
beset by imposter syndrome, into a serious researcher with a new sense of 
determination,” writes this young academic. So why do some colleagues insist on 
treating motherhood as a failing?

Our obsession with metrics turns academics into data drones 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/nov/27/our-obsession-with-metrics-turns-academics-into-data-drones>

What’s your Ref score? How is your students’ learning gain? Will you do well 
in the Tef? All this measurement is turning us into obsessive automatons, says 
this academic, and we’re in danger of losing sight of the job we’re here to do. 
“Creativity, love of knowledge and thirst for discovery are things we should 
teach, incentivise and promulgate.”

Do you have an idea for an Academics Anonymous blog? Read through our blogging 
guidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
, and email a pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. 
