
UK mental health policy is in disarray. It’s a message coming from all 
quarters – even former care minister Norman Lamb is now condemning practices 
such asshunting people in crisis across the country in search of beds 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/may/18/norman-lamb-hospital-beds-far-from-home-inhumane>
 – a policy for which he was responsible when in office.

But the issue is not only about a failure to achieve parity with physical 
health in terms of vastly inferior funding.Mental health 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/mental-health> policy now lags 
behind its physical health equivalent by perhaps 50 years in terms of 
innovation and effectiveness. We need new thinking, and that does not seem to 
have been forthcoming from policymakers of many political colours. Instead, as 
a new Joseph Rowntree Foundation study suggests, we might do better to turn to 
the ideas and lived experience of mental health service users and their 
organisations.


Related: Personal budgets don't work. So why are we ignoring the evidence? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/may/05/personal-budgets-health-care-nao-report>

These are set out in a new report of a national project 
<http://www.shapingourlives.org.uk/resources/our-resources/all-publications/from-mental-illness>
, of which I am one of the authors, based on speaking to more than 80 mental 
health service users. Most felt professionals and the public interpreted mental 
health issues through a narrow medical model, seeing the problem primarily in 
the individual. They saw this approach as inherently stigmatising and damaging, 
and associated it with an unhelpful over-emphasis on drug treatment.


The idea of “recovery” has become a guiding principle for UK mental health 
policy and provision in recent years. For the report, we asked service users 
what they thought about it.

Participants had mixed views on whether it was helpful for service users. Most 
felt that the idea could be helpful, but that the policy as implemented is not. 
Many felt it perpetuates a medicalised individual model of mental health and is 
not based on listening to service users.

There were strong feelings that the idea, which was supposed to be user-led, 
has been hijacked by a narrowly framed government policy, which puts increasing 
responsibility on the individual to deal with their difficulties. Its central 
aims were seen as saving money, cutting services and getting people off 
benefits and into paid work, regardless of how helpful or realistic that was 
for them. Many highlighted how welfare reform policies undermine whatever 
positives mental health policy and practice still offers.


Mental health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/mental-health> service 
users were divided about whether the social model of disability could helpfully 
be extended to their experience. But most felt that social approaches to mental 
health, which take account of the whole person and wider societal issues 
affecting them, would be the most helpful. Some felt such social approaches 
needed to be incorporated more widely in medical practice. They valued a 
holistic or combined approach which takes account of both the individual and 
their social circumstances.

Findings highlighted the complexity of service users’ views, their reluctance 
to impose monolithic interpretations on their experiences and desire to take 
account of both personal and social issues. So, for example, while some 
preferred the language of “madness” over “mental health”, others were 
uncomfortable with it.

For the future, service users call for more funding for mental health, 
redistributed to smaller user-led and community based initiatives. They want to 
see social approaches to distress incorporated much more in policy, services, 
preventive and early intervention work and professional training; more value 
place on their experiential knowledge and more user involvement in research. 
They want to see a different approach to welfare reform based on supporting 
people to make the most of their lives, rather than having to demonstrate 
incapacity. They offer a blueprint for truly modernising mental health thinking 
and policy.

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
