
At a time when robots crowd factory lines, algorithms steer cars and smart 
screens litter the checkout aisles, automation is the new spectre. The robots, 
they say, are coming for our jobs.

Let them, reply the luxury communists. 

The new age offers a number of undeniable boons and advancements ... that 
promise to make drudgery redundant

Cybernetic meadows and machines of loving grace

Located on the futurist left end of the political spectrum, fully automated 
luxury communism (FALC) aims to embrace automation to its fullest extent. The 
term may seem oxymoronic, but that’s part of the point: anything labeled luxury 
communism is going to be hard to ignore.

 “There is a tendency in capitalism to automate labor, to turn things 
previously done by humans into automated functions,” says Aaron Bastani, 
co-founder of Novara Media. “In recognition of that, then the only utopian 
demand can be for the full automation of everything and common ownership of 
that which is automated.”

Bastani and fellow luxury communists believe that this era of rapid change is 
an opportunity to realise a post-work society, where machines do the heavy 
lifting not for profit but for the people.

“The demand would be a 10- or 12-hour working week, a guaranteed social wage, 
universally guaranteed housing, education, healthcare and so on,” he says. 
“There may be some work that will still need to be done by humans, like quality 
control, but it would be minimal.” Humanity would get its cybernetic meadow, 
tended to by machines of loving grace.

Related: The way we live now: the rise of the energy-producing home 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/mar/16/live-rise-energy-producing-home-architecture>

“Take Uber. Huge company,” Bastani says. “Its idea is that by 2030 it will 
have this huge global network of driverless cars. That doesn’t need to be 
performed by a private company. Why would you have that? In London, we have 
Boris bikes. Why couldn’t we have something like Uber with driverless cars 
provided at a municipal level without a profit motive?”

This is just the beginning

The ideology springs from a tangle of well-observed trends. Generally, the 
rate of technological progress and labour productivity is rising,but wages are 
stagnating 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/01/13/sunday-review/americas-productivity-climbs-but-wages-stagnate.html?_r=0>
 andfactories are shedding jobs 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/wonkblog/wp/2013/07/05/bad-news-were-shedding-factory-jobs-again/>
. Recent research indicates that35% of jobs in the UK are “at risk” of being 
automated 
<http://www2.deloitte.com/uk/en/pages/press-releases/articles/deloitte-one-third-of-jobs-in-the-uk-at-risk-from-automation.html>
. And MIT professors Erik Brynjolfsson and James McAfee argue persuasively in 
their oft-citedSecond Machine Age <http://www.secondmachineage.com/> that the 
robots are just getting started.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F46tfa%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F46tfa%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F13%2F1426262146897%2F3482edc8-2b5a-4edf-9ce2-88c28ba2cba4-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fully%20automated%20luxury%20communism&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F46tfa%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fully+automated+luxury+communism&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F46tfa%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F13%2F1426262146897%2F3482edc8-2b5a-4edf-9ce2-88c28ba2cba4-1020x612.jpeg>
 Humanity’s cybernetic meadows will be tended to by machines with loving grace. 
Photograph: HD Wallpaper 
The automatons of this new age offer a number of advantages beyond automation 
that promise to make drudgery redundant, including 3D-printing and algorithms 
smart enough almost to pass for human. An age of machine-abetted plenty appears 
to loom around the corner.

“I’m not saying we’re there yet, though in certain areas we clearly are,” 
Bastani says. “Take video and audio content – we’ve reached post-scarcity with 
that. A Spotify or an iTunes or a Wikipedia-style model doesn’t feed people, 
obviously. But the claim could be that this is the leading edge of a set of 
trends for software, but also, soon, for hardware. Because that’s attendant 
with the rise of solid freeform fabrication, 3D-printing, synthetic biology.”

Bastani isn’t alone in evangelising an era of mass robo-luxury. Members of the 
leftwing groupPlan C  <http://www.weareplanc.org/category/work#.VP-7JnDF83I>
deploy the slogan “Luxury for all” in their agitations, and a sharply-designed 
Tumblr,Luxury Communism <http://luxurycommunism.tumblr.com/>, trumpets 
sympathetic ideas. The maxim has been showing up at student protests.

Likewise, Brynjolfsson doesn’t find the idea of machine-generated populist 
luxury outlandish. On the contrary. “A world of increasing abundance, even 
luxury, is not only possible, but likely,” he says. “Many of things we consider 
necessities today – phone service, automobiles, Saturdays off – were luxuries 
in the past.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F46tfa%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F46tfa%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F13%2F1426259460331%2Fea01b524-2139-492b-8456-9b9f71a58993-1608x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fully%20automated%20luxury%20communism&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F46tfa%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fully+automated+luxury+communism&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F46tfa%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F13%2F1426259460331%2Fea01b524-2139-492b-8456-9b9f71a58993-1608x2040.jpeg>
 ‘Fully automated luxury communism is about seizing the bakery rather than 
stealing the bread.’ Photograph: Bettmann/Corbis 
“Technology can create enormous bounty,” Brynjolfsson wrote, “but the road to 
abundance may be very rocky as existing business models and ways of creating 
value are disrupted.”

British luxury communism 

British luxury communism has its origins in the mid-00s protest movement, 
according to Plan C, when its members spotted the slogan “Luxury for All” at a 
demonstration in Berlin.

“It seemed to us that this demand neatly summed up the aims of a modern 
communist movement,” say Plan C members. They believe its tenets were initially 
inspired by Kim Stanley Robinson’s Red Mars trilogy, wherein a socialist utopia 
is established on the Red Planet.A Pattern Language 
<https://archive.org/details/APatternLanguage>, a 1970s utopian tract written 
by three architects, was also an inspiration. Bastani says his conception of 
FALC is based on a modern reading of Marx’s Capital and Grundrisse.

Related: Company offers rain-free wedding days for £100,000 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/mar/11/rain-free-weddings-company>

Of course, history is littered with the blueprints of unrealised 
techno-utopias and work-free leisure societies. Thinkers as varied as Marx and 
Bertrand Russell were certain science, technology and human cooperation were on 
the verge of liberating humanity from the bondage of labour.

“The vision of giving many, if not most, ordinary citizens vastly reduced 
workloads is a very old notion in utopian thought and writings,” says Howard 
Segal, professor of the history of science and technology at the University of 
Maine and author of Utopias: A Brief History.

He points to Edward Bellamy’s industrial army in Looking Backward (1888) and 
the writings of the Technocrats in the mid-1900s. But luxury communism perhaps 
finds a more current cultural analogue in sci-fi visions such as Star Trek, 
with its replicators and egalitarian politics, or the late Iain Banks’ 
high-tech post-scarcityCulture <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Culture> 
universe.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F46tfa%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F46tfa%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F13%2F1426262659578%2F2415628a-925d-4deb-85e3-b8b03c1658dc-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fully%20automated%20luxury%20communism&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F46tfa%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fully+automated+luxury+communism&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F46tfa%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F13%2F1426262659578%2F2415628a-925d-4deb-85e3-b8b03c1658dc-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Automated dog versus its original. Photograph: Toshifumi Kitamura/AFP/Getty 
Images 
Eventually, Bastani sees FALC achieving something closer to that — a society 
with collective control over its own high-tech, work-reducing gadgets. He 
believes what little work will be necessary in the future, such as optimising 
3D-printers and agricultural robots, will be organised much the way editors 
currently manage Wikipedia — in a decentralised, non-hierarchical fashion.

But before then, and in order to get there, he hopes to use the luxury 
communist label to win converts to the cause. Ultimately, this is about 
politics.

Consider the Atlanta rapper Migos’ hit song, Versace, he says. “You get these 
music videos the kids love, where it’s completely outlandish, luxury 
everywhere. The story of capitalism is that if you work hard and play by the 
rules you can get this, which is obviously bullshit.

“But if you say, well look, if you want this, what you need to do is seize the 
means of production. We need to get automation and make it subordinate to human 
needs, not the profit motive. It’s about seizing the bakery rather than 
stealing the bread.” With robots presumably kneading the dough.

The technology and innovation hub 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/series/technology-and-innovation>
 is funded by BT. All content is editorially independent except for pieces 
labelled “brought to you by”. Find out morehere 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.

Join the community of sustainability professionals and experts. Become a GSB 
member <https://register.guardian.co.uk/sustainable-business/> to get more 
stories like this direct to your inbox.
