
The number of public sector workers earning more than the prime minister looks 
set to soar thanks to the academies scheme, calculations by the government’s 
own national schools commissioner, Sir David Carter, suggest.

A spreadsheet 
<https://www.dropbox.com/s/7267o8lk3rpf1sm/dcartermatsustainabilitymodel.xlsx?dl=0>
 written by Carter for a presentation last month, seen by Education Guardian, 
assumes that any multi-academy trust with at least 10 schools and including two 
secondaries will have a chief executive at a salary of £150,000.

Related: The academy chiefs of the future? They will be largely white and very 
male 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/12/multi-academy-trusts-chiefs-primary-schools-david-carter>

With 21,000 state-funded schools in England, and with Carter also having 
suggested 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/12/multi-academy-trusts-chiefs-primary-schools-david-carter>
 that there may be 1,000 new multi-academy trusts by 2020, that looks like a 
large number of high earners.

The TaxPayers’ Alliance, which campaigns against high public sector pay, said 
last year <http://www.taxpayersalliance.com/psrl_town_hall_rich_list_2015> 
there were only 537 people earning £150,000 or more across the whole of UK 
local government. David Cameron earns £143,462. Might this be a case where a 
change of organisation – the government wants all schools to move away from 
local authorities to take on academy status, most under multi-academy trusts – 
results in a much larger bill for taxpayers?

The Department for Education said academies were subject to a “rigorous system 
of accountability and oversight” but otherwise offered no comment.

Schools consultancy transparency needed


Government rules 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/469495/Academies_Financial_Handbook2015.pdf>
 state that academy trusts that buy services from companies run by someone who 
is a trustee of the academy chain must do so “at cost”, suggesting no profit is 
made. But what does this mean in practice?

Our interest was piqued after reading the 2015 accounts of an organisation 
that runs seven free schools, the London-based Bellevue Place Education Trust 
(BPET). It lists payments of £206,258 to enable a private consultancy called 
Place Group to set up four of those free schools in 2014-15.

This is declared under “related party” payments in the accounts. However, it 
is not stated specifically that Claire Delaney, chair of trustees of BPET, is 
also managing director of Place Group, in which she holds a 22.5% shareholding 
stake, or that Simon Rule, Place Group’s chief executive, is another BPET 
trustee and also owns 22.5% of Place Group.

The BPET accounts 
<https://beta.companieshouse.gov.uk/company/07956784/filing-history> say 
another company, Schools’ Buying Club, was selected to be the “procurement 
provider” – selecting which firms’ services should be bought by the trust – and 
that although there is no charge [to BPET] for Schools’ Buying Club’s work, 
“the successful provide [sic] is instead charged as a percentage of the overall 
contract”.

Delaney and Rule are directors of Schools’ Buying Club and both own 22.5% 
shares in the company. The relationship is not specified explicitly in BPET’s 
accounts.

A report 
<https://www.parliament.uk/documents/commons-committees/Education/Conflicts-of-interest-in-academies-report.pdf>
 18 months ago for the Commons education select committee questioned what “at 
cost” actually meant and called for greater transparency. In this case, 
although the full contract details are not specified in BPET accounts, Place 
Group told us that both it and Schools’ Buying Club had complied fully with 
guidelines and both had actually made losses on BPET work.

Delaney said the contracts won by Place Group and Schools’ Buying Club had 
been subject to a formal tendering process, and that “directors who are related 
parties stepped away from any involvement” in that process. Both companies’ 
bids followed DfE guidance on what “at cost” meant, she said, and the DfE was 
fully aware of all relationships and related party transactions. Mark Greatrex, 
BPET chief executive, added that Place Group was one of five companies invited 
to tender for the free schools work and that having Place Group’s “outstanding” 
services available at cost had led to significant savings for BPET.

That all sounds like a good thing for the taxpayer, then. But perhaps it would 
be better if the DfE ensured fuller details were published in accounts to 
promote transparency.

Sparks fly as Bromley ends utilities contract


A local authority lauded in last month’s education white paper 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/12/tory-education-plans-schools-government-academies>
 for urging all its schools to become academies has brought more controversy to 
the debate by ending a gas and electricity contract it has negotiated for them 
in the past.

An email allegedly sent without warning to schools in Bromley earlier this 
month essentially told them they were on their own in negotiating new deals for 
the utilities they use from October, with the council having decided not to 
continue with the contract it offers.

“Your organisation will need to purchase energy services directly from the 
open market … from 1 October onwards,” says the email.

Most, but not all, schools in the south London borough are academies. Bromley 
says the schools are free to remain with their existing provider if they want. 
But contracts will need to be renegotiated by them, with the email warning 
bluntly that schools doing nothing will face “out of contract/penalty rates”.

One Bromley headteacher says: “With all the things I have to deal with as a 
head, working so hard as we are to try to improve our schools, where am I 
supposed to get the time to spend on this? There is no sign of the local 
authority doing anything to help: it is like they are trying to wash their 
hands of us.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4thgm%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4thgm%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb222b64c172ec66ac108e85b6e5bdd7869efda1%2F0_474_3529_4411%2F3529.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20government%20plans%20lead%20to%201%2C000%20academy%20chiefs%20paid%20%C2%A3150%2C000%2B%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4thgm%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will+government+plans+lead+to+1%2C000+academy+chiefs+paid+%C2%A3150%2C000%2B%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4thgm%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb222b64c172ec66ac108e85b6e5bdd7869efda1%2F0_474_3529_4411%2F3529.jpg>
 Rachel de Souza … excited. Photograph: Teri Pengilley for the Guardian 
A Bromley spokesperson says: “This is another example of allowing academies to 
take control of their own budgets, freeing them to negotiate the many 
attractive deals now available. Bromley is proud to be leading the way with the 
academy process.”

That sounds like small comfort to our headteacher source.

Exciting times ahead for Rachel de Souza?


“Busy week ahead … an imp meeting with exceptional people. Maybe the start of 
something BIG #edreform,” tweeteddiary favourite Dame Rachel de Souza 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jul/28/academy-trust-sick-hewett-school-norwich-ofsted-inspiration-trust>
 breathlessly 10 days ago. We understand that the final round of interviews for 
England’s new chief inspector of schools may have taken place last week. Are 
these two sentences connected? A fair few people who have followed De Souza’s 
career closely,as we have 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/15/golden-goodbye-payments-academy-soar-harris>
, are waiting with bated breath.
