
The leader of the Scottish Conservatives 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives>, has predicted her party 
will beat Labour into third place for the first time in the history of the 
Holyrood parliament.

With just one full day of campaigning left before Thursday’s elections, Ruth 
Davidson <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/ruth-davidson> said her party’s 
internal polling leaves her confident that the Tories will be returned as the 
official opposition to the SNP.


“We know what the crossover point is, we know the percentage that we need to 
get pastLabour <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour>, and we’re there,” 
she said.


Related: 5 May: your guide to this week's local and mayoral elections 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/02/5-may-your-election-guide> 

With polling consistently placing the SNP at about 50%, the nationalists are 
expected to win the majority of constituency seats, with Labour and the 
Conservatives locked in an unprecedented battle for second place over the 
remaining regional list seats.


Polling for the Daily Record published on Tuesday morning 
<http://www.dailyrecord.co.uk/news/politics/clock-ticking-labour-new-poll-7882872#1skVMlkFqt3v3k1O.97>
 shows the parties are neck and neck, but Davidson told the Guardian she 
believes the Tories are marginally ahead.

Acknowledging that the Holyrood voting system, which selects the list seats 
proportionately, is difficult to predict, Davidson said: “I think it will be 
close. I think you’ll be able to count on the fingers of one hand the 
difference between us but I think our nose is in front. I think it’s on.”


Conservative strategists have extrapolated from recent YouGov figures that up 
to 150,000 voters, who backed the UK in the 2014 independence referendum and 
then supported Labour or the Lib Dems in last year’s general election, could 
switch to Davidson’s party, which is targeting them with its core messages of 
strong opposition to the SNP and defence of the union.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tz5b%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tz5b%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c0d1df2c0d2438f92f59a6267f3ee9ad4ada063%2F101_211_4576_2746%2F4576.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Conservatives%20will%20beat%20Labour%20in%20Scotland%2C%20says%20Ruth%20Davidson&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tz5b%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Conservatives+will+beat+Labour+in+Scotland%2C+says+Ruth+Davidson&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tz5b%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c0d1df2c0d2438f92f59a6267f3ee9ad4ada063%2F101_211_4576_2746%2F4576.jpg>
 Ruth Davidson speaks to local residents in Peterhead, Scotland. Photograph: 
Jeff J Mitchell/Getty Images 
While a substantial SNP victory seems likely, the unique interaction of the 
first (constituency) and second (regional) votes in theD’Hondt system 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/D%27Hondt_method> for allocating seats makes the 
placement of the runners up far less predictable than in a traditional first 
past the post arrangement.

Davidson’s final week strategy is also based on an understanding that the 
constitution remains the defining faultline inScottish politics 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/scotland>. She believes the independence 
question is heavily informing voters’ decision-making some 20 months after the 
referendum.

The Tory leader has underlined her party’s unionist credentials throughout the 
campaign, pledging to oppose a second independence referendum no matter what 
the outcome of June’s EU vote and directly matching the SNP’s plans for a 
summer independence drive with her own initiative to state the positive case 
for the union. She has alsobaited the Scottish Labour leader, Kezia Dugdale 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/30/nicola-sturgeon-scotland-referendum-independence-knife-edge-scottish-tory-leader-ruth-davidson>
, over the strength of her pro-union leadership.


Voters who backed remaining in the UK, according to Davidson, “by and large 
want someone who will validate the decision they made just 20 months ago”. She 
includes in this category many older, working-class Labour voters, “who look at 
Jeremy Corbyn and run a mile”.

“There is also a frustration from people who don’t support the SNP and just 
want someone to take them on. There’s a lot there for any party that says ‘we 
will stand up for the decision you made’. For some people that’s an attractive 
offer when they see a bit of chaos and confusion in the Labour party both north 
and south of the border.”
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fsnp-scottish-labour-elections-politics-video&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fsnp-scottish-labour-elections-politics-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20long%20can%20the%20SNP%20own%20Scottish%20politics%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fsnp-scottish-labour-elections-politics-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+long+can+the+SNP+own+Scottish+politics%3F+%E2%80%93+video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fsnp-scottish-labour-elections-politics-video&media=>
How long can the SNP own Scottish politics? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2016/apr/28/snp-scottish-labour-elections-politics-video>
Davidson is not precious about the fact that such voters may lend her their 
support on a short-term arrangement. “There’s also that latent sense of 
Scottish fairness: ‘We gave Labour two chances and the SNP are still rampant, 
let’s give someone else a go.’ And they look at me and think ‘aye her, she’ll 
do’. I’m not pretending these people love the Conservative party and are going 
to vote for us forever.”

Scottish Tory candidates, who describe themselves as “with Ruth Davidson’s 
team” rather than “Conservative” on the doorstep, say their leader’s personal 
popularity and promotion as the only woman to stand up to Nicola Sturgeon cuts 
through powerfully.

One candidate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/scotland-blog/2016/may/02/scottish-elections-new-faces-of-holyrood-2016>
 also told the Guardian that animosity towards David Cameron and George Osborne 
was “the hardest thing to overcome on the doors”. The prime minister has been 
notably absent in the final weeks of campaigning in Scotland, amid reports of 
fears that his dire approval ratings north of the border and recentquestions 
over his tax affairs 
<http://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/07/david-cameron-admits-he-profited-fathers-offshore-fund-panama-papers>
 could damage Davidson’s chances.

Did she tell Cameron not to come to Scotland 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>? “No,” she says briskly, “we had a 
conversation and he gets that I’m in charge of this. It’s the first election 
that’s wholly about me and he trusts me to get on with it.”


Davidson has worked hard to distance herself from the more elitist form of 
Conservatism that dominates. “We have huge support from working-class areas 
right across the UK. We used to have that in Scotland and we lost it and one of 
the things I’ve been working hard to do is bring it back. We will never be as 
significant a movement in Scotland as we can be if we don’t get it back,” she 
says.
