
Everyone’s talking about 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/12/bank-of-england-keeps-interest-rates-on-hold-as-brexit-fears-bite>
 what a Brexit will mean for the UK economy – and one of the most important 
issues for voters is what will happen to UK jobs. As this depends on what trade 
agreements we could negotiate with the remaining EU, the affect on careers and 
industries seems unclear.

So what do we actually know about what a Brexit will mean for UK employment? 
Economists, thinktanks, and researchers unpick the statistics to find out which 
industries are likely to suffer or flourish following Britain leaving the
European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>.

The losers: financial services, tourism, car manufacturing

“Those which are likely to be most affected by Britain leaving the EU would be 
in the service sectors that trade with the EU and sectors that benefit from the 
free movement of labour,” says Angus Armstrong, director of macroeconomics at 
the National Institute of Economic and Social Research (NIESR).

So this would include: financial services, tourism, construction and the 
automotive industry – which could lead to aloss of 950,000 jobs 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/21/brexit-could-cost-100bn-and-nearly-1m-jobs-cbi-warns>
, according to an analysis by accountancy firm PwC for the CBI.


Mike Hawes, chief executive of the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders, 
has said 
<http://www.smmt.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/SMMT-KPMG-EU-Report.pdf> 
[pdf] Europe is “fundamental to the success of the UK automotive industry”. 
Likewise, speaking about financial services, TheCityUK’s chairman, Gerry 
Grimstone,said their research 
<https://www.thecityuk.com/news/leaving-eu-poses-very-significant-risks-to-uks-future/>
: “Clearly shows leaving the EU would seriously damage economic growth and jobs 
in the UK ... London is Europe’s financial centre so there is a strong national 
interest in getting this right.”

Specific firms that have contemplated scaling back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/dec/04/goldman-sachs-warns-london-exit-britain-eu>
 their UK organisations in the event of a Brexit include: car companyHyundai 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2014/02/25/hyundai-uk-european-union_n_4853938.html>
, along with US investment bankGoldman Sachs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/dec/04/goldman-sachs-warns-london-exit-britain-eu>
.


Unemployment may also rise in the next few years if we choose to leave the EU. 
“In the short-term, we expect that a vote to leave would result in a 
significant economic downturn, with unemployment rising by up to 1.7%,”writes 
Armstrong and Jonathan Portes 
<http://ner.sagepub.com/content/236/1/2.full.pdf+html> [pdf], principle 
research fellow of NIESR, in their latest analysis. However, in the long-term 
they would expect employment and growth to recover. “Our results are less 
pessimistic than those of theTreasury 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/517415/treasury_analysis_economic_impact_of_eu_membership_web.pdf>
 [pdf] orOECD 
<https://www.oecd.org/eco/The-Economic-consequences-of-Brexit-27-april-2016.pdf>
 [pdf], with the estimated long-term hit to GDP ranging from 1.5%–3.7%.”

The winners: fishing, manufacturing, productivity

According to Ryan Bourne, head of public policy at the IEA and author of the 
EU jobs myth 
<http://www.iea.org.uk/sites/default/files/publications/files/Briefing_1502_The%20EU%20Jobs%20Myth_web.pdf>
 [pdf], the effect on UK jobs will depend on the relationship we have with the 
EU after the referendum. He argues that if we were to remain outside the single 
market, not sign a bilateral trade deal, and abolish all import tariffs, we 
would see higher-paying, more productive jobs in the UK over the long term.


Related: The Guardian view on the economics of Brexit: a fact-based fear | 
Editorial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/18/the-guardian-view-on-the-economics-of-brexit-a-fact-based-fear>

“The service sectors and very high-end manufacturing would likely flourish. We 
would also almost certainly see a boost to the UK fishing industry on leaving 
the Common Fisheries Policy.” However Bourne admits that sectors such as the 
automotive industry would be likely to face “more robust external competition”.


Another sector that might benefit if Britain were to leave the EU is renewable 
energy. “[Following a Brexit] we’d be able to reassess some of the most 
economically damaging regulations, particularly on renewable energy,” says 
Bourne.


Armstrong agrees that there will be some “possible gains of reducing 
regulations on businesses”, although he says at the moment the “benefits from 
such gains are hard to measure at a sector level”.

One thing economists agree on is that what will happen to British jobs depends 
on the trading arrangements we negotiate with the EU post-Brexit. It will be 
these terms and agreements that will influence how specific sectors are 
affected. For example, if we leave the EU, British farmers will lose the Common 
Agricultural Policy subsides. However leavecampaigners have promised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/feb/24/would-british-farmers-be-better-off-in-or-out-of-the-eu>
 this will be replaced by a UK subsidy. Likewise, if we are outside the single 
market and do not sign a bilateral trade deal, we will trade under World Trade 
Organisation rules and will then face the EU’s common external tariff.

Without knowing how Britain will agree terms with the remaining EU, we can’t 
know for certain how UK jobs and industries will change. But the industries 
that stand to be most affected will be those that rely most on trade with the 
EU and the free moment of labour within Europe.


 * This article was amended on Tuesday 24 May to remove a reference to Ford’s 
position on Brexit, which was out of date 
Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
