
What is the look of summer 2015?

Women of Britain, by email

There are, of course, plenty of lines I could spin you about this. Number one 
is some guff about the mid-length skirt, which all the fashion magazines and 
blogs are pushing as the length of the season. They do this every few years – 
by my reckoning, about every three – and it’s not a bad idea. After all, most 
style-conscious women aren’t likely to own skirts that end midway down their 
calves so they will then have to go out and buy them (there is little to be 
gained by the fashion industry from saying that, say, miniskirts are in because 
young women generally already have about a thousand shoved in a drawer at home).

Related: What to wear to a summer wedding | Alice Fisher 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/may/17/what-to-wear-to-a-summer-wedding-alice-fisher>

The reason women tend not to own many mid-length skirts is that they look 
terrible. Oh sure, some women look great in them – long, willowy women who wear 
them and look like elegant bohemian gazelles in their mid-length Marni dresses. 
But these women look elegant in anything, so who cares? The rest of us, 
however, suspect we look like substitute teachers from the 1970s and feel about 
as elegant as dumplings. (Truly, only the rangiest of gazelles feel elegant in 
a skirt that cuts across at the widest part of the calf.)

What’s that, you say? Marks & Spencer has made a mid-length skirt in suede 
that is absolutely thedernier cri? Oh please, tell me more about this skirt 
because Ihonestly don’t think it’s been written about enough everywhere 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/3am/style/celebrity-fashion/alexa-chung-marks-spencer-skirt-5197854>
in every 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-3011726/MS-skirt-thats-split-Britain-Fashionistas-love-Mail-columnist-Sarah-Vine-hates-does-Jane-Asher-think-newest-trend-suede-clothes.html>
British publication 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2015/05/14/marks-spencers-autograph-skirt-suede-alexa-chung_n_7284216.html>
! For those who have managed to avoid reading about this accursed skirt (and I 
can only assume you must be Trappist monks), M&S has knocked out some 70s-style 
skirt that was worn once by Alexa Chung (OMIGOD SCREAM OMIGOD STOP THE PRESSES 
OMIGOD, etc forever), which has therefore been deemed a Statement Piece, and 
has only just gone on sale (even though it feels like it’s been promoted since, 
as Kanye West would say, Prince was on Apollonia and OJ had Isotoners).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4929a%2Fsfb%23img-1&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4929a%2Fsfb%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F18%2F1431957849976%2F7719e0fe-16f4-47a0-9f61-80e5ab6b91b6-805x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20is%20summer%202015%E2%80%99s%20big%20fashion%20trend%3F%20(Hint%3A%20it%E2%80%99s%20not%20Alexa%20Chung%E2%80%99s%20M%26S%20skirt)&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4929a%2Fstw%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What+is+summer+2015%E2%80%99s+big+fashion+trend%3F+%28Hint%3A+it%E2%80%99s+not+Alexa+Chung%E2%80%99s+M%26S+skirt%29&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4929a%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F18%2F1431957849976%2F7719e0fe-16f4-47a0-9f61-80e5ab6b91b6-805x1020.jpeg>
 You’re never alone with a Breton top. Photograph: PR 
Now, we’ve been here before with M&S statement pieces, namely the famous (nay, 
HISTORIC)saga of the M&S pink coat 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2013/oct/14/pink-coat-fashion-buy-ask-hadley>
, which was deemed back in 2013 to be the Statement Piece. Leaving aside the 
fact that both the pink coat and suede skirt are ugly as sin (one made women 
look like Barbara Cartland in an utterly wrong way; the other makes them look 
like Jessie from Toy Story in an even worse way), the link between them is that 
they represent a triumph of M&S PR over actual fashion for women. Let me 
explain – with my years of undercover work at the coalface of fashion – how 
these Statement Pieces emerge: occasionally, a garment will be knocked out by a 
high street chain that is deemed, by its PR department, to be “marketable”. It 
will then give this garment to a photogenic celebrity (Chung or Moss, ideally, 
but random foreign celebrities, such as Blake Lively, Diane Kruger or Olivia 
Palermo will also do). As soon as one of them wears said garment, the PR 
department will email every fashion editor in the land with the subject heading 
“JUST IN” or “BREAKING” or “EXCLUSIVE”, or a similar word to denote its 
pressing newsworthiness. The fashion press will duly fall in line and promote 
the garment, mindful that this high street outlet buys a significant amount of 
advertising in its publication and therefore will not take kindly to being 
ignored. Et voila, a high street Statement Piece is born. So if you ever 
wondered at the disjunct between fashion articles telling you that women across 
Britain are “clamouring” to buy a certain item of clothing and the noted lack 
of this garment on any woman you actually know or even see on the street, now 
you know why. Truly, it’s like I’ve pulled back the curtain and revealed the 
Wizard of Oz is actually just a harassed PR named Natalie, isn’t it?

Let’s all just agree to ignore the fuss about the midi skirt, and particularly 
the M&S midi skirt, and look instead at what is actually the look of the 
summer. And that, my friends, is the Breton shirt. I know, I know – this is not 
news, right? Every single one of you has about three Breton shirts in your 
cupboard at home and one on your person right now. But I think it’s worth 
noting how fast this item has become a veritable basic for British women, 
really just over the course of the past half decade. I have one friend who 
collects them from different retailers; another who had to go cold turkey when 
she realised she owned 10. I had some friends round for a barbecue this weekend 
and there were three Breton tops between us, and there would have been four if 
I hadn’t changed moments before lunch, due to some unfortunate mustard spillage.

You won’t read about this in any of the fashion magazines because, as I say, 
there is nothing to be gained by promoting something that women already have. 
And the Breton shirt has become as much of a signifier of the British woman in 
summer as cropped trousers is of the 50-plus British woman on holiday in a warm 
climate. Some might say it is too ubiquitous to be considered proper fashion 
now, but those people can swan off in their ugly mid-length suede skirts and 
leave us be-Breton-ed ones to enjoy ourselves around the barbecue (mind the 
mustard).

Post your questions to Hadley Freeman, Ask Hadley, The Guardian, Kings Place, 
90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Email ask. hadley@theguardian.com. 
<mailto:ask.%C2%A0hadley@theguardian.com>
