
A few days before Christmas, feeling rather furtive about it, I went on a 
media diet: I quietly unsubscribed from, unfollowed or otherwise disconnected 
from several people and news sources whose output, I’d noticed, did nothing but 
bring me down. This felt like defeat. I’verailed against the popular self-help 
advice 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/may/04/oliver-burkeman-rolf-dobelli-clear-thinking>
 that you should “give up reading the news 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/apr/12/news-is-bad-rolf-dobelli>” on the 
grounds that it’s depressing and distracting: if bad stuff’s happening out 
there, my reasoning goes, I don’t want to live in an artificial bubble of 
privilege and positivity; I want to face reality. But at some point during 
2015’s relentless awfulness, it became unignorable: the days when I read about 
another mass shooting, another tale of desperate refugees or anything involving 
the words “Donald Trump” were the days I’d end up gloomier, tetchier, more 
attention-scattered. Needless to say, I channelled none of this malaise into 
making the planet better. I just got grumbly about the world, like a walking 
embodiment of that bumper-sticker: “Where are we going, and why are we in this 
handbasket?”

One problem is that merely knowing that the news focuses disproportionately on 
negative and scary stories doesn’t mean you’ll adjust your emotions 
accordingly. People like me scorn Trump and the Daily Mail for sowing 
unwarranted fears. We know that the risk of dying in traffic is vastly greater 
than from terrorism. We may even knowthat US gun crime is in dramatic decline 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2015/12/03/weve-had-a-massive-decline-in-gun-violence-in-the-united-states-heres-why/>
,that global economic inequality is decreasing, 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/posteverything/wp/2015/01/08/stop-obsessing-about-inequality-its-actually-decreasing-around-the-world/>
 or thatthere’s not much evidence that police brutality is on the rise 
<http://www.cnn.com/2015/04/20/us/police-brutality-video-social-media-attitudes/>
. (We just see more of it, thanks to smartphones.) But, apparently, the part of 
our minds that knows these facts isn’t the same part that decides whether to 
feel upbeat or despairing. It’s entirely possible to know things are pretty 
good, yet feel as if they’re terrible.

This phenomenon has curious parallels with the “busyness epidemic”. Data on 
leisure time 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2014/05/the-myth-that-americans-are-busier-than-ever/371350/>
 suggests we’re not much busier than we were, yet we feel busier, partly 
because – for “knowledge workers”, anyway – there’s no limit to the number of 
emails we can get, the demands that can be made of us, or the hours of the day 
we can be in touch with the office. Work feels infinite, but our capacities are 
finite, therefore overwhelm is inevitable. Similarly, technology connects us to 
more and more of the world’s suffering, of which there’s an essentially 
infinite amount, until feeling steamrollered by it becomes structurally 
inevitable – not a sign that life’s getting worse. And the consequences go 
beyond glumness. They include “compassion fade” 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4062481/>, the well-studied effect 
whereby our urge to help the unfortunate declines as their numbers increase.

Related: Is our destiny in our own hands? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/08/oliver-burkeman-is-destiny-in-our-own-hands>

This isn’t an argument for avoiding news entirely: I certainly don’t, and 
neither should you. (Take it from an unbiased journalist.) It’s just an 
argument for carefully pruning your incoming information streams, balancing the 
importance of staying informed against a pointless gloom that helps no one. You 
don’t want to shut out reality. But 24/7 exposure to everything purporting to 
be news these days isn’t “reality”. It paints a picture that’s equally fake – 
and way, way more stressful.

 * oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com <mailto:oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com> 