
I recently built a fort. It was a large musical fort where people could play 
and explore. It was a very serious piece of work – and it was the final piece 
of myPhD <http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/phd> portfolio.

The installation, staged at a gallery in East London, was part of an 
investigation into engaging new audiences with “musique concrète”: the art of 
making electronic compositions using sounds from natural sources.


The piece, entitled Let’s Build a Fort!, investigated childhood nostalgia. 
During the two weeks that the installation was open, I found that audience 
members wanted to share their childhoods with me – including the books that 
they’d read and the toys that they’d had (or desperately wanted).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jvgb%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jvgb%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4382ce9940089b7ab32e43aa53e43f5bb14902e8%2F137_97_1534_920%2F1534.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%20built%20a%20musical%20fort%20for%20my%20PhD&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jvgb%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I+built+a+musical+fort+for+my+PhD&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jvgb%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4382ce9940089b7ab32e43aa53e43f5bb14902e8%2F137_97_1534_920%2F1534.jpg>
 Children playing in the fort. Photograph: Lucy Harrison 
I had fantastic conversations about childhood tantrums and ways of playing. 
Audience members regressed. My favourite was a man, clearly on a date, who 
wouldn’t let his girlfriend into the fort unless she got the password right. 
That’s a relationship that’s going to last.

My PhD in composition means that I get to spend my days designing soundscapes 
that tread the fine line between being magical and creepy. I realised a while 
ago that my creations were often sinister – it has taken a lot of work to move 
away from this. Sound worlds can change drastically with the addition of a 
single note or a shift in tempo.

I mostly use everyday sounds in my work, like keys being dropped on a table or 
pages being turned. It’s fascinating to see how sound can change or take on 
different meanings in different contexts. I was once advised: “Don’t bother 
recording rain on a roof. Without seeing the rain, it sounds like bacon being 
fried.”

In addition to designing soundscapes, my research involves investigating new 
technologies and looking at how these can be used to interact with sound. This 
has involved working with electrically conductive paint, getting to grips with 
gaming technology, and relearning how to solder (a surprisingly useful skill to 
have picked up in high school).

Related: My PhD takes me to one of the last truly wild places on earth 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/feb/29/my-phd-takes-me-to-one-of-the-last-truly-wild-places-on-earth>

I chose to undertake a practice-based PhD rather than jumping into freelance 
work in order to challenge myself creatively without having to worry about 
commercial pressures. Composition is a skill and a craft, and I wanted to make 
sure that I took the time to develop and stretch myself. The research route 
means that I can stay curious and absorb all of the art and technology that’s 
being developed.

A PhD in the arts can be isolating – generally speaking, we don’t have offices 
and will instead work from home or libraries. This seems to be particularly 
common for composers. But my work is collaborative in nature and relies on me 
being out and about and communicating with a wide variety of people.

Before I started my PhD, I thought I was a very solitary person. I would work 
alone and present the finished product at a concert. My research has taught me 
that I love engaging with the public.


I have also worked with fantastically talented directors, writers and 
designers. Being part of a university has given me access to a cross-discipline 
network of people who are all looking to create and push boundaries in their 
work, and in turn, this has encouraged me to take more risks.


It’s a good time for interactive art. Technology is moving incredibly quickly 
and becoming more and more affordable. The way we consume art and music is 
changing – audiences are becoming savvier, more informed and have greater 
access to arts and technology.

Related: My PhD busts the old stereotypes about 'selfish, smug' only children 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jan/18/my-phd-busts-the-old-stereotypes-about-selfish-smug-only-children>

Companies like Artichoke <http://www.artichoke.uk.com/> (which created the 
fantastically popular Lumiere festival),Punchdrunk <http://punchdrunk.com/> and 
Secret Cinema <http://www.secretcinema.org/> have captured the public 
imagination by creating event art. They understand that audiences are looking 
for shared experiences with friends and family. In my work I’m always 
considering ways that we can learn from these experiences and apply them to 
sound art.


Now, in my final year, I have absolutely no regrets about choosing to work 
towards a PhD. It has given me the space to develop my own creative style, push 
myself further and clarify what I want to achieve creatively. I have built a 
solid foundation of skills, such as collaborative working and project 
management. And I built a fort.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
