
It is a truth universally acknowledged that economic development requires 
transport infrastructure, and another that there is no formula that precisely 
calculates the link.

In March 2015, railways and roads were described as the foundation and 
backbone of the northern powerhouse inthe document  
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/northern-transport-strategy>that 
launchedTransport for the North <http://www.transportforthenorth.com/>.

The government has to demonstrate to the people of the north that they are 
serious
Judith Blake, Leeds council leader 
Last month, chancellor George Osborne handed over £135m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/15/george-osborne-budget-to-set-transport-schemes-in-motion>
to put flesh on these bones, with the funding for preparatory work to upgrade 
the railway line between Leeds and Manchester, and an 18-mile road tunnel under 
the Peak District.

But if transport underpins the idea of regenerating the north as a network of 
city regions – which are supposed to rebalance the national economy and counter 
the might of London and the south-east – the precise form and timing of new 
infrastructure is uncertain. HS2 is not due to reach Manchester, Leeds and 
Sheffield until 2033, though there is a plan to open the line as far as Crewe 
sooner. The government hasn’t committed to anything definite.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t9y5%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t9y5%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd84f5c882312e703faa60871fd6ee4cb9e9cbcd2%2F282_482_5245_3147%2F5245.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Transport%20for%20the%20north%3A%20cutting%20through%20the%20scepticism&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t9y5%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Transport+for+the+north%3A+cutting+through+the+scepticism&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t9y5%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd84f5c882312e703faa60871fd6ee4cb9e9cbcd2%2F282_482_5245_3147%2F5245.jpg>
 Judith Blake, leader of Leeds city council, says the benefits of HS2 are 
already evident. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
In March, Labour’s shadow communities secretary Jon Trickett referred to a 
“Northern power sham”. The leader of Leeds council, Judith Blake, agrees there 
is a gulf dividing rhetoric from resources: “You have to forgive people for 
being cynical and remember there have been eye-watering differences in 
investment – £14bn for Crossrail, £1.7bn for electrification of the Great 
Western route – the transport spend per head in London is £294, in Yorkshire 
it’s £101. The government has to demonstrate to the people of the north that 
they are serious.”

But Blake says the benefits of HS2 are already evident. Blake cites Burberry’s 
plan to manufacture trench coats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/03/burberry-invest-50m-new-trenchcoat-factory-leeds>
 10 minutes from Leeds’s new station.

Birmingham city council leader, John Clancy, who holds the transport brief in 
theCore Cities group 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jan/23/new-city-centres-the-alternative-establishment>
, says: “It’s not a 2026 thing, it’s a 2016 thing, there’s no question it’s a 
game changer in terms of people’s perceptions of the city, from abroad in 
particular. It’s how you connect that to the rest of the West Midlands that is 
the big issue.”

It’s important for the north of England to have its own identity and a sense 
of what it can deliver as a whole
David Molyneux, deputy leader, Wigan council 
Two years ago Clancy wrote a book, The Secret Wealth Garden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/economics-blog/2014/may/27/local-authority-pension-fund-reforms-john-clancy-secret-wealth-garden>
, which argued that the UK’s 101 local government pension funds should merge 
and move a portion of their combined £260bn holdings into regional investment 
bonds. Combined with a more enterprising approach by councils, who could “sweat 
and securitise” their assets, he believes such measures could generate capital 
locally. But this is not to let central government off the hook. Clancy says 
that if the government proves not to be serious about devolution and 
rebalancing, “it would become a big political issue in the same way it did in 
Scotland”.

Quite what form such a threat might take is unclear, but supporters of the 
powerhouse hope thatTransport <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> for the 
North – which becomes a statutory body next year – will prove an effective 
advocate. They want the second phase of HS2 (to Leeds and Manchester) 
accelerated, as well as motorway improvements and a timetable for the upgrade 
of the east-west route from Liverpool to Hull known as HS3.

Scepticism about all this abounds, and appeared justified by a decision in 
January 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/29/government-accused-of-contempt-for-north-over-sheffield-office-closure>
 to close the Sheffield office of the Department for Business, along with 
figures showingjust 2.4% 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/07/97-of-top-officials-at-northern-powerhouse-department-work-in-london>
 of senior civil servants in the Department for Communities and Local 
Government work outside London. Blake says last month’s forced academisation 
announcement came as a shock to councils trying to join up schools with local 
businesses.

There are concerns in the north-east about being left out. Even phase two of 
HS2 only goes as far as Leeds. Helen Golightly, chief executive of the north 
east local enterprise partnership, says devolution is in its “early days” and 
most businesses “won’t be looking ahead 10 or 20 years”.

Related: Councils in the driving seat: transport devolution explained 
<http://www.theguardian.com/big-ideas/2015/sep/23/transport-devolution-powers-councils-productivity-northern-powerhouse>

Blake has some sympathy with the view that local voices risk being drowned out 
by the political and business lobbies that drive the biggest projects. “Yes 
there is a need for a much more comprehensive conversation about what people 
want and about the needs of different communities,” she says. “But alongside 
that you need a strong statement of intent in terms of the potential for growth 
and development. Investors need to be confident that we will look after the 
basics when and if they choose to invest in our areas.”

Last year’s northern powerhouse transport strategy document, like the One 
North prospectus 
<http://www.manchester.gov.uk/downloads/download/5969/one_north> that preceded 
it, contrasts the north of England with the Randstad region of the Netherlands 
and the Rhine-Ruhr in Germany, making the point that connections between towns 
and cities in those regions make them prosperous. Wigan, for example, which is 
part of Greater Manchester, is just as close to Liverpool, and Wigan council 
deputy leader, David Molyneux, whose regeneration portfolio covers transport, 
takes a close interest in its port. “It’s important for the north of England to 
have its own identity and a sense of what it can deliver as a whole,” he says, 
adding that an announcement on a pan-northern ticketing scheme is coming soon.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t9y5%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t9y5%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6fa8c7aaa1362f8efeb1bea007aaf9821362cf9b%2F0_856_2832_1699%2F2832.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Transport%20for%20the%20north%3A%20cutting%20through%20the%20scepticism&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t9y5%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Transport+for+the+north%3A+cutting+through+the+scepticism&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t9y5%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6fa8c7aaa1362f8efeb1bea007aaf9821362cf9b%2F0_856_2832_1699%2F2832.jpg>
 Liverpool MP Louise Ellman says there has to be continuous campaigning and it 
has to come from the north. Photograph: John Stillwell/PA Archive/Press 
Association Ima 
But if regional identity is one thing, fast trains are another, and Liverpool 
MP Louise Ellman, who chairs the transport select committee, says the proof of 
the powerhouse will come, if it comes, in the form of central government funds.

“We’re talking seriously about things now, which is a great leap, but things 
have to be in programmes with dates,” says Ellman. “There has to be continuous 
campaigning and it has to come from the north. I think the local authorities 
have done a great job, andTransport 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/transport> for the North 
will be the focus, and it needs businesses to be involved as well. They have to 
be connected and push it along.”

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
