
Conducting research on controversial political topics can pose serious 
challenges in some countries. Researchers face censorship, poorly stocked 
libraries, political intimidation from security services and restrictive 
copyright laws. I have learned that effective research often has less to do 
with technical skill than the ability to navigate tricky socio-political 
terrains.

Related: Banned Books Week 2015: the 10 most challenged titles – in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gallery/2015/sep/25/banned-books-week-2015-10-most-challenged-titles-in-pictures>

In countries with repressive political climates, the most valuable books are 
often hidden. In Sudan, the front shelves of bookshops and libraries are 
reserved for the most mundane and uncontroversial texts. Critical political 
works, meanwhile, are strategically placed in the darkest, dustiest corners, 
away from the keen eyes of security officials.

This is not unique to Sudan; I have been in Egyptian bookshops that keep 
political and philosophical works in the attic. On several occasions I have 
asked about a controversial book and been guided to a secret room – walls 
adorned with the faces of African nationalists, Arab Marxists, and European 
existentialists – which is only accessible to those who ask.

But censorship isn’t the only barrier. Intellectual property laws in the 
global north are restrictive. High prices and hefty import costs can mean that 
texts written about Sudan by Sudanese authors but published in the UK are just 
as inaccessible as banned books. A landmark text on slavery, for example, is 
difficult to find commercially in Sudan (likely due to the politics of its 
communist author rather than its content)and a translated version costs £61 
<http://www.palgrave.com/page/detail/slavery-in-the-sudan-mohamed-ibrahim-nugud/?K=9781137286024>
. As my colleague Anne Powell has noted, “availability does not equal access 
<http://scholarlykitchen.sspnet.org/2015/05/21/guest-post-inasps-anne-powell-on-availability-does-not-equal-access/>
”: £61 for a book is hardly accessible.

In addition, the cost of journal articles can be downright extortionate. Court 
statements – which you might expect to be accessible to citizens – cancost £26 
each behind publisher paywalls 
<http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/03056248308703531>. Unlike in the 
UK or US, where university affiliation means access to a wide range of 
journals, researchers in institutions in the global South don’t always have 
such access (although there have been initiatives byJSTOR 
<http://about.jstor.org/libraries/african-access-initiative>, Research4Life 
<http://www.research4life.org/>, and INASP 
<http://www.inasp.info/en/network/publishers/> to make some articles free or 
heavily discounted).

Related: Secret reading in Sudan | Reem Abbas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/oct/26/secret-reading-sudan-banning-books>

By contrast, intellectual property laws are comparatively lax in many poorer 
countries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2011/may/03/why-poor-countries-lead-world-piracy>
. After an unsuccessful hunt for a censored book in north-east Africa, I 
benefited from this laxness.

On this occasion I was searching on behalf of a relative, who had told me to 
ask for texts “by people imprisoned by Nasser or Sadat”. When my aunt overheard 
me saying this in a bookshop, she hurriedly ushered me out, lest I mistake a 
plain-clothes intelligence officer for a bookseller.

These officials are constantly on the lookout for members of 
“hostile”opposition groups and would have questioned my interest in such works. 
I turned to Google with hopes of finding the book in a nearby library – but 
instead my search returned a complete PDF version. I quietly thanked the 
uploader and the lax copyright laws.

Bu we must remember that where technology and books fail, people can excel. 
The historian Hanna Batatu, for example, secured access to political prisoners 
in Baqubah for his studyThe Old Social Classes and the Revolutionary Movements 
of Iraq 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Social-Classes-Revolutionary-Movements-Iraq/dp/0863565204>
.

The Iraqi penal code had banned the “propagation of communist ideals”, which 
included possession and dissemination of literature. Relevant information was 
locked in the Ministry of Interior and in the minds of prisoners, with Baqubah 
hosting a sizeable cadre of leftists. Their history was not stored in books, 
but in their memories and collective experiences.

Related: 'Where are the libraries?' The literary radical fighting Sudan's 
crackdowns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/12/sudan-save-khartoum-literary-culture>

For my research, I spoke with Sudanese trade unionists about a colleague who 
had been tortured to death in Khartoum for leading a strike in the early months 
of the coup. One of the doctors in the group had been on call when the body was 
received. He described how – in spite of the visible marks on the victim’s body 
– military doctors wrote malaria as the cause of death. Such harrowing truths 
cannot always be illuminated through books; the value of dialogue with people 
more informed and experienced than professional researchers cannot be 
overstated.

In such environments, an informal economy prevails – and within it, 
second-hand book fairs flourish. The most popular of these in Sudan isMafroosh 
<http://baraza.cdrs.columbia.edu/sketch-of-a-literary-scene/>, a glorious 
monthly spread of used books too controversial for bookshops yet battered 
enough to be affordable.

It’s not only the content of the books that’s controversial – the very act of 
preserving and disseminating is as political as banning and destroying. And 
this is, perhaps, the best solution to the challenge of seeking information in 
closed countries: to bring together the people committed to preserving recorded 
history.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
