
If I’m on TV, I make a real effort to get ready. When I go out, I want to 
relax a bit more. It’s a quick shower, a bit of moisturiser and I’m done in 15 
minutes. I host a beauty awards every year, and one of the main reasons I do it 
is the goody bag: I’ve never seen anything that makes my sister quite so happy.

I was introduced to the Murad range through it. I recommend their mattifying 
moisturiser 
<http://www.murad.co.uk/invisiblur-spf-30?gclid=CJa4kPut1MwCFeop0wodVwkArg> to 
all my girlfriends. At first, they take the mickey, but then they use it and 
say, “Oh my god, this is amazing.”

Back in the day, my friends and I would go out to buy a shirt for a Saturday 
night, whereas now it is a case of looking in the wardrobe to see what’s there. 
I take most time over my shoes, because I’m not very good at putting things 
together. I recently asked a stylist to go through my wardrobe for work and she 
was like, “No, no, do you have anything to go with this? No?” It was awkward. 
She went to buy more clothes.

I love a good suit. I don’t often get to wear one, but if I have a presenting 
gig, I make sure everything is crisp. Most of the money I spend on clothes 
probably goes onThom Sweeney suits <https://www.thomsweeney.co.uk>: he does a 
lot forDermot O’Leary <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/dermot-oleary>, 
David Gandy 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/oct/03/how-i-get-ready-david-gandy> and
Jamie Redknapp 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/aug/10/jamie-redknapp-this-much-i-know>
, and I’ve never seen those boys look bad in a suit.

Related: Frankie Dettori: ‘I use perfume four times a day’ 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/apr/30/how-i-get-ready-frankie-dettori>

I don’t know why, but I often find myself in darker colours. Last Saturday, I 
went out with two mates and we were all wearing black and I was like, “Boys, 
seriously, somebody needs to change. We look like a past-it boy band.”

• Gethin Jones is an ambassador for Speedo’s Dive In 
<http://www.speedo.co.uk/dive-in> campaign movement, which offers 10,000 free 
swim fit sessions across the UK.
