
We often hear about people being disengaged from politics because of age, 
gender, race or background. However, people with learning disabilities are one 
disenfranchised group rarely spoken of.

I have Asperger syndrome and am aware of the challenges people with autism and 
learning disabilities face; from finding a job to carrying out regular everyday 
tasks such as planning a journey. For many, getting to grips with politics is 
just another challenge and a potential cause of isolation.

People with learning disabilities have the same right to vote as any other 
adult. But historically they have not always been considered an important part 
of the electorate.

I grew up with BBC Radio 4 as the default station in my house and, as such, 
politics has always been close to my heart. I realise, however, that not 
everyone shares my passion or finds politics easy to understand.

With the EU referendum <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> 
coming up, there has never been a more important time to make sure that the 1.5 
million people in the UK with learning disabilities have their say by voting. I 
have been working with United Response, a national disability charity, to try 
and make politics more accessible to this marginalised group.

For those who understand politics, it’s easy to forget how complicated even 
the most straightforward things can be. Too often, politicians focus on their 
image and fail to properly communicate with their audience. A photo opportunity 
is easy, but making sure that everybody can understand your views is difficult.

I recently took to the streets of my home town Newquay in Cornwall, to find 
out what people think of people think of the EU. Many people I spoke to had 
trouble saying or defining what the EU is or does. If the general public are 
struggling to understand the debate, it’s hardly surprising that people with 
literacy or communication difficulties are disengaged.

Accessible information is the key to voter engagement for people with learning 
disabilities. This is true of all political campaigns and the EU referendum is 
no exception. It is easy for the mainstream press to assume that everybody 
knows what the EU is, but too often the facts are clouded in buzzwords and 
jargon.

In the buildup to the 2015 general election, I campaigned with United Response 
to encourage people with learning disabilities to register and vote. We urged 
politicians to produce accessible information for people with learning 
disabilities and created easy read versions of the party manifestoes.

I interviewed politicians 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8U9pjTo1rC0&list=PLl79ZsuMB5ba31HxoHvTiaTtHRnDo9N2Z>
 from across the political spectrum because I wanted them to see how important 
people with learning disabilities are as voters. I was delighted when we 
managed to get the party leaders to commit to making their campaigns more 
accessible.

Related: Brexit could undermine the rights of disabled people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/mar/11/brexit-could-undermine-the-rights-of-disabled-people>

At the end of the campaign, we found that 43% of the surveyed people with 
learning disabilities supported by United Response voted at the general 
election in May – a 10% increase on numbers from 2010. 31% stated that they 
were first time voters, with only 14% saying this was due to age. What’s even 
more important is that 71% of the survey respondents found easy read 
information helpful, demonstrating that some clear communication can go a long 
way.

This year, I have been working for United Response again to create an 
accessible guide to the EU referendum 
<http://www.unitedresponse.org.uk/easy-news>. Alongside my colleagues, all of 
whom have either a learning disability or autism, we’ve created an easy read 
guide which explains the key arguments for staying in and leaving the EU in an 
unbiased format. We hope this will enable people to make an informed decision 
and exercise their democratic right on the 23rd June.

The outcome of the EU referendum, whatever it may be, will have a profound 
impact on everybody living in the UK. When it comes to making this important 
decision, let’s make sureevery vote counts <http://www.everyvotecounts.org.uk/>.

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
