
“If you gotta ask, you’ll never know,” Louis Armstrong once said when asked 
“what is jazz?”

The same could be said of the EU, which can be just as convoluted, raucous and 
dissonant at times: a fissiparous alliance of 28 countries, a cluster of 
institutions in Brussels, the world’s biggest transnational economy, a 
collection of treaties, a budget of €150bn, a never-ending succession of 
well-catered summits …

Before voters turn out for the referendum on Britain’s EU membership on 23 
June, it is vital to understand how theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> works, and how it decides on the laws 
and regulations that affect the lives of 500 million people.

Institutions

There are at least a dozen, but the most important are:

The European commission (Brussels): the executive, composed of a president 
(currently Jean-Claude Juncker of Luxembourg) and 27 commissioners – one from 
each country. The commission proposes new laws and policies and ensures that EU 
law is applied. People complain it is not elected - but then neither is the 
British civil service.

The European parliament (Brussels and Strasbourg): the 751-member legislature, 
comprising MEPs from all 28 countries, which passes laws based on commission 
proposals. Elections are held every five years. UK voters elect 73 British MEPs.
Number of MEPs per EU country 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/05/eu_meps-zip/giv-12515v74PCZ5F5CdG>
The Council of the European Union (also known as the Council of Ministers): 
comprises government ministers from all 28 nations and together with the 
parliament forms the main decision-making body of the EU.

The European council: a body that brings together EU leaders to set the 
general policy direction for the EU, most notably in quarterly summits, chaired 
by a sitting president (currently Poland’s Donald Tusk). Summits generally 
start on Thursdays and finish when the last person goes to bed. All leaders are 
democratically elected heads of government.

The European Central Bank (Frankfurt): manages the euro and sets eurozone 
monetary policy.

The European court of justice (Luxembourg): interprets EU laws and arbitrates 
disputes.

Member states: 

The EU 28 are, in order of accession: Belgium, Luxembourg, Netherlands, 
France, Germany, Italy; Britain, Denmark, Ireland ; Greece; Spain, Portugal; 
Austria, Finland, Sweden; Czech Republic, Slovakia, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, 
Cyprus, Malta, Poland, Hungary, Slovenia; Bulgaria, Romania; and Croatia.

Only one territory has ever voted to quit the EU: Greenland in 1985, six years 
after a referendum. It could be argued that Algeria was a member of the EEC as 
it was a part of France until gaining independence in 1962.
Years in which each member state joined the EU 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/05/eu_accession-zip/giv-12515AAGXE5TyDv1x>
The EU has changed its name and purpose over the years, reflecting moves 
towards closer integration. TheEuropean Coal and Steel Community 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2002/jul/19/worlddispatch.eu>, founded in 
the early 1950s essentially as a tariff-cutting initiative, was joined by, and 
later merged with, the European Economic Community (EEC) in 1957. The European 
Community came into being in 1993 at the same time as the European Union, an 
overarching body whose name rapidly became the preferred term of reference.

Principal landmarks along the way include the common agricultural policy – an 
enormous subsidy programme – established in 1962; the removal of all internal 
tariffs (1968), the Single European Act (1987), which committed members to 
removing all remaining barriers to a common market by 1992; the Maastricht 
treaty (1993), which paved the way for the single currency; and the Lisbon 
treaty (2009), which overhauled the institutions.

Values

EU nations must be democracies with high levels of tolerance of liberty, 
equality, minorities, rule of law and respect for human rights. Other more 
informal values include embracing each other’s national cuisines, bureaucracy, 
cafe culture, acronyms, simultaneous translation, Beethoven’s Ode to Joy – the 
EU anthem – and supporting the Ryder Cup golf team (the only side to play as
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> in any major sporting 
competition).

Economy

The EU economy is the world’s biggest, at about €14tn. About 1% of that is 
devoted to anannual budget <http://ec.europa.eu/budget/annual/index_en.cfm> of 
about €144bn, which subdivides as follows:
Support for farmers 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/05/eu_budget-zip/giv-12515T65BnGTnpZ7X/>
What isn’t it?

The EU is not the Council of Europe, the 47-member grouping that includes all 
EU countries and is Europe’s leading human rights organisation. So when people 
argue about European human rights being imposed on member states, they are not 
talking about the EU.


It’s not synonymous with Nato, an entirely different grouping that includes 
for example the US, Canada, Norway and Turkey, but doesn’t include Sweden and 
Finland.

It’s not the answer to everything, but just another large multinational 
institution struggling to connect with its people.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fhow-would-brexit-affect-you-eu-referendum-video-explainer&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fhow-would-brexit-affect-you-eu-referendum-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20would%20Brexit%20affect%20you%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fhow-would-brexit-affect-you-eu-referendum-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+would+Brexit+affect+you%3F+%E2%80%93+video+explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fhow-would-brexit-affect-you-eu-referendum-video-explainer&media=>
How would Brexit affect you? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jun/07/how-would-brexit-affect-you-eu-referendum-video-explainer>
 * This article was amended on 9 June 2016 to add a paragraph about the role 
of the Council of the European Union, at the suggestion of Guardian readers. 