
It was October 2008 and, without a permanent job to tie me down, I purchased a 
round-the-world airline ticket through Asia, Europe and the United States. 
After trekking across Thailand and Cambodia and enjoying a blissed-out European 
summer, I landed in the East Village of New York where a cosy neighbourhood 
cafe served as my base to write from and sip a bottomless supply of bland 
American coffee.

One afternoon from behind the pages of the New York Times, I heard a familiar 
voice. “James, what the hell are you doing here?” It was a fellow Australian 
writer here on assignment to cover the US presidential election for an online 
news site. Several coffees later he offered me a job accompanying him on the 
campaign trail to help capture the video element to his reports. I was in.

As I’d purchased a flexible multi-stop airline ticket, all I needed to do was 
send an email to my travel agent back in Melbourne to adjust my flights.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4862z%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4862z%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F6%2F1430874027242%2Fafc52c61-4fb7-42e5-bb9f-4330feaac959-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Do%20round-the-world%20airfares%20still%20add%20up%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4862z%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Do+round-the-world+airfares+still+add+up%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4862z%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F6%2F1430874027242%2Fafc52c61-4fb7-42e5-bb9f-4330feaac959-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Add on a side trip to Paris as part of your round-the-world fare. Photograph: 
Alamy 
Keep it flexible

For me an around-the-world ticket offers the freedom for such encounters and 
opportunities to open up, and for a fraction of the cost of purchasing return 
flights from any single destination. The relative geographic isolation of 
Australia means these type of fares are popular.

Round-the-world tickets may prove to be the thing that saves traditional 
real-world travel agents from becoming redundant in an online-dominated travel 
market. True, such tickets are available via airlines’ websites, but according 
to Stefanie Harms, travel consultant from Student Flights in Melbourne, the 
best deals are the ones travel agents can stitch together for you, combining 
and manipulating routings to create bespoke round-the-world tickets.

“A round-the-world ticket makes a lot of sense for Australian travellers 
because it allows you to sneak in a lot of different destinations with just the 
one airfare. Often you can visit Asia, Europe and North or South America all on 
the one ticket for a similar price to a return Europe airfare and significantly 
less than a return ticket to South America,” she says.

These fares change with each season and will need to be negotiated with a 
trusted travel agent, but at present Swiss airlines is offering a fare for just 
under $2,000 taking in Asia, Europe and the Americas (add about $400 in tax if 
you want to go to South America), while STA have a trip taking in Los Angeles, 
New York, Moscow and Singapore for $1,699 but you’ll need to make your own way 
across the US and between Moscow and Singapore.

In comparison, STA is offering fares from Melbourne or Sydney to London for 
$1,199 or New York for $1,263 but its round-the-world deal takes in both these 
cities as well as stopovers in California, another European destination and 
Asia for $1,699. If you want to book a return ticket to Rio De Janiero from 
Sydney in July, Flight Centre is offering tickets for $2,063, but a 
round-the-world ticket with Swiss airlines taking in Asia, Europe and Brazil 
will set you back $2,382.

Stefanie Harms at Student Flights says: “The value of round-the-world airfares 
becomes especially clear when you start to compare the cost to a basic return 
flight to one city.”


For example, in peak season for the European summer, a return fare from 
Melbourne to Berlin can cost between $2,000-$2,500 (depending on when you book) 
and a return Melbourne to New York airfare could cost around $1,500-$2,200.


“So potentially you can get multiple cities and countries on your ticket for 
just a little bit more than you would pay for a return to the one city,” says 
Harms.


Make your own adventures

Unlike traditional airfares, round-the-world tickets don’t have seasonal peak 
times or restrictions, meaning they are generally available all year round. 
Often these tickets are organised whereby the arrival and departure points are 
determined by availability, meaning you need to make your own way between them. 
These may prove to be the best parts of your journey because they force you to 
make your own plans outside of predetermined travel itineraries.

Joanna Luke, manager of round-the-world experiences for Flight Centre, says 
she often finds once travellers realise what they can do and see with these 
tickets they want to keep adding more and more cities into their holidays. “The 
only real downside is that you are going to have to get some more annual leave 
approved,” she says.


The carbon dilemma

The inescapable dilemma many of us face with any globe-trotting these days is 
the carbon footprint we will leave in our wake. For travellers from 
geographically isolated countries like Australia where it’s not possible to 
simply hop across different countries by train, the options are limited.

Although the miles covered on round-the-world trips are substantial, they are 
also substantially less than would be required to make separate return journeys 
to reach all these destinations. If we can fit it all into one trip, this is 
surely better than going back and forth around the world.

Weighing environmental footprint against the very human urge to see the world 
are questions every traveller will have to grapple with.
