
The chief inspector of schools has urged the government to bring back formal 
national tests for 14-year-olds in England as a way of tackling persistent 
underperformance among the most able pupils.

Related: East Midlands schools are worst performers, says Ofsted chief 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/07/east-midlands-schools-worst-performing-ofsted-michael-wilshaw-gcse>

 Sir Michael Wilshaw <http://www.theguardian.com/profile/michael-wilshaw>, who 
heads the schools watchdogOfsted <http://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted>, 
said it had been a mistake to abolish the externally marked tests for key stage 
3 students.

As a result, he said, thousands of the most able pupils – many from 
disadvantaged backgrounds – had been left “drifting” through the first few 
years of secondary school, allowing academic standards to fall and the 
attainment gap between rich and poor students to widen.

 School leaders responded by saying that subjecting schoolchildren to yet more 
testing was “not a panacea to every challenge”.

 The controversial tests were scrapped in 2008  
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2008/oct/14/sats-scrapped>by the then 
Labour education secretary, Ed Balls, after the company responsible for 
delivering the papers failed to mark them on time, amid a debate about the 
value of testing.

 Wilshaw, who made the comments in his monthly written commentary, pointed out 
that children inprimary school, 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/primary-schools> who are tested at seven 
and 11, were thriving academically, while children at secondary school who 
lacked the rigour of formal national testing until 16 were falling behind.

 “There can be little doubt, in my view, that these tests have contributed 
greatly to the recent narrowing of the attainment gap in primary schools 
between poorer pupils – including the most able – and their peers,” he said.

 He told critics of testing: “Those who indulge in moaning and whinging about 
national testing need to remember that when standards decline, it is the most 
disadvantaged pupils who suffer the most.”

 Wilshaw also proposed the introduction of sanctions against schools that 
failed to meet their responsibilities towards their most able pupils. He said 
they should not be allowed to set up an academy trust.

 “The most recent statistics paint a bleak picture of underachievement and 
unfulfilled potential,” said Wilshaw. “Thousands of our most able secondary age 
children are still not doing as well as they should in the non-selective state 
sector where the vast majority of them are educated.”

Last year, 68% of non-selective secondary school pupils who achieved a level 5 
or above (which is significantly above average) in English and maths at the end 
of primary school failed to attain either an A* or A in these subjects at GCSE; 
27% failed to achieve the minimum expected progress, a grade B.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzp9%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzp9%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F411de8011d608d8a91ca68de575a8bef45df822d%2F0_0_2574_3861%2F2574.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ofsted%20chief%20calls%20for%20return%20of%20national%20tests%20for%2014-year-olds&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzp9%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ofsted+chief+calls+for+return+of+national+tests+for+14-year-olds&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzp9%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F411de8011d608d8a91ca68de575a8bef45df822d%2F0_0_2574_3861%2F2574.jpg>
 Sir Michael Wilshaw: ‘I firmly believe it was a mistake to abolish these tests 
in the first place’. Photograph: Felix Clay for the Guardian 
Wilshaw said: “As chief inspector, I have consistently lamented the failure of 
too many secondary schools to stretch our most able children, particularly the 
poorest. If our nation is serious about improving social mobility then our 
secondary schools have got to start delivering for these children.


“I urge the government to consider bringing back external national testing at 
key stage 3. I firmly believe that it was a mistake to abolish these tests in 
the first place. If we are serious about helping all disadvantaged children, 
but especially the most able, to learn well and unlock their full potential, we 
need to know how they are doing at 14, as well as at seven, 11 and 16.”


Malcolm Trobe, interim general secretary of the Association of School and 
College Leaders, said the amount of formal testing children in England faced 
was “onerous” and the accountability system “fearsome”.


Related: Seven scientific ways to beat the onset of panic in an exam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/jun/08/seven-scientific-ways-beat-panic-exam>

“Schools work very hard to provide the best possible education to all their 
pupils, including the brightest. Most are judged byOfsted 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> as outstanding or good. Nobody 
denies there are still challenges but we believe these will best be solved by 
everybody in the education system working together in a supportive and positive 
manner.”


Labour’s education spokeswoman, Lucy Powell, added: “The government is 
incapable of answering Sir Michael’s challenge because they’ve run out of ideas 
for raising aspiration and stretch in education, and instead continue to focus 
on unnecessary structural changes which will do nothing to address these 
important issues.”

A Department for Education spokesperson acknowledged more needed to be done to 
ensure the most able children fulfilled their potential, adding that new GCSEs, 
which were due to be examined for the first time next year, would stretch the 
brightest pupils.

“However we are not complacent, and that is why our recent white paper goes 
even further by committing to investigating and funding approaches to help even 
more bright children fulfil their vast potential.”
