
So, as has been widely expected, the Sun has been censured by the press 
regulator 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/18/queen-backs-brexit-headline-in-the-sun-was-inaccurate-press-watchdog-rules>
 for its headline “Queen backs Brexit 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/politics/6986518/Queen-hailed-as-a-backer-of-Brexit.html>
”.

And, also as expected, the paper’s editor, Tony Gallagher 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/tony-gallagher>, has rejected the decision by 
the Independent Press Standards Organisation (Ipso).

The problem for Gallagher was using the term “Brexit” because, at the time the 
Queen is said to have spouted her anti-European Union views, it had not been 
coined.

Indeed, at that time, the government had not even arranged the EU referendum 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>. How then could the Queen 
have backed a British pull-out from the EU?

Clearly, that was the logic applied by Ipso’s complaints committee. Although 
the Sun believes that the Palace amended its original complaint from one about 
the story to one about the headline, I am assured this was not the case.*

Royal aides appear to have realised the poential implications of taking issue 
with a story with a double source (even if the people were anonymised).

But Gallagher wasn’t happy about the headline ruling. In his Radio 4 Today 
programme interview, he was unrepentant. He relied on the fact that his Brexit 
headlined was qualified by a sub-head referring to it being a “bombshell claim”.

That interview was interesting. He managed to make clear his rejection of 
Ipso’s ruling while embracing his paper’s membership ofIpso 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/ipso>.

He also took the opportunity to stress that he knew more than he published, 
that the sources were impeccable and that he would do it all over again. “In 
all conscience,” he said, “we don’t accept we made a mistake.”


Gallagher stopped well short of being critical of Ipso and of self-regulation 
and shrugged off the paper’s previous ruling (about the inaccuracy of its “1 in 
5 Brit Muslims’ sympathy for jihadis” story).

Gallagher’s careful answers were similar to the measured tone of  his paper’s 
editorial 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/sun_says/6500866/Sun-Says.html>, in 
which the Sun reiterated its belief that the Queen does back Brexit.

It thought it “fair enough” to have published both the original story and the 
headline. “We stand by all of it”, said the Sun, and continued:

“We respect Ipso and understand why the Queen complained. She was furious at 
the claim she had taken sides in a political dispute. But the idea she keeps 
all her thoughts to herself is nonsense.”

In conclusion, the Sun advanced a familiar “right to know” and “public 
interest” justification for its story:

“A newspaper wouldn’t be a newspaper if it got wind of such views  so clearly 
in the public’s interest to read and didn’t publish them.”

It published Ipso’s verdict across the bottom of page 2, “Ipso rules against 
Sun’s Queen headline” 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/clarifications/7157143/IPSO-rules-against-Suns-Queen-headline.html>
, as it is required to do under the rules of its contract with the regulator.


Ipso’s critics will argue that the paper, having been found “guilty” of 
running an inaccurate front page headline, should have been forced to run the 
ruling on page 1. But it did carry a page 1 trail (and I understand the size of 
the typeface was agreeable to Ipso).

Note also the reality of this whole affair. Whether or not the headline was 
justified and whether or not the story was entirely accurate, is there anyone 
across Britain who doesn’t now believe that the Queen is none too happy with 
Britain’s membership of theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>
?

The Sun <http://www.theguardian.com/media/sun> appears to have reflected the 
truth of the Queen’s covert political viewpoint. That may not have been the 
case if the Palace had failed to make an official complaint.

I wonder, on reflection, if the monarch’s advisers got it wrong. Surely, the 
lady did protest too much?

*This paragraph was amended at 10am in the light of new and further 
information.
