
I have never written that snowdrop article, the one you read every year, in 
every gardening magazine; when I do, I’ll hang up my gardening gloves for good. 
It is not that I have anything against snowdrops, or writing about them when 
they bloom. I love them, and have planted them in every garden I’ve made. You 
should, too. But that’s the end of the story as far as I’m concerned.

Hepaticas make a wonderful companion to snowdrops: in fact, you could say 
hepaticas are the new snowdrops. These delightful, tiny, jewel-like bundles of 
joy flower from February to March, just when we need them most. I’m giving you 
the heads up because I hear John Massey ofAshwood Nurseries 
<https://www.ashwoodnurseries.com/> is going to put on another fine display of 
hepaticas at theRHS spring show 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/shows-events/rhs-london-shows/rhs-london-early-spring-plant-fair>
 and, once that happens, it may be hard to get hold of them.

Related: Hepaticas: early spring jewels 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gardening-blog/2016/jan/21/hepaticas-early-spring-jewels>

Hepaticas are members of the buttercup family and look much like their 
cousins, anemones; they have the same evergreen, three-lobed leaves. They are 
woodland and alpine plants native to central and north Europe, Asia and North 
America. Delicate blooms in carmine, purple, blue or white belie their inner 
nature, because you have to be tough to flower in late spring. The Japanese 
love them and have developed many with double petals. European species tend to 
grow in deeply shaded woodland, especially beech, so work wonderfully under 
deciduous trees and shrubs. Alpine varieties grow in grasslands, often 
appearing out of snow. They love alkaline soils – they’re often associated with 
limestone – but will survive a range of soils as long as they have some winter 
moisture.

Related: Japanese hepaticas: pastel perfection 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gardening-blog/2015/apr/09/japanese-hepaticas-pastel-perfection>

The European species, Hepatica nobilis 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/plants/details?plantid=3082>, is a good beginner’s 
plant, as is the large and more robust blue hepatica (H. transsilvanica 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/8652/Large-blue-hepatica/Details>). Those two 
hybridise to makeH. x media; ‘Harvington Beauty’ 
<https://www.ashwoodnurseries.com/shop/hepatica-x-media-harvington-beauty.html> 
is worth looking out for, as it has strong blue flowers, is tolerant of drier 
conditions and is easy to please. IfH. nobilis is happy, it will colonise, 
slowly self-seeding around; a mature plant will send out numerous blooms in 
succession. It is much loved by early pollinators, and on sunny days, when it’s 
warm enough to fly, you’ll see fat bumble queens having an orgy in the stamens. 
Hepaticas don’t like disturbance, though you can divide established clumps 
after flowering or in very early autumn. Water new plants for the first couple 
of months while they settle down.

If you get good at these, move on to the rare Japanese types 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gardening-blog/2015/apr/09/japanese-hepaticas-pastel-perfection>
,H. japonica, for which there is often a waiting list. They’re very slow 
growers, and expensive, but when you see a perfect, anemone-centred form burst 
open in a fine ceramic pot, it’s easy to see why people lose themselves to them.

Hepaticas should be planted with other delicate spring bulbs. They won’t 
thrive in competitive situations with the likes of ivy, ramsons or bluebells; 
but dog’s tooth violets, trilliums, wood anemones (which flower about four 
weeks after hepaticas), hellebores and white scillas and ipheions make good 
companions.

 * This article was amended on February 9 2016 to correct the spelling of 
ramsons (Allium ursinum). 