
What came first, the chicken-is-healthy study or the eggs-are-unhealthy study? 
Nutritional advice is notoriously nebulous, and food groups regularly alternate 
between demonisation and deification. Fat makes you fat; fat makes you thin; 
carbs are basically crack; carbs are back. Corporate agendas are behind much of 
this confusion. But, more worryingly, they’re also behind many of the food 
“facts” we take for granted. Much conventional health wisdom is actually 
commercialised wisdom: the result of canny marketing campaigns or 
industry-funded studies. Even if you think you’re above advertising, immune to 
the seductions of pseudoscience, you would be surprised how many marketing 
myths you may have inadvertently swallowed.

Breakfast of chumps 


Let’s start with breakfast. There’s no conclusive evidence a morning meal 
makes you lose weight and feel great, but the idea that breakfast is the most 
important meal of the day is widely ingrained. This is largely thanks to the 
efforts of grain companies. Kellogg’s, for example,funded an influential study 
that linked breakfasting on cereal with lower BMI 
<http://seattlecentral.edu/faculty/jwhorley/Breakfast_BMI.pdf>. And The Quaker 
Oats Center of Excellence 
<http://www.quakeroats.com/about-quaker-oats/content/quakeroats-center-of-excellence.aspx>
 financed research showing thata daily breakfast of porridge reduces cholesterol
 <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4473164/>.

Big Cereal isn’t alone in bigging up breakfast with biased science; bacon is 
also to blame. In the 1920s, PR manEdward Bernays 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2001/mar/16/marketingandpr1> was tasked with 
increasing bacon consumption in the US. At the time, most Americans ate a light 
breakfast; Bernays figured a good way to increase bacon consumption would be to 
increase breakfast consumption. So, he asked doctors to confirm that “a hearty 
breakfast was better than a light breakfast to replace the energy lost by the 
body at night”; 4,500 doctors agreed andBernays got the media to report the 
results <http://baltimorepostexaminer.com/bacon-for-breakfast/2013/07/11>, 
strategically placing bacon adverts by the headlines. Today, 70% of bacon eaten 
in the US is eaten at breakfast.

Squeezing the truth 


Orange juice’s position as part of a healthy breakfast is the fruit of a 
marketing man’s imagination. In 1908, California faced a surplus of oranges; if 
citrus growers (organised under the brand Sunkist) didn’t increase consumption, 
they would go bust. At the time, Americans didn’t drink fresh orange juice, but 
an ad agency decided to change that. It invented a cheap juice extractor, which 
it publicised in adverts extolling the health benefits of drinking an orange. 
“We asked 3,000 physicians about orange juice for babies,”reads one Sunkist ad 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=5LAaAQAAMAAJ&pg=RA1-PA102&lpg=RA1-PA102&dq=We+asked+3000+physicians+about+Orange+Juice+for+babies&source=bl&ots=yA2DKowp6Z&sig=VrLY7LPujFPIw_XxsBkQOrqoQpc&hl=en&sa=X&redir_esc=y#v=onepage&q=We%20asked%203000%20physicians%20about%20Orange%20Juice%20for%20babies&f=false>
. The physicians were all for it. The campaign led to a massive increase in 
juice consumption and created a health halo around fruit juicethat has only 
recently started to slip 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2014/02/misunderstanding-orange-juice-as-a-health-drink/283579/>
.

Caffeinated kids 


You may have heard that caffeine stunts growth; this is unsubstantiated 
nonsense. The short story is that it’s a tall tale spread by Postum, a 
caffeine-free morning beverage invented in the late 1800s. Postum marketed 
itself as an alternative to coffee by demonising its competitor, suggesting 
coffee stunted a child’s mental and physical development.One Postum ad shows a 
small boy struggling at school 
<http://www.wjm2234.com/ebay/33/1933-ad-bad-coffee.jpg>: “Held back by coffee … 
this boy never stood a fair chance.”

Eight is not the magic number 


Drinking eight glasses of water a day is great if you enjoy urinating, but 
generally it’s unnecessary.The eight-a-day myth 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/25/upshot/no-you-do-not-have-to-drink-8-glasses-of-water-a-day.html?_r=0>
 seems to derive from old guidelines stating that, while people need 2.5 litres 
of water a day, we get most of that from our regular diet. Only half of that 
information seems to have stuck. Bottled water companies have helped reinforce 
existing hydration misinformation through exaggerated health marketing, and we 
lap it up. Consumption of bottled water has shot up – in the UK, it’s now 100 
times higher than in 1980.

The military-industrial-carrot complex 


Some food myths go deep into the upper levels of government. The idea that 
carrots imbue you with night vision originated in the second world war 
<http://www.smithsonianmag.com/arts-culture/a-wwii-propaganda-campaign-popularized-the-myth-that-carrots-help-you-see-in-the-dark-28812484/>
, when the British government dealt with an oversupply of carrots via 
propaganda suggesting carotene was the source of the RAF’s night-flying 
abilities. The actual source was radar, but that was sort of classified. It’s 
unlikely the Luftwaffe bought the carrot-vision story, but the British public 
did and millions of carrots were consumed in the hope of being able to see 
better in a blackout.

Spinach spinmeisters 


Rumours of spinach’s iron content have been greatly exaggerated. The blame for 
this has traditionally been cast on clumsy German scientists who put a decimal 
point in the wrong place, bestowing spinach with 10 times more iron than it 
has. However, thedecimal-point myth has itself been debunked 
<http://www.internetjournalofcriminology.com/sutton_spinach_iron_and_popeye_march_2010.pdf>
. So, by the way, has Popeye’s iron enthusiasm; Popeye liked spinach for the 
Vitamin A. Despite all the debunking, however, both spinach and Popeye are 
still strongly associated with iron. Marketing may not be responsible for this 
particular fallacy, but it does demonstrate how hard it is to overturn 
misinformation once it gets out there. Which is something many marketers 
understand when they push exaggerated claims.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpcOrSWr2HLU&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpcOrSWr2HLU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpcOrSWr2HLU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpcOrSWr2HLU&media=>
Pinching salt 


Statistics show that, eventually, 100% of us will die. Whether we should avoid 
carbs, fat, chicken or eggs in order to postpone that demise is not so clear 
cut. Nevertheless, looking at who funds the research behind health headlines is 
always advisable; many supposedly scientific studies are best taken with a 
heavy pinch of salt. Although, you know, that may have been an expression 
invented by the sodium lobby.
