
If you’ve done any research on universities, you’ll be well aware that they 
invest heavily in their marketing – from YouTube channels featuring their 
swankiest digs to Instagram accounts full of arty-looking photos of their towns 
and cities. So how can you see past the glossy prospectuses and get the real 
story on the places you want to apply to?

Social media <http://www.theguardian.com/media/social-media> can help 
enormously, says Jack Wallington, community director at the Student Room 
website. “You can find people, online, who are at the university you want to go 
to and doing the course you’re thinking of taking – and then you can ask them 
what it’s really like. That’s so powerful.”

And there are many ways of finding people to talk to. Search Twitter or 
YouTube and you should be able to find students doing the course you’re 
interested in – then you can contact them directly with questions.

Related: University league tables 2016 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/ng-interactive/2015/may/25/university-league-tables-2016>

Joining private Facebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> 
groups for specific subjects or societies is another good idea – if you send a 
message to the group owner explaining why you want to join, they should be 
happy to add you on a short-term basis.

As with any social media interactions, it’s important to keep yourself safe, 
so use privacy settings where appropriate and be wary of publishing any 
personal information about yourself (such as phone numbers or pictures of your 
home or school).

While it can be daunting to reach out to people you’ve never met, it’s 
definitely worth the effort, says Molly Massey, who contacted students on 
Facebook and Twitter to find out about living costs and accommodation at 
Lincoln University, where she has been offered a place to study biology.

Online discussion forums can be helpful too. Ash Miah, who hopes to study 
mathematics and sports science at the University of Birmingham, says he used 
the Student Room’s discussion forums to get information that wasn’t available 
on university websites, and found out about “the social scene, what lectures 
are like, the cost of living and so on”.

Bloggers are another useful source of information. A quick search on Google or 
Tumblr should lead you to bloggers studying at your chosen university. And to 
get a more realistic impression of the campus and accommodation, you can search 
for images – taken by students – on social media platforms like Instagram and 
Pinterest.

Related: Clearing: how to find a course that keeps your dreams on track 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/aug/11/clearing-how-to-find-a-course-that-keeps-your-dreams-on-track>

While it’s a good idea to combine online research with university visits, this 
isn’t always possible, says Moj Taylor, executive and business development 
manager of Push Talks, which delivers training and guidance on higher education 
in schools.

He recalls one student he worked with who was applying for universities in 
Western Australia. “She’d have loved to visit, but this just wasn’t an option. 
So she found someone on Facebook doing the course she wanted to study and sent 
him a message. They chatted about the course and she ended up asking him if 
he’d take some footage of the campus for her. This gave her the chance to see 
beyond the marketing brochures.”

As Miah puts it: “All universities try to sell themselves. It’s a business at 
the end of the day. So what can be better than [hearing about universities] 
from people who are actually there.”


Kirsten’s story


Kirsten Kurt-Elli has an offer to study political science at Birmingham 
University, starting in September.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b6jd%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b6jd%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf1bb4e152424155ff7f3cf9dafa62d625d01c00%2F0_0_640_573%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clearing%3A%20use%20Facebook%20to%20uncover%20the%20truth%20about%20universities&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b6jd%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clearing%3A+use+Facebook+to+uncover+the+truth+about+universities&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b6jd%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf1bb4e152424155ff7f3cf9dafa62d625d01c00%2F0_0_640_573%2F640.jpg>
 Thorough: Kurt-Elli researched her unis to the point of tedium. 
I spent hours researching universities online before I decided where to apply. 
Initially, I was obsessed by league tables, until I discovered there were 
different kinds – and they all contradicted each other. Thankfully, a teacher 
explained that university rankings can vary quite significantly from subject to 
subject, and from year to year. That helped me get things into perspective.


I messaged people on Facebook from my secondary school who had gone to the 
universities on my shortlist to get their honest views. I also searched on 
Twitter to see what students were really saying about the quality of lectures 
or the accommodation. This gave me a much more realistic idea of what was going 
on.

LinkedIn was useful to track where graduates from particular universities end 
up – and how favourably this compares with the impressive employment stats in 
their prospectuses.

I also read some reviews on TripAdvisor  <http://www.tripadvisor.co.uk/>so I 
could get a feel for the nightlife, restaurants and things to do in the area.

It was a tedious process at times – but not as tedious as spending three years 
on a degree you’re not really interested in, or in a city you don’t like.

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
