
I commend two books about Irish journalism that deserve to be read outside 
Ireland. The first, which I sadly didn’t get to mention when it was first 
published in 2013, is an anthology of hugely readable journalistic work,Great 
Irish Reportage 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Great-Irish-Reportage-John-Horgan/dp/1844883213/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1426594619&sr=8-1&keywords=great+irish+reportage>
.*

Edited by John Horgan, the former (and first) press ombudsman in Ireland, it 
contains a host of excellent pieces, beginning in 1922 with Frank Geary’s 
report in theIrish Independent 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/irish-independent> on the re-taking of Cork 
city from the occupying anti-Treaty forces.

My favourites include Myles na gCopaleen (Flann O’Brien) on the changing 
culture of the Irish pub; Elizabeth Bowen on living in Cork during the second 
world war (or “the emergency” as it was known in Ireland); Mary Kenny’s Irish 
Press piece on Dublin prostitutes; and Nell McCafferty’s poignant article about 
a 15-year-old girl who died in childbirth.

Others to appreciate are reports by Colm Toibin, Maeve Binchy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/maevebinchy>, Eamon Dunphy and Olivia 
O’Leary. A special mention too for Paul Kimmage’s retrospective piece for the 
Sunday Independent in 2000 on Muhammad Ali’s visit to Dublin in 1972.


And Emily O’Reilly’s observations on the day in 1983 that Gerry Adams 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/gerryadams> was first elected MP in West 
Belfast is a small masterpiece of non-judgmental fly-on-the-wall journalism.

The second book, just out, is The Irish Times: 150 years of influence 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Irish-Times-150-Years-Influence/dp/1472919068/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1426602514&sr=8-1&keywords=Irish+Times+150+years>
 by Terence Brown.** And the manwho reviewed it on behalf of the Irish Times  
<http://www.irishtimes.com/culture/books/review-the-irish-times-150-years-of-influence-by-terence-brown-1.2138839>
was none other than John Horgan.

Brown tells the story of a paper that was founded in 1859 as the voice of the 
Protestant middle class. The blurb material tells us that “the history of the
Irish Times <http://www.theguardian.com/media/irish-times> is also a history of 
the Irish people” and continues:

“Always independent in ownership and political view and never entwined in any 
way with the Roman Catholic church, it has become the weather vane, the 
barometer of Irish life and society followed by people of all religious and 
political persuasions and none.

The paper is politically liberal and progressive as well as being centre right 
on economic issues”.

Brown tells the story of the paper by showing how it covered the key events in 
modern Irish history, including the 1916 Easter Rising, the civil war, “the 
troubles” in the north of the island, the years of the Celtic Tiger and its 
aftermath of economic recession.

Horgan writes warmly of Brown’s perceptive effort, observing that it “charts 
its course with a journalist’s unerring eye for significant detail, as well as 
a historian’s sensitivity to trends and a writer’s gift for language”.

*Great Irish Reportage, edited by John Horgan (Penguin, £14.99) **The Irish 
Times: 150 years of influence, by Terence Brown (Bloomsbury Continuum, £20)
