
Perched on barstools in a sweaty night club, we were screaming small talk at 
one another. We’d only spoken for a few minutes before I told him my dreaded 
secret.

“You’re from a girls school? Wow!” he responded when I mentioned my sixth-form 
education. “So did you all sleep around? Or did you sleep with each other?”

This wouldn’t be the only moment of crassness I would face in my first term at 
university as a result of going to a girls’ school.

Coming from an all-female environment, I had grown accustomed to an 
oestrogen-fuelled sphere of grades, gossip and girls’ nights in. My move to a 
male-dominated flat at university introduced me to new social norms. From 
dubious “banter” to the exhausting pressure to “pull”, it was a world utterly 
unfamiliar to me.

From my experience, single-sex schools don’t allow boys to experience an 
environment where women are equal
Mike Davis, Manchester University student 
Melissa Wood, a student at the University of Exeter and graduate of St Albans 
High School for Girls in Hertfordshire, has had similar experiences.The 
stereotype that “we are all socially awkward and sex starved” is one that has 
tainted several of her university encounters.

One student at the University of Cambridge, who wanted to remain anonymous, 
says she also found herself “stigmatised” as a result of her private, 
all-girls’ education. She was taunted by other students about her girls’ school 
background, which she found hurtful initially.

It’s the same for many students from boys’ schools. Mike Davis, a student at 
the University of Manchester, went to both an all-boys college and a 
co-educational school. He highlights another potential drawback to single-sex 
education. “From my experience, single-sex schools don’t allow boys to 
experience an environment where women are just as clever, competent, and 
equal,” he says.

“I found that boys there tended to look at women solely as potential 
girlfriends as opposed to equal peers.”

Related: I wish I weren't the only girl in my computer science class 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/mortarboard/2016/feb/10/im-the-only-girl-in-my-computer-science-class>

Richard Cairns, headmaster of the co-educational Brighton College, has 
condemned the“deeply unrealistic world” 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jan/05/single-sex-education-row-head-richard-cairns-criticises-girls-schools>
 of single-sex schools, arguing that such forms of education place their 
students“at a huge disadvantage” 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jan/05/single-sex-education-row-head-richard-cairns-criticises-girls-schools>
 in the long term.

But are single-sex schools really outdated? I’d hesitate to agree. 

Patsy Kane, executive headteacher of the Education and Leadership Trust in 
Manchester,recently outlined the benefits of all-girls’ schools 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jan/05/single-sex-education-row-head-richard-cairns-criticises-girls-schools>
. “Sometimes stereotypical choices are not challenged [in mixed education] and 
too frequently boys may dominate certain activities. But this can’t happen in a 
girls-only space,” she said.

Students <http://www.theguardian.com/education/students>, too, have also 
rejected criticism of their single-sex education. They credit their schooling 
with increasing their personal confidence, leading to later academic success.

Wood attributes her independence and strength on arriving at university to her 
single-sex school. “I am so pleased I went to an all-girls school because it 
was drilled into me that women are equally intelligent and so I go into all my 
studies with that attitude,” she says.

Related: Why I'm glad my parents sent me to a state school 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/09/why-im-glad-my-parents-sent-me-to-a-state-school>

Fiona Linnard, a student at the University of Leeds, was educated at both a 
co-educational school and an all-girls school. She says: “Surrounded by rowdy, 
pubescent boys for much of my teens only served to spark and fuel my 
introversion, whereas the transition to an all-girls sixth form did wonders for 
my confidence.”

In spite of certain stigmas, the social and academic benefits offered by a 
single-sex education have allowed many students to thrive at university.

And as for the teasing boys, my school gave me the confidence to deal with 
them.

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
