
Why is infant mental health so important?

Gavin Moorghen, professional officer, British Association of Social Workers: 
Infant mental health is an essential aspect of human growth and development and 
there should be recognition that mental health needs are present from 
conception and through to adulthood.Children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> are born needing love, attention 
and consistency, and without those components even the youngest of children may 
suffer poor emotional wellbeing.

Julia Brown, co-founder, the FASD Trust: The brain grows during the first two 
years of life at a tremendous rate – at the age of two, 80% of the brain has 
developed – and so those early years are critical. It is a unique, special time 
when so many emotional responses are learnt and, if it goes wrong, we spend the 
next 20 years trying to correct.

Matt Forde, head of service for Scotland, NSPCC: The more severe the adversity 
faced in infancy and childhood, the more serious are the risks across childhood 
and into adulthood. Informed by this understanding, infant mental health seeks 
to improve parent-child relationships and enable nurturing care. Often this can 
mean working with parents to deal with the unresolved consequences of their own 
experiences of trauma, abuse and neglect, and to develop the capacity to be 
attuned to their child’s needs.

Related: How can public services work together on infant mental health? Live 
Q&A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/jun/03/infant-mental-health-children-discussion>

Is enough attention paid to young children’s mental health: are there enough 
services and funding?

Jane Barlow, president of the Association for Infant Mental Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> (UK): I think the withdrawal of 
funding from key services over the past five years has significantly affected 
the ability of key practitioners such as midwives and health visitors to 
provide the preventive services that are so important to promoting infant 
mental health. Many local authorities are also closing down children’s centres 
as a result of funding problems, which was a key place for families with babies 
and young children to receive services. The long-term consequences of these 
funding cuts will begin to emerge over the next five to 10 years.

Alice Cook, independent family assessment practitioner and PhD student at 
Royal Holloway University: In my experience, there are pockets of brilliant 
services which therefore results in a postcode lottery for those families who 
need to access them. There is an issue when it comes to implementing the large 
knowledge base we now have in relation to what are effective interventions.

Maria Kane, representative from the Cavendish Square Group of NHS trusts and 
chief executive of Barnet, Enfield and Haringey NHS mental health trusts: There 
has not been nearly enough focus on infant mental health to date. 
Interestingly, now that the financial challenges of the NHS are so evident, 
more focus is being put on perinatal services because of the enormous 
opportunities to save costs in the long term if we intervene as early as 
possible in a child’s development. Sufficient funding for identifying and 
treating maternal depression and anxiety in the perinatal period will have 
enormous return on investment for the NHS and social services.

Related: A quick guide to attachment theory | David Shemmings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/feb/15/attachment-theory-social-work-child-protection>

Are children’s emotional and attachment needs forgotten when care decisions 
are made?

Susannah Bowyer, research and development manager, Research in Practice: I 
don’t think they are forgotten, but they can and do certainly get lost in 
competing priorities, changes in policy and case law. We explored practice in 
the family courts in a number of “deep dive” projects for the Department for 
Education in 2015. In the course of these, we observed a wide range of 
practice, including:

 * Thoughtful and focused practice at pre-proceedings stage, supported by good 
use offamily group conferencing 
<http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/jul/23/domestic-violence-family-group-conferences>
 as a means to link in with wider family support. 
 * Decisions for placement that were causing a good deal of anxiety, and were 
accompanied by changing use of court orders which suggested that no one 
involved was confident that the placement was a safe and permanent home for the 
child concerned. 
 * The lack of therapeutic support, both post-adoption and for other carers 
such as special guardians. Support is required sometimes years down the line 
from a family court decision, as issues may emerge much later in a child’s life.
Sheena Webb, consultant clinical psychologist and service manager for the 
London Family Drug and Alcohol Court: Court reports will often pay heed to the 
benefits of children growing up with birth parents, and will often acknowledge 
a good quality of relationship between parent and child. Nonetheless, when this 
is presented alongside issues of risk, the concern over risk usually prevails – 
in some cases rightly so. However, often the risk analysis, particularly for 
infants of mothers who have had previous children removed, is based upon mainly 
historical risk factors. It becomes impossible for the parent to demonstrate 
enough change to mitigate the history, no matter how good a bond they are 
forming with their baby.

I think ​​local ​authorities are trying to offer parents a chance to access 
the help they need and to demonstrate change
Sheena Webb 
More and more I think local authorities are trying to offer parents a chance 
to access the help they need and to demonstrate change, but we need to increase 
the confidence with which we can measure that change and demonstrate its 
sustainability to the courts. Risk assessment needs to be multidimensional and 
dynamic, and needs to seriously consider the emotional and attachment impact 
[on the child] of losing their biological mother or father.

Clea Barry, practice supervisor (public law), Cafcass: Social workers and 
guardians have a lot of expertise around promoting attachment for children in 
care and managing risk. Once matters get to court, it becomes harder to talk 
about promoting change because of the competing need to avoid delay. The 
answers are, first, that more work should be done earlier on to prevent the 
need for proceedings; and, second, in ensuring that court assessments are 
tightly focused and combine a therapeutic approach towards parents with a focus 
on assessing and managing risk.

What can be done to support mothers with mental health difficulties in the 
perinatal period?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kmdx%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kmdx%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F599d70cf34780978d02bddaf7e55e5905a0778c0%2F87_0_3964_2379%2F3964.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Infant%20mental%20health%3A%20the%20four%20essential%20questions&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kmdx%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Infant+mental+health%3A+the+four+essential+questions&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kmdx%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F599d70cf34780978d02bddaf7e55e5905a0778c0%2F87_0_3964_2379%2F3964.jpg>
 Midwives and health visitors are key to supporting pregnant women. Photograph: 
David Jones/PA 
Jane Barlow: The key issue is to encourage women to access whatever services 
are available, because there is still stigma attached to issue of mental health 
problems such as depression and many women worry that if they disclose such 
concerns they will be at risk of having their baby removed.

Related: Can the Mockingbird model of foster care fly in the UK? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/apr/28/mockingbird-foster-care-uk-social-work>

Julia Brown: We were involved in some work around understanding why midwives 
did not want to ask women about their alcohol consumption in pregnancy. The 
main answer we uncovered was that midwives did not know to whom and where to 
refer pregnant women with an alcohol issue for further help and support. There 
was a reluctance to “open a can of worms” with no “worm catchers” around. 
Therefore, if we have clear pathways, midwives (and others) then feel empowered 
and confident to ask questions because they know they can offer appropriate 
help and support in return.

Karen Broadhurst, professor of social work, Lancaster University: When we 
think about the collateral consequences of child removal, this not only relates 
to the huge emotional trauma of removal of, typically, infants, but also the 
very real practical hurdles that follow such things as loss of housing, welfare 
entitlements and immediate “exclusion” from everyday informal networks. In 
addition, there can be very real restrictions on kin relationships, where 
contact is restricted because infants are placed in extended families. So, we 
need to grasp the enormity of child removal for birth parents.

This debate is about infant mental health, but as children grow up in 
substitute care, the wellbeing of their parents is a key consideration for them 
– particularly where infants remain in kin care. This isn’t an argument against 
kin placements, nor safeguarding infants from harm through removal, but it is 
an argument in favour of continued help for birth parents for all concerned, as 
this is in everyone’s interest.

Conclusions

David Shemmings, co-director of the Centre for Child Protection at the 
University of Kent: What we need to be observant and vigilant about are the 
signs of “toxic” trauma in childhood. We need to be able to identify it quickly 
and as accurately as possible and then, if they are its primary cause, to help 
family members prevent or stop its occurrence. One way to do that is to change 
their relationship with their child, so that they become more nurturing, as 
well as provide sensitive discipline.

Related: ​The young mothers trapped in a cycle of having babies removed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/jan/07/young-mothers-trapped-cycle-babies-removed>

There is growing evidence that epistemic trust is pivotal in promoting lasting 
change. This means that the person needs to feel, believe and know that someone 
understands them.

We need to make sure that policies and practices avoid blaming parents, 
because there is strong evidence that the quality of relationships between 
professionals and families is a key variable involved in promoting lasting 
change.

The longer we leave things, the more difficult it is to change things because 
the wiring becomes more “hardened”.

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
