
700,000 people in the UK

More than one in 100 people are on the autism spectrum in the UK – an 
estimated 700,000 people.

Women and girls overlooked

More males than females are diagnosed with autism, with different studies 
putting the ratio anywhere between 2:1 and 16:1. But recent research suggests 
that the number is far more equal than previously thought; the problem is that 
professionals often don’t understand the different ways autism can manifest in 
women and girls.

More than one in four autistic people have been asked to leave a public place 
because of their autistic behaviour

120,000 young people with autism of school age in England


There are an estimated 120,000 school-aged children on the autism spectrum in 
England, the vast majority (73%) in mainstream schools.

75% bullied at school

75% of children on the autism spectrum of secondary school age say they have 
been bullied at school.


22% have no friends

22% of young people on the autism spectrum who responded to a survey by the 
National Autistic Society said they had no friends at all. One in 10 said their 
friends were mainly adults. Half said they would like more friends.

53% of autistic adults want help to find work

Only 15% of autistic adults are in full-time paid work. 53% of people on the 
autism spectrum say they want help to find work, but only 10% get the support 
to do so. 43% of those who have worked have left or lost a job because of their 
autism.

44% fear harassment

44% of people on the autism spectrum responding to a survey by the National 
Autistic Society said they stay at home because they are afraid of being abused 
or harassed – almost half (49%) said they have been abused by someone they 
thought of as a friend.

75% of parents said their autistic children had been labelled “strange”

75% of parents in an NAS survey said their children on the autism spectrum had 
been labelled “naughty” or “strange”. 72% said that people avoid them, 74% said 
people make disapproving noises, and 87% said people stare.

More than one in four asked to leave a public place

More than one in four (28%) autistic people have even been asked to leave a 
public place because of their autistic behaviour.


99% awareness, not enough understanding

More than 99% of the public said they have heard of autism – yet only 16% of 
autistic people and their families think the public have a good understanding 
of the condition and how it can affect behaviour.

Discover how you can help: Alexander Marshall, the 10-year-old star of the 
National Autistic Society’s “Too Much Information” video, talks about living 
with autism 
<http://www.theguardian.com/tmi/2016/apr/01/autism-and-the-overload-effect>


To find out more about autism, the person, and what to do visit 
www.autism.org.uk/tmi <http://www.autism.org.uk/tmi>
