
Jeremy Corbyn <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> sought to 
exploit Tory divisions over the effect of leaving the EU on workers’ rights 
during prime minister’s questions, highlighting pro-Brexit ministers’ 
statements on “reducing the burden” on employers of EU protection for workers.
Brexit explained: Can I still register to vote? 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/05/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=website_crash#>
A day after the Sports Direct boss, Mike Ashley, looked set to face a 
multimillion-pound bill following his admission that the company had failed to 
pay staff the national minimum wage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/07/sports-direct-agrees-back-pay-deal-with-hmrc-minimum-wage>
, the Labour leader said David Cameron should distance himself from Priti 
Patel’s words that workers’ rights in EU law were a “burden”.

Ashley “would make Scrooge look like a good employer,” Corbyn said. “It shows 
we must strengthen and not weaken workers’ rights, especially when there are 
criminal activities involved,” he said, citing Patel, the pro-Brexit employment 
minister, who said the UK could “halve the burdens” on employers by leaving the 
EU.

“If we could just halve the burdens of the EU social and employment 
legislation we could deliver a £4.3bn boost to our economy and 60,000 new jobs,”
she told the Institute of Directors in May. 
<https://www.tuc.org.uk/international-issues/europe/eu-referendum/workplace-issues/priti-patel-reveals-leave-campaign-agenda>

The Labour <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> leader, who has 
previously appeared reluctant to exploit Tory divisions during PMQs, returned 
several times to the cabinet disunity during his questioning.

“Does [Patel] speak on behalf of the government when she promises to reduce 
the burden, as she describes them, of employment legislation?” Corbyn asked, 
also referring to the justice secretary, Michael Gove, who said he “could not 
guarantee every person could keep their job” after a leave vote.

Related: What has the EU ever done for my … job? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/08/what-has-the-eu-ever-done-for-my-job>

Gove appeared “equally relaxed about employment rights”, Corbyn said. “Can’t 
[Cameron] do something about that?”

Cameron said the EU’s underpinning of workers’ rights was one of the reasons 
many people would vote to stay in, but said the UK went over and above the 
rights demanded by the EU, on flexible working, maternity leave and shared 
parental leave, and more annual leave.

“There are ministers in the government who, in a personal capacity, are 
campaigning on another side of the argument,” Cameron said, emphasising that he 
did not agree with Gove or Patel’s statements.

Brushing over the divisions, Cameron said it should be celebrated that he and 
Corbyn, as well as the Lib Dems, the SNP, the Greens and Northern Irish 
parties, agreed on the principle that Britain should stay in.

Related: Labour must speak for Europe, before it’s too late | Anne Perkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/08/labour-europe-nigel-farage-david-cameron-eu>

Ashley, who may be disbarred as a company director, admitted Sports Direct 
effectively paid workers less than the minimum wage because of the time it took 
for them to be searched as they left the warehouses at the end of their shifts.

He admitted that 80% of workers were on zero-hours contracts, a practice which 
Corbyn asked the prime minister to ban.

Cameron said he “abhorred” Sports Direct’s failure to pay the minimum wage and 
that the government was taking strong action against companies who failed to 
pay the minimum, but said a consultation last year had found some workers 
preferred more flexible contracts.
