
Growing up on a farm in central Kenya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/kenya>
, Winston Wachanga witnessed the piles of fruit and vegetables that perished 
after never making it to a market.

Later with a tomato farm of his own, he experienced the same struggle of 
farmers across the country trying to find a buyer. “We have so much produce but 
accessing customers is difficult. We don’t have capacity to get produce to 
market and we end up being exploited. It becomes frustrating,” he says.

To solve this gap, Wachanga set up online delivery company Kitchen Soko 
<http://www.kitchensoko.com/>. In less than a year he has built up a network of 
80 local farmers in Kenya whose produce is delivered in a box straight to the 
customer’s front door. Customers can find out exactly which farm the produce 
has come from.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gdqb%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gdqb%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F021f3c813ad0ac10b04976b21d4c8916922689de%2F119_340_1321_2303%2F1321.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20rise%20of%20internet%20veg%20box%20schemes%20in%20sub-Saharan%20Africa&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gdqb%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+rise+of+internet+veg+box+schemes+in+sub-Saharan+Africa&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gdqb%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F021f3c813ad0ac10b04976b21d4c8916922689de%2F119_340_1321_2303%2F1321.jpg>
 Winston Wachanga, founder of Kitchen Soko. Photograph: Winston Wachanga 
Wachanga is one of the tech entrepreneurs tapping into Africa’s middle class 
as well as the continent’s improving access to internet. In 2013McKinsey 
estimated 
<http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/high_tech_telecoms_internet/lions_go_digital_the_internets_transformative_potential_in_africa>
 that by 2025 e-commerce could account for 10% of retail sales in Africa’s 
largest economies.

Kitchen Soko says it now supplies 500 boxes a week. Expats make up about one 
quarter of Kitchen Soko’s clients, says Wachanga, but the rest are Kenyans. 
“Middle-class Kenyans living busy lives in the city, like those in other 
growing economies, value their time,” he says. “That’s why there is a lot of 
e-commerce.”

Reports about dangerous toxins found in food sold in Nairobi have led to a 
surge in demand, says Wachanga. Recenttests on a sample of food 
<http://www.nation.co.ke/news/Nairobi-residents-eating-poison-scientists-warn/-/1056/3028510/-/7thgf5z/-/index.html>
 bought in markets and supermarkets in the city found chips cooked in 
transformer oil, fruit containing traces of calcium carbide – usually used in 
welding – and kale containing toxic levels of lead. “Big suppliers don’t care 
where the food comes from. We are letting people know the source,” says 
Wachanga. “All our producers have to go through our food principles. They have 
to strive to produce food as organically as they can.”

In Gambia, IT entrepreneur Modou Njie also saw an opportunity to buy food 
directly from local food producers and cut out the middleman, launchingFarm 
Fresh <http://www.farmfresh.gm/en/> last August. Its website offers more than 
100 products, while farmers receive specific orders and a guarantee the produce 
will be bought from them.

Farm Fresh has seen steady demand in its first year and is soon launching in 
Sierra Leone with plans to extend to Senegal and Ghana.

Providing a direct link from farm to fork isn’t always straight forward, 
however. This is true ofRwanda <https://www.theguardian.com/world/rwanda> whose 
nickname “the land of a thousand hills” hints at the logistical struggle.

Civil engineering graduate Gael Murara recently introduced online grocery 
deliveries to Kigali, Rwanda’s capital, with his startupGroceWheels 
<http://grocewheels.com/>. While his aim is to buy directly from farmers, he 
needs to build up enough demand to make that practical, and in the meantime he 
buys from wholesalers.

Part of this demand driving process will be about familiarising people with 
the concept of home delivered groceries. “E-commerce is very new. I have a lot 
of people asking where we work from, I say we are just online, we don’t have a 
shop. It’s the fact they don’t see the person they are buying from,” Murara 
says.

For the farmers, these companies say they offer better profits and spark 
competitive prices. Wachanga says that middlemen in traditional supply chains 
in Kenya are now having to compete with the rates that Kitchen Soko offers its 
farmers, and so have to give farmers better deals.

Better deals for farmers could incentivise people to remain in or enter 
agriculture, a sector that struggles with a reputation for being a lot of hard 
work for little pay. “If you say you’re a farmer they will just laugh at you. 
It isn’t highly regarded,” says Njie. “A lot of people are not aware that 
agriculture is a lucrative market.”

In Kigali, Murara hopes to show young people that agriculture “is not just 
getting up at 5am to tend to crops ... People don’t really realise the market 
that is there. There are a lot of exciting things that can reduce the work of 
the farmers,” he says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gdqb%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gdqb%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F396e3d389da60ebca5bbe9c5b60bd5807ca6bc9c%2F97_44_1112_667%2F1112.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20rise%20of%20internet%20veg%20box%20schemes%20in%20sub-Saharan%20Africa&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gdqb%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+rise+of+internet+veg+box+schemes+in+sub-Saharan+Africa&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gdqb%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F396e3d389da60ebca5bbe9c5b60bd5807ca6bc9c%2F97_44_1112_667%2F1112.jpg>
 Harvesting vegetables for Kitchen Soko. Photograph: Winston Wachanga 
There are, however, notes of caution about the potential of these businesses. 
Omair Ansari, emerging consumer market analyst at Renaissance Capital, says it 
is too early to know the scale of this niche sector but queries its 
profitability.

Widespread internet access is planned but is currently low, he says, while 
credit cards and mobile payment platforms like Kenya’sMpesa 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/jun/04/world-remit-do-pay-financial-services-western-union-world-bank>
 are still relatively rare. Furthermore, these schemes are directed at a high 
earning middle class and while that demographic is growing, it’s a slower 
growth than initially predicted. A recentCredit Suisse report 
<https://publications.credit-suisse.com/tasks/render/file/?fileID=F2425415-DCA7-80B8-EAD989AF9341D47E>
 suggests only 19 million people on the continent should be considered middle 
class. Ansari predicts that online grocery delivery companies will struggle to 
make money until those challenges are overcome.

“Among the upper middle and upper class there is a demand but that is also 
finite. You see stupendous growth rates of e-commerce because it simply didn’t 
exist before, but that also has a cap on it when the rest of the population 
doesn’t have access to mobile data. You can launch it now but it will end up 
costing you until that [internet] penetration rate kicks through. So the 
scalability isn’t huge until logistics, mobile broadband and the cost of data 
are sorted,” he said.

Wachangai remains buoyant. “People working in farming will be the next 
millionaires and it will only come through innovation like ours.”
