
My mother is mildly obsessed with her thyme hanging basket, and for good 
reason: it thrives in a way that thyme doesn’t always. It hangs outside a 
south-facing kitchen window, but I think the secret of its success is that it’s 
just under the eaves of the house, so is protected from winter rain. It always 
looks marvellous in summer, when it flowers, but it’s as attractive now. Plus 
there’s none of that splashback you get in winter from garden plants, so it’s a 
joy to cook with.

Prostrate rosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis Prostratus Group 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/88317/Rosmarinus-officinalis-Prostratus-Group/Details?returnurl=%2Fplants%2Fsearch-results%3Fform-mode%3Dfalse%26query%3Drosmarinus%26aliaspath%3D%252fplants%252fsearch-results>
) is another herb that works well in a hanging basket – the larger the basket, 
the bigger it will grow – and although it won’t do anything spectacular in 
winter, so long as it’s healthy, it will look luxurious. Maybe plant snowdrops, 
crocus orIris reticulata 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/21176/Iris-reticulata/Details> varieties to pop 
up between the foliage and add some cheer.

Related: NHS special: Sow, Grow, Repeat winter 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/audio/2016/jan/16/nhs-special-sow-grow-repeat-winter>

When it comes to flowers, pansies and violas seem to rule the winter hanging 
basket scene, but that can be problematic; if the basket is too high, you won’t 
get much joy from those smiling faces. They can be a gamble, too. Those large 
petals often crumple and bleed in the rain, and can be shy to flower on short 
days. Violas, however, are tougher and flower more readily over a longer period 
– I guess due to their alpine ancestry. Dark violas tend to get lost against 
the soil: even though they look opulent and velvety in the garden centre, 
they’ll all but disappear at home: whites, pinks, sky blues and yellows show up 
best.

I have a soft spot for ornamental cabbages in baskets. The white and green 
sort, interplanted with white heather,Calluna vulgaris 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Calluna>, and trailing ivy, make a lovely 
seasonal basket. You don’t have to pay for ivy: just find someone with plenty, 
lift a few strands with roots along them, and it will quickly bed down; if you 
have the sort of basket that lets you plant from below, nudge the ivy in there, 
so it doesn’t compete with other plants.

Related: Alys Fowler: give fruit netting some TLC now, and help the birds into 
the bargain 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/02/fruit-netting-care-winter-alys-fowler>

Hanging baskets work now because the plants are checking in for a few months. 
Other than ivy, the rest won’t put out a great deal of roots, so keep checking 
if they need water, particularly if sheltered from the rain. If you’re thrifty, 
when spring appears and you go for a new look, repot heathers, evergreen shrubs 
and ivies: you don’t need to pot them up into larger containers, but give them 
fresh compost, feed them over summer, and they’ll be ready for next year’s 
baskets, too.
