
This week, academics from a wide variety of disciplines – including bioethics, 
linguistics, design engineering, geography and history – will gather in London 
to share ideas about a pillar of British life:The Archers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-archers>.

Although some of the papers to be presented at the one-day conference 
<https://www.eventbrite.com/e/the-archers-in-fact-and-fiction-academic-analyses-of-life-in-rural-borsetshire-tickets-19994870195>
 approach the world’s longest-running radio soap opera from a slightly 
tongue-in cheek angle (“Seeming, seeming: Othello, reputation and Rob 
Titchener”), others reflect on the contemporary social and political issues 
raised by recent storylines, such as disability rights (“The dis/appearance of 
disability … or why Bethany had to leave Ambridge”) and cuts to services 
(“Heather Pet – a dramatic end to ongoing lack of good social care”).

Related: Why aren't there more university graduates on Coronation Street? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/nov/19/why-arent-there-more-university-graduates-on-coronation-street>

When I started looking at The Archers and its audience in the late 1990s, it 
was a mostly solitary pursuit. I often felt there was something deeply uncool 
about my research topic – plucked from the heart of middle England – even 
though I was looking at the dynamics of gender, class and race in the fictional 
village, and at feminist fan cultures around the programme.

Being broadcast on radio may have been a factor in condemning The Archers to 
academic obscurity.Radio <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> studies is 
sometimes thought of as a Cinderella subject in the broader field of media and 
cultural studies – but the digital era has changed this landscape, as well as 
the role and even the nature of the medium.


The programme can also now be accessed on BBC iPlayer or as a podcast, and 
online fan communities have flourished as a result. Even though the BBC closed 
its Archers messageboard in 2013, the discussions have moved to independent fan 
sites and social media such asFacebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/BBCTheArchers/?fref=ts> and Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/BBCTheArchers> and continued to grow. 

But academics have not devoted much time or attention to Ambridge and its 
residents until now, despite the programme being broadcast for 65 years. So how 
did the conference come about? Cara Courage, a PhD student at the University of 
Brighton and one of the conference organisers, explained in an interview with 
The Independent: “We discovered a huge fan base of academics commenting on the 
omnibus episode on Twitter. We began chatting about topics for an academic 
paper on The Archers and it grew from there. The response has been 
overwhelming.”

Related: What's wrong with studying the Kardashians? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jan/14/whats-wrong-with-studying-the-kardashians>

The online Archers listeners who responded to calls during my research 
<http://www.intellectbooks.co.uk/journals/view-Article,id=9069/> were 
predominantly female (76%), white British (81%) and aged 40-59 (62%). The level 
of education was high – 74% had been through higher education. Analysis of 
online discussions highlighted their delight in criticising, parodying and 
satirising the programme, as well as peppering their comments with literary and 
cultural references.

So it is not at all surprising to find a group of academics who are also 
regular Archers listeners. The playful tone of the call for papers – which 
listed possible topics including “The statistical probability of no Ambridge 
residents listening toRadio 4 <http://www.theguardian.com/media/radio4> at 2pm 
or 7pm” – and the titles of some of the papers (“Lynda Snell as archetypal 
class warrior”, for example) are in line with the ironic fandoms identified in 
online discussions.

The enforced brevity of Twitter has prompted a new kind of Archers online 
chat, focused mainly on the Sunday omnibus edition, consisting of rapid, witty 
remarks or parodic images such as those from theAmbridge Synthetics 
<https://twitter.com/ThePlarchers> account, which provides the “unofficial 
pictures” of “a contemporary drama in a plastic setting”.

Related: What makes a good bad guy? Ask a philosopher 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jan/21/what-makes-a-good-bad-guy-ask-a-philosopher>

Twitter, Facebook and fan sites also provide forums for discussion of the 
issues raised, such as the current storyline of violence and emotional abuse in 
Helen and Rob’s marriage. Listeners are divided on whether the story works as 
entertainment, with some finding it unbearable to listen to, while others 
comment on the excellent acting and scripts. It certainly fulfils the 
programme’s original mission to educate and inform by raising awareness of the 
plight of “real-life Helens” amid cuts to funding for women’s shelters. As a 
result of a recent Twitter campaign, Archers listeners haveraised more than 
£50,000 <https://www.justgiving.com/helentitchener/> for the national domestic 
violence charity Refuge.

Combine these lively debates and online communities with the fact that the 
radio broadcast remains a marker in the day for households across the country, 
and the programme’s buoyant audience figures and resilience in the face of 
criticism do not seem so surprising. Here’s to another 65 years.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
