
The civil service fast stream consistently holds its own with the likes of 
PwC, Deloitte and Aldi in the top UK graduate schemes. For 2014-15 it came 
sixth in the Times Top 100 Graduate Employers – though it slipped to 18th place 
in the Guardian UK 300 most popular graduate employers for 2015, from ninth in 
2014.

Some 20,072 people applied to the fast stream in 2014 and the civil service 
offered places to 915 applicants, 159 of whom declined.

What makes it so popular? “The fast stream gives newcomers a lot of 
responsibility from day one,” says Laura Dix, who started working in the 
Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) in 2013. “You arrive in the job and 
you’re expected to be an expert in whatever you’re working on. You decide what 
government policy is going to be.”

Related: What is it like to work in the civil service fast stream? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/sep/04/civil-service-fast-stream-like-to-work-advice>

Dix, 25, is fascinated by foreign policy but was also pulled to the civil 
service by the range of career options available.

The 2013 cohort were the first to trial the new-look fast stream – a four year 
programme with the first two years divided into four six-month assignments in 
at least two government departments. This is followed by two year-long 
placements.

The redesigned scheme is more structured and intends to give fast streamers 
more opportunities to progress; previously a graduate’s development was more 
closely linked to theirpersonal choices or the needs of the department 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2012/sep/18/how-civil-service-fast-stream>
 for which they were working.

The fast stream has an average starting salary of £25,000–£27,000 which, while 
competitive for the public sector, is lower than many other top graduate 
schemes (Aldi offers £42,000).

Does this reflect in the types of people who choose to apply for the civil 
service? A lot of people who join have a strong social conscience, says Dix. 
Like many of her colleagues, she is keen that her work has a positive impact on 
people’s lives, not shareholders’ pockets.

That said, Dix’s peers included a former GP of 10 years’ experience, people 
from the private sector, journalists and teachers. Most fast streamers are not 
recent graduates –the average age is 25 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2013/sep/17/civil-service-uncovered-fast-streamer>
.

“We are looking for the broadest possible range of the best possible 
graduates,” says Gillian Smith, head of civil service resourcing. “We don’t 
have any preconceptions about particular types of universities or courses.”

The fast stream is often criticised as elitist – in 2012 12.5% of successful 
applicants were from ethnic minority groups while 26.2% of successful 
candidates were Oxbridge graduates.

Civil service recruiters themselves are working to boost diversity: Smith says 
they have expanded the number of universities they work with and now involve 
fast streamers in outreach schemes and insight days. Their summer diversity 
internship gives students from under-represented socio-economic backgrounds and 
ethnic minority groups experience working in government, with a view toapplying 
for the fast stream 
<http://faststream.civilservice.gov.uk/the-different-streams/summer-diversity-internship-programme/>
.

How to join the civil service fast stream

Applications open in September. Applicants must first register and select one 
ofseveral fast stream options 
<http://faststream.civilservice.gov.uk/the-different-streams/>, including 
generalist (for main government departments, which takes the bulk of fast 
streamers), analytical, human resources, digital and technology, European and 
Northern Ireland. Most streams are open to graduates with a 2:2 in any degree 
discipline.

The next step is to do self-assessed online numerical and verbal reasoning 
tests, first introduced to discourage unrealistic applications. Recruiters will 
not see the results of these or any practice tests. Smith stresses that it’s 
particularly important topractise under timed conditions 
<http://faststream.civilservice.gov.uk/media/129988/onlinetestsadvice.pdf>.

Timed reasoning tests form a part of the first assessed stage of the 
application process, alongside a questionnaire designed to assess candidates 
against the civil service’s10 core competencies 
<http://www.civilservice.gov.uk/wp-content/uploads/2012/07/Civil-Service-Competency-Framework-July-2012.pdf>
, which revolve around setting direction, engaging people and delivering 
results.

Make sure you complete this as yourself – Smith warns applicants against 
trying to answer questions in some kind of persona. “You shouldn’t come to the 
application process with any preconceptions about what we are looking for.”

There is then an e-tray exercise which tests prospective fast streamers’ 
ability to handle a typical workload. Practice versions of this are also 
available.

Those that make it this far are invited to a one-day assessment centre, which 
consists of written and group exercises and interviews. Smith advises 
candidates to be well prepared and well rested. Don’t worry too much about the 
other candidates and remember that you’re not in direct competition with them, 
she adds.

Do the broadest possible research – Smith says applicants should not only read 
all the information on the fast stream website but also like them on Facebook 
and follow them on Twitter. And don’t just read, interact; current fast 
streamers answer questions from prospective applicants about what to expect 
from the programme via Facebook.

Smith also suggests looking across at the GOV.UK website and wider civil 
service, at the range of career prospects available. “We are expecting people 
to demonstrate their potential to lead in the civil service,” she says.

Fast stream recruiters prize leadership qualities, but the civil service is 
supposed to be impartial and objective – so you might want to keep some of the 
more outlandish opinions to yourself in interviews.

Once applicants have been accepted they put the government departments they 
would like to work for in order of preference. Applicants who want to work in 
Parliament or in the Foreign Office, the two most popular departments by far, 
should put their preference as their first or stand no chance of getting in. 
These departments, along with the technology and European streams, require an 
extra layer of entry tests.

“This final level is very much about people skills,” says Dix, adding that you 
probably can’t do a job at the Foreign Office without being able to engage with 
people.

For Dix the final selection involved role play scenarios, for example telling 
a colleague their work isn’t good enough or informing a supplier that they have 
messed up on a contract. To prepare, she suggests prospective FCO fast 
streamers imagine they are on the receiving end of a difficult message.

If you just miss the cut

Related: What to do if you don’t get on the civil service fast stream 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/sep/03/civil-service-fast-stream-other-routes>

When candidates narrowly miss out on being offered a place on the fast stream 
their details are kept on file for up to a year and they may be offered a 
direct appointment to the civil service as an executive officer.

“There are always more people hitting the type of standard we expect than we 
have got places to offer,” says Smith. In 2013 the civil service took about 100 
executives officers from the fast stream waiting list. It saves taxpayers’ 
money because they don’t have to be assessed again, says Smith.

The executive officer level is one grade below the fast stream entry point – 
higher executive officer (development) – but the salaries are not too 
dissimilar. Nick Adams, 25, was rejected from the fast stream in May 2012 but 
joined as an executive officer a few months later. He was quickly promoted to 
assistant private secretary for Brandon Lewis, at the same grade as the fast 
streamers, and soon surpassed his colleagues, securing a further promotion with 
management responsibilities very few fast streamers have.

“If I could do the assessment centre again I would almost certainly not treat 
the written exercise like a university exam,” he says. Candidates have a lot of 
information to digest and summarise, and Adams recommends bullet points over 
carefully crafted prose.

But Adams doesn’t feel like he’s missed out. Fast streamers benefit from a 
development plan and scheduled away days – but personal development is 
encouraged throughout the civil service and direct appointments are more 
flexible because you can go for promotions whenever you want, he says. Fast 
streamers can do this, but it means leaving the stream.

Plus, there’s “a bit of animosity between the fast streamers and the rest of 
the civil service” because they form a clique. Adams likes being better 
integrated into Whitehall, and says he’s proud to be a “reject fast streamer”.

For more advice on how to apply, visit the civil service fast stream website 
<http://faststream.civilservice.gov.uk/>.

More on this topic

 * What’s it like to work in the fast stream? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/sep/04/civil-service-fast-stream-like-to-work-advice>
 * What to do if you don’t get in to the civil service fast stream 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/sep/03/civil-service-fast-stream-other-routes>
 * Why I halved my salary to join the fast stream 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/sep/17/civil-service-fast-stream-halved-salary-join>
 * How to get a job in the public sector 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/sep/01/public-sector-jobs-top-employers-career>
 * Why work in the public sector? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/feb/27/why-join-public-sector>

Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> here for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday. Follow us on Twitter via@Guardianpublic 
<https://twitter.com/guardianpublic>
