

AA Gill basking in his own radiance. Photograph: Eamonn McCabe

Much as I love his writing, AA Gill has never been the sort of chap one would 
associate with cutting edge technology so it was refreshing to see him write so 
lucidly about the Devil's Interweb in his Sunday Timesreview of Hix Oyster and 
Chop House 
<http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/life_and_style/food_and_drink/eating_out/a_a_gill/article3908077.ece>
. According to Gill, his son had shown him "a website called simply, and 
elegantly, aagillisgod".

He discourses with the urbane brilliance we've come to expect for a further 
couple of hundred words, about what he read on the site, how it compared him 
unfavourably, though obviously amusingly, to his friend Jeremy Clarkson, how he 
later told Jeremy all about it and how they competed to include mention of it 
in their respective columns.

Perhaps he'd forgotten that his reviews are pored over by countless foodies on 
the Sunday Times website; perhaps he imagined that people who look at screens 
don't have much truck with the rarified world of the professional bon viveur. 
Whatever the reason, the poor man clearly didn't realise that every one of his 
online readers would rush straight to www.aagillisgod.com which, according to 
the Whois Server has been in the hands of a swift-moving speculator in Boca 
Raton Florida since 07.55 on Sunday (EST). Next, they will have tried
aagillisgod.co.uk <http://www.aagillisgod.co.uk>, .org, or .net which, they 
will have discovered, now belong to ... well me actually ... which is why they 
redirect to this post.

Now if you google "aagillisgod" it just leads to a ferocious blogger's critique
 <http://rotwatch.blogspot.com/> and, gallingly, his own article. Give the 
servers a chance to catch up and I guess it will also point right back here. 
Aah, but the web is a fickle mistress.

What can possibly have happened? A misspelling - surely the Sunday Times subs 
are more on the ball than that? Did no one check? Is the great man confused? 
Perhaps he's got the web mixed up with Teletext? Personally, I think he might 
actually be God so I refuse to believe he's making it up.

Whatever it was he had in mind it must be out there somewhere and it can't be 
beyond the reach of WoM readers to find it. If anyone has any idea whatAA Gill 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/aa-gill> was looking at, let us know and, 
after a suitably educational interval, we'll redirect these URLs to it.
