
With seven days to go until Britain votes on its EU destiny, what’s on the 
minds of the electorate?

Voter focus groups hosted by the Guardian last week in Brighton on the south 
coast and Knowsley on Merseyside suggest it’s all about immigration – and 
everyone is confused.

The group in Brighton involved 21- to 34-year-olds (and they were leaning 
towards remain), while the group in Knowsley had older voters, 45-65, favouring 
a vote to leave.

Carried out by research group Britain Thinks, the exercise saw voters share 
their hopes, fears and frustrations about the referendum campaign and the role 
of Brussels in British life – and they offered some startling insights. Here 
are 10 things we learned:

1. It’s all about immigration 

Notwithstanding remain politicians’ careful efforts to construct an argument 
about the economy (David Cameron, George Osborne) or the risks to workers’ 
rights or the NHS of leaving the EU (Jeremy Corbyn), voters see immigration at 
the centre of the argument, whichever way they lean personally. “Immigration, 
that’s what everyone’s thinking about, whether they say so or not,” said one 
man in Knowsley. “Immigration is the first thing that seems to get mentioned. I 
saw it on the news, the radio,” said one of the Brighton women.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y4qc%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y4qc%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F625b280d0b6593e164f5c1fc1ac50626a943a53c%2F0_527_2624_1574%2F2624.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20what's%20on%20the%20minds%20of%20voters%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y4qc%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EU+referendum%3A+what%27s+on+the+minds+of+voters%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y4qc%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F625b280d0b6593e164f5c1fc1ac50626a943a53c%2F0_527_2624_1574%2F2624.jpg>
 The chancellor, George Osborne, on an EU-related visit to Renishaw Plc in 
Woodchester near Stroud, Gloucestershire. Photograph: Ben Birchall/PA 
2. People are confused – and frustrated

 “Confusing” was the most-used word when participants were asked to write down 
the first things that sprang to mind when they thought about the referendum. 
Asked to bring an object to symbolise the campaign so far, one woman in 
Brighton brought a pair of sunglasses, “to represent the fact I think people 
are covering things up”.

Far from being delighted at the opportunity to express their views on Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> at the ballot box, many of the 
participants felt frustrated or not well-informed enough to make a choice – and 
that applied even to those planning to vote leave. “I don’t think we should be 
having a referendum anyway. They only did it to hoover up the Ukip voters,” 
said one leaver.


3. Remain’s focus on the economy is not sticking 

Remain’s central argument, that leaving the EU would hit the economy, jobs and 
living standards, has failed to feed through to the public. When questioned, 
many did acknowledge that leaving could be risky. “If we leave it’s the whole 
uncertainty thing – do we know, really, what’s going to happen?” one female 
remain leaner said. But most said they didn’t see how their own circumstances 
would be affected and indeed some said they had seen that house prices could 
fall, an idea the young voters of Brighton, at least, would welcome.

4. The £350m to Brussels claim is cutting through 

In contrast, Vote Leave’s claim that Britain sends £350m a week to Brussels 
may have beendisputed by experts 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/reality-check/2016/may/23/does-the-eu-really-cost-the-uk-350m-a-week>
 – Labour’s Angela Eagle told Boris Johnson last week to “get that lie off your 
bus!” – but it cuts through with the public. Even the remainers were attracted 
to the poster spelling out the £350m a week argument, and connecting it to the 
cost of the NHS and schools, when presented with a selection of alternatives. 
Stronger In’s poster claiming that average households would be £4,300 a year 
worse off, by contrast, looked like “scaremongering”.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y4qc%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y4qc%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feca946dfb71226e8fdec13d8645ae8b02b510847%2F0_345_2827_1695%2F2827.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20what's%20on%20the%20minds%20of%20voters%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y4qc%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EU+referendum%3A+what%27s+on+the+minds+of+voters%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y4qc%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feca946dfb71226e8fdec13d8645ae8b02b510847%2F0_345_2827_1695%2F2827.jpg>
 Angela Eagle urges Labour voters to vote remain. Photograph: Euan Cherry/UPPA 
5. The campaign is damaging the (already-damaged) politicians 

Voters’ lack of faith in politicians has been exacerbated by the way the 
campaign has been conducted, too. One man in Brighton turned up with a jam 
swiss roll, because “if you have a bit of it, it’s alright, it’s a bit 
interesting. But after a certain amount of time, you feel quite sick and you 
just want it to all be over.” In Knowsley, one of the Brexit-leaning men 
brought a whistle, because he said politicians had been “dog whistling – 
scaring people”.

Tim Farron, the Liberal Democrat leader, may need to work on his public 
profile. Shown photos of a selection of public figures, and asked whether they 
would trust them on theEU referendum 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>, our focus groupers were 
unable to venture an opinion, because none of them knew who he was. A group 
shot of pro-Brexit ministers, including employment minister Priti Patel and 
Chris Grayling, the leader of the House of Commons, received a similar response.

6. Remainers see Brexiters as xenophobic

Perceptions of the kind of person who would vote to leave were very different 
in the two places, offering a glimpse of the culture clash that is one aspect 
of the national debate. Brighton’s remainers saw a typical Brexiter as 
rightwing, nationalist and perhaps xenophobic. “All I keep thinking is people 
saying ‘back in the day’,” said one. Knowsley’s leavers, however, saw Brexiters 
as “brave”, and concerned about the impact of immigration on public services.

7. Leavers see the rich and “unaffected” as remainers 

The flipside was true, too: Brighton’s young voters saw the typical remainer 
as cultured, well travelled, well educated. Knowsley’s leavers agreed with some 
of that, but lumped politicians, big business and the rich in with the remain 
camp – people whose lives would not be affected, they thought, by a vote to 
stay.

8. Voters are not trusting the politicians 

When it comes to whom the public trust on the EU, it’s not the politicians, or 
at least not British ones. Almost everyone pointed to money expert Martin Lewis 
– whose article about how to vote has been viewed almost 700,000 times – as a 
trusted source.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y4qc%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y4qc%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f8abf17fe5f60d1f4965f4fb83936f95b14cbc7%2F165_88_3941_2365%2F3941.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20what's%20on%20the%20minds%20of%20voters%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y4qc%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EU+referendum%3A+what%27s+on+the+minds+of+voters%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y4qc%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f8abf17fe5f60d1f4965f4fb83936f95b14cbc7%2F165_88_3941_2365%2F3941.jpg>
 Money expert Martin Lewis. Photograph: S Meddle/ITV/REX/Shutterstock 
9. Leavers are upset with Obama 

Barack Obama, who was wheeled out weeks ago by No 10, was viewed as convincing 
by remainers – but his involvement was resented by leavers. “Obama’s not even 
in Britain so what does he care, what does he know?” said one. But if telly 
naturalist David Attenborough or footballer David Beckham were to venture an 
opinion on Brexit, our focus groups suggest the public would be all ears.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y4qc%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y4qc%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12b6f6eb9329b58022f1411b77c6385264cdc101%2F0_1684_3256_1954%2F3256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20what's%20on%20the%20minds%20of%20voters%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y4qc%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EU+referendum%3A+what%27s+on+the+minds+of+voters%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y4qc%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12b6f6eb9329b58022f1411b77c6385264cdc101%2F0_1684_3256_1954%2F3256.jpg>
 US president Barack Obama was in London in April. Photograph: Matt Dunham/AP 
10. The crystal balls are not working 

Both sides struggled to spell out how Britain might change in the event of 
Brexit – apart from blanket media coverage. “I wouldn’t feel much change at 
first apart from the fact that it would be on every single show,” said one of 
our Brighton group.


Apathy may still be the enemy for the remain campaign, and although most of 
our participants, after an evening spent discussing the referendum, said they 
were likely to vote, they were far from certain about it. One of our young 
Brighton women summed it up for many when she said: “People don’t know which 
way to vote so they just say ‘meh’.”


• This article was amended on 16 June 2016. An earlier version referred to 
“£4,300 a week” where “£4,300 a year” was meant.
