
Leaving the EU would detonate a bomb under the British economy, David Cameron 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> has said as he joined with 
Labour, Lib Dem and Green politicians to argue that the leave campaign was 
being reckless with people’s futures.

Brexit explained: Changes agreed by Cameron 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/05/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=cameron_changes#>
The prime minister appeared with Harriet Harman, Natalie Bennett 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/natalie-bennett> and Tim Farron to talk 
about the risks of Brexit and challenge the leave campaign to set out an 
economic plan.

Cameron said leave campaigners were prepared to make things up to persuade 
people to opt for Brexit.

“Don’t throw away your job, don’t throw away your children’s futures, don’t 
throw away the strength and future of our country on the basis of misleading 
statistics peddled by a campaign determined to say anything and indeed 
everything to get the outcome they want,” he said. “That is what is happening. 
Do not be misled. Do not let them persuade you of this reckless course for our 
country.”

He said there would be a recession, years of uncertainty and weaker trade in 
the event of Brexit, and the leave campaign had failed to set out how it would 
deal with those consequences.

“Add those things together – the shock impact, the uncertainty impact, the 
trade impact – and you put a bomb under our economy,” he said. “And the worst 
thing is we’d have lit the fuse ourselves.”

Related: EU referendum live: Cameron says Brexit vote would be economic 'bomb' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/06/eu-referendum-live-cameron-harman-leave-campaign-con-trick>

Cameron said the event in London was an “unprecedented show of cross-party 
unity”, and branded the out campaign “undemocratic and reckless” because it had 
not set out what a vote to leave would mean.

Labour’s Harman said the leave campaign should stop speaking in code and be 
honest that slashing red tape meant wanting to abolish maternity and paternity 
rights and holiday entitlements.


“You’ve said you want to cut red tape and scrap £600m of regulation … Admit 
that means you would abolish the rights to maternity leave and paternity leave, 
scrap the laws that stop employers treating part-timers as second-class 
citizens and which make employers pay for holiday leave,” the Labour former 
interim leader said.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kfzv%2Fsfb%23img-1&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kfzv%2Fsfb%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe378f1c2208e4a93c58b33e846cffff58b8fb58%2F316_125_2897_1739%2F2897.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Cameron%3A%20leave%20vote%20would%20be%20economic%20bomb%20for%20UK&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kfzv%2Fstw%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David+Cameron%3A+leave+vote+would+be+economic+bomb+for+UK&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kfzv%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe378f1c2208e4a93c58b33e846cffff58b8fb58%2F316_125_2897_1739%2F2897.jpg>
 David Cameron speaks at the Oval cricket ground in London. Photograph: Dylan 
Martinez/PA 
Jeremy Corbyn, the Labour leader, also supports staying in the EU but will not 
share a stage with Cameron.

Farron, the Lib Dem leader, said there was a “black hole at the heart of 
[Brexiters’] spending plans of more than £150bn”, and branded the leave 
campaign’s claims “fantasy economics”.

Bennett, the Green party’s outgoing leader, asked the leave campaign: “Can you 
confirm that you intend to abolish environmental protections and measures to 
tackle climate change?”

She also challenged the media to start treating the referendum as an argument 
about policy rather than a Conservative party leadership contest.

They set out their case at an event in London shortly before the leading leave 
figures Boris Johnson and Michael Gove appeared in Stratford-upon-Avon, to 
claim that the UK would be hit with an extra £2.4bn bill from the EU if it 
votes to stay.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kfzv%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kfzv%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb5549e54d5d3d611117ea5c33a52a77a5c5c0da%2F0_69_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Cameron%3A%20leave%20vote%20would%20be%20economic%20bomb%20for%20UK&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kfzv%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David+Cameron%3A+leave+vote+would+be+economic+bomb+for+UK&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kfzv%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb5549e54d5d3d611117ea5c33a52a77a5c5c0da%2F0_69_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 People listen to Natalie Bennett’s speech. Photograph: WPA Pool/Getty Images 
 Asked about the prime minister’s claim that Brexit would place a bomb under 
the British economy, Gove said he believed in “free speech and democratic 
debate – a strong culture of people telling it like it is and shooting from the 
hip”.

 The justice secretary said he wanted to argue that the EU undermines NATO and 
weakens national security. He said the ECJ was a court with a “fundamentally 
political agenda” to further the cause of European integration. “Indeed the ECJ 
can over-rule Parliament and strike down our laws, forcing us to accept its 
rulings.”

 Johnson also hit back at the prime minister arguing that it was a “myth and 
delusion” to suggest that less democratic control would boost prosperity. “The 
risk of staying in this over-centralising, over-regulating job destroying 
machine are becoming more and more obvious.”

Despite the bitter feuding between Tories in the two camps, Cameron told BBC 
Radio 2’s Jeremy Vine show that he had a “self-denying ordinance” not to attack 
other members of his party.

 He said Sir John Major, the former prime minister, was speaking for himself 
when he said Johnson and Gove posed a danger to the NHS and were running a 
deceitful campaign “verging on the squalid”.

 However, he went on to criticise Michael Gove, the justice secretary, for 
saying last week that people have “had enough of experts” when asked about 
economists who supported the leave cause.

 Cameron said someone from leave said the other day it was wrong to trust 
experts but no one would build a bridge without listening to them.
