
In the 1980s I began my career in the new-style media. As fashion editor of 
Blitzmagazine I commissioned 22 designers including John Galliano, Jean Muir 
and Vivienne Westwood to customise a Levi’s denim jacket. Among this glamorous 
roll-call wasLeigh Bowery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/leigh-bowery>, who I’d got to know on 
London’s avant-garde club scene.

Even though he was often caricatured as a clown, Leigh was fiercely serious 
about his work. He spent dayspainstakingly positioning thousands of golden 
hairgrips on to his jacket <http://www.vam.ac.uk/users/node/18682> in row upon 
row of fringing that jangled as it moved. He also lined it with turquoise satin 
on to which he applied sequins the size of 50p pieces.

On 15 June 1986, we staged a Gala Fashion Show at the Albery Theatre in 
London’s West End with actors, musicians and dancers, including Miranda 
Richardson, Tina Chow, Michael Clark, Margaux Hemingway and Daniel Day-Lewis, 
who doubled as models. Despite being surrounded by a surfeit of star turns and 
style icons and, bearing in mind he existed on the extreme margins of society 
(these were the days before YouTube and Instagram could turn any kid in their 
bedroom into a global phenomenon) Leigh, who modelled his own jacket, stole the 
show.

First, Leigh’s segment of the show was heralded by a large ladyfriend, with an 
even larger sign on which was scrawled “BOWERY”. It was not until she lifted 
the sign above her head, like one of those women who announces each round of a 
boxing match, that she was revealed to be completely naked. Leigh loved to 
shock but while this was probably his first appearance on a West End stage his 
performance was well rehearsed.

He paraded on his platforms like a supermodel, only interrupted by a mock fall 
– something he had done many times before on the dancefloor ofTaboo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/jun/22/club-catwalk-london-fashion-1980s>
, the nightclub he fronted. At the end, he shimmied off stage, arms 
theatrically outstretched, his behind (encased in gold lycra) jiggling like 
Beyoncé at her best. Beyond.

The 1980s were all about customisation so for another Blitz project I asked 
Leigh to makeover a harlequin catsuit from Hyper Hyper. On the day of the shoot 
he dressed his model, his friend Trojan, in his own designs screwing up the 
catsuit and dumping it on the floor. “I’m so sorry Iain,” said Leigh in his 
most seductive singsong voice, “I racked my brains to make this garment look 
interesting, something I’d be seen in… NOTHING WORKED!” He couldn’t resist 
adding: “It is so hideous I did think about doing a poo on it.”

In everything he did, Leigh was mesmeric, like a giant, twirling glitterball. 
“The most amazing light show” is how fellow nightclubber Boy George described 
him in the lyric of“Il Adoro” <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=piBwH5nuSHo> in 
Taboo, the musical. I am happy to have had the chance to dance in those rays.

Vogue Colouring Book by Iain R Webb is published by Conran Octopus, £10. To 
order a copy for £8, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/366321/> 
