
If the prime minister David Cameron is to be believed, his flagship troubled 
families programme 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/downing-street-launch-for-troubled-families-scheme--2>
 (TFP) has beena miraculous success 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2015/jun/22/cameron-sets-out-his-one-nation-mission-in-a-speech-politics-live#block-5587f7c4e4b0629b0a62aa02>
, having saved the taxpayer more than a billion pounds.

The trouble with Cameron’s bold assertion is that, while there is some 
qualitative evidence that TFP has enabled some improvements in professional 
practice, there appears to be no solid data to underpin his wider claims.

The seemingly runaway success of TFP was just one of several bold declarations 
made by Cameron inhis welfare speech 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2015/jun/22/cameron-sets-out-his-one-nation-mission-in-a-speech-politics-live#block-5587f7c4e4b0629b0a62aa02>
 in Runcorn on Monday morning. Introduced under the last government, TFP 
identifies (in theory) the most vulnerable families and prepares innovative, 
focused interventions to help them.

These intensive interventions, the prime minister said, had “changed lives” by 
tackling seemingly intractable problems of worklessness, addiction, truancy and 
anti-social behaviour:

I can announce today that almost all of the 117,000 families which the 
programme started working with have now been turned around – in terms of either 
school attendance or getting a job or both. This has saved as much as £1.2bn in 
the process.

Related: David Cameron's claim of £1.2bn saved via families plan labelled 
'pure fiction' 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jun/22/david-cameron-claim-12bn-saved-troubled-families-plan-pure-fiction>

Such is its success, said Cameron, that TFP is to be expanded to 400,000 more 
families by the end of this parliament, and the principle behind it – the 
so-called Payment by Results (PBR) approach – will be applied to those other 
parts of the public sector “where state institutions have all too often failed”.

But is the prime minister correct about the achievements of TFP? 

Jonathan Portes <http://niesr.ac.uk/users/portes-j>, the head of the National 
Institute of Social and Economic Research, had a view of its successback in 
March <http://www.niesr.ac.uk/blog/troubling-attitude-statistics#.VYgSTWTF_5p>, 
when very similar claims for the TFP were made by the then communities 
secretary Eric Pickles:

We have, as of now, absolutely no idea whether the Troubled Families Programme 
has saved taxpayers anything at all; and if it has, how much. The £1.2bn is 
pure, unadulterated fiction.

Portes, who repeated his criticisms 
<https://twitter.com/jdportes/status/612957343295348737> of TFP on Monday 
morning, points out that although an evaluation has been commissioned of the 
TFP, its findings have yet to be published. The £1.2bn savings figures is based 
on rough, self-reported estimates by councils who (in theory) have a financial 
interest in presenting optimistic assessments of their own TFP performances 
(they get paid by the number of families they “turn around”).

Moreover, the TFP data, Portes pointed out, is not properly tested. There has 
been no assessment of what would have happened to these families had they not 
been subject to the programme. There is no counterfactual, and therefore no 
legitimate basis on which to make a savings estimate.

Portes added: 

Until the results of the evaluation are in, we know nothing about whether 
there any savings, let alone what they are.

The government confirmed on Monday afternoon that the results of the formal 
evaluation had not yet been published.


The Durham university researcher Stephen Crossley 
<https://www.dur.ac.uk/research/directory/staff/?mode=staff&id=9446> also 
looked at these figures 
<https://akindoftrouble.wordpress.com/2015/03/13/the-troubled-families-programme-the-perfect-social-policy/>
 on their first official airing in March 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/more-than-105000-troubled-families-turned-around-saving-taxpayers-an-estimated-12-billion>
, and noted the staggeringly unlikely assumptions on which the data Cameron 
uses are based:

The TFP has apparently achieved a 100% success rate in local authorities 
identifying exactly the same amount of troubled families in their area as the 
indicative number provided by the government – the total number of families 
identified and worked with by local authorities comes to 117,910. Every single 
local authority has identified every single ‘troubled family’ in its area and 
every single local authority has begun working with them. The practice on the 
ground, therefore, represents a perfect alignment with the information provided 
by politicians and civil servants in Whitehall. This is despite the data used 
to identify the number of ‘troubled families’ being six years out of date and 
compiled for completely different purposes and identifying potentially very 
different families.

Crossley, who has made other detailed 
<https://akindoftrouble.wordpress.com/2015/03/11/no-method-in-the-troubled-families-madness/>
criticisms 
<https://akindoftrouble.wordpress.com/2015/03/15/the-troubled-families-non-announcements/>
 of TFP, points out that unlikely savings aside, there is an air of unreality 
about the statistical claims for the success of the on-the-ground work with 
familes:

It is ... staggering that work with some of the most disadvantaged families 
who have allegedly been immune to all previous policy interventions and whose 
‘troubles’ have existed ‘for generations’ has been so successful at a time of 
wide-ranging and deep cuts to local authorities and others’ public services.

Portes remained similarly incredulous:

In other words, CLG (Department for Communities and Local Government) told 
Manchester that it had precisely 2,385 troubled families, and that it was 
expected to find them and “turn them around”; in return, it would be paid 
£4,000 per family for doing so. Amazingly, Manchester did precisely that. Ditto 
Leeds. And Liverpool. And so on. And CLG is publishing these figures as fact. I 
doubt the North Korean statistical office would have the cheek.

Cameron nonetheless heralded Payment by Results as an approach which should be 
rolled out to other services. His enthusiasm is not shared by the National 
Audit Office (NAO) however. Only last week,it urged caution on PBR 
<http://www.nao.org.uk/report/outcome-based-payment-schemes-governments-use-of-payment-by-results/>
, not least because there was so far no evidence that it offered value for 
money, and no sign that Whitehall was monitoring how well PBR was working.

The head of the NAO Amayas Morse concluded:

Payment by Results potentially offers benefits such as innovative solutions to 
intractable problems. If it can deliver these benefits, then the increased risk 
and cost may be justified, but this requires credible evidence. Without such 
evidence, commissioners may be using this mechanism in circumstances to which 
it is ill-suited, to the detriment of value for money.

There is support among some professionals working with troubled families for 
the changes in practice that the programme enables. The family work is as a 
result often more sustained, and the problems addressed more wholistically, 
with agencies working together. Anecdotally, results with individual families 
have been positive.

But even its supporters have acknowledged that its benefits, like those of 
many preventative interventions, are often hard to quantify; and that there is 
a risk that these elements of good practice have been lost in the political 
imperative to over-claim for what Crossley called, with withering sarcasm:

The perfect social policy
