
Over recent years there has been a growing consensus in mainstream political 
parties as to how to tackle neglected mental health services and improve the 
poor outcomes experienced by many service users and their carers. The concern 
has been of particular significance for black and minority ethnic (BAME) 
communities.

 This challenge is reflected in NHS England’s Mental Health Taskforce report 
<https://www.england.nhs.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/Mental-Health-Taskforce-FYFV-final.pdf>
 which sets out a new cross-system, all ages, national five-year plan for NHS 
mental health services to 2020-21, launched earlier this year.

Related: Mental health services kept waiting for promised 'revolution' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/may/19/mental-health-nhs-revolution>

 More than 20,000 people took part in the taskforce consultation process that 
informed the report. Several key themes emerged: better access, better quality 
services, better attention to physical and mental healthcare, better preventive 
care. The taskforce has responded to these requests by outlining:

 *  A seven-day NHS providing crisis care across the country, including a new 
model for children and young people. 
 *  An integrated approach to mental and physical health. 
 *  Promoting good mental health and preventing poor mental health. 
The taskforce concluded that the best way to revolutionise care is to treat 
people’s minds and bodies equally, hardwiring mental health into theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>. This means greater transparency in 
spend and outcomes and a relentless focus on inequalities.

The report recommendations for the NHS have been adopted with a target that by 
2020-21, at least a million people with mental health problems will be 
accessing high-quality care they aren’t getting today. This is further backed 
by £1bn new investment by the year 2021, which we hope will materialise as real 
money backed up by greater transparency in how this is spent by local services.

 The report also challenges the government for stronger leadership because a 
mentally healthy society – and one which cares well for people with mental 
health problems – involves social care, housing, employment, education and 
schools. The prime minister has made a personal commitment to this work.

 The experiences of African and Caribbean service users, carers, and frontline 
staff were not overlooked by the taskforce. At community events and in informal 
conversations, black service users and professionals shared their experiences – 
positive and negative – of mental health services.

These conversations also raised issues of stigma and discrimination, not only 
across services but the perception of how our community views mental health and 
the stigma that we may hold against people with mental health challenges. It is 
clear that we can do more to make sure mental health is a strong area of 
advocacy and campaigning for better services.

 The introduction of NHS England’s Workforce Race Equality Standard 
<https://www.england.nhs.uk/about/gov/equality-hub/equality-standard/>, which 
aims to increase black and minority ethnic senior representation on NHS trust 
boards and to tackle bullying of frontline staff, means there is an opportunity 
to put race equality back on the agenda for mental health services. The Royal 
College of Psychiatrists’commission report on adult inpatient care 
<http://www.rcpsych.ac.uk/policyandparliamentary/commission.aspx> also 
recognised the issue of BAME over-representation in detained services.

 Although the report does not recommend a return of the Delivering Race 
Equality programme 
<https://www.mind.org.uk/media/273467/the-end-of-delivering-race-equality.pdf>, 
there are specific recommendation for the appointment of a senior mental health 
equality lead at the Department of Health to oversee how race and other 
equalities areas are being delivered and implemented by the NHS and social care.

Related: Have men been let down over mental health? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/may/18/men-suicide-mental-health>

 A deeper question also emerges: how do we ensure that the issue of race 
equality is mainstreamed into the delivery of services by the NHS, local 
government, criminal justice, the police, employers and housing providers?

 Furthermore, can black-led providers, service user and carer organisations be 
supported to have a voice which is actually heard and encourage delivery of 
high quality, culturally appropriate services for our diverse communities?

 Part of the answer is that we need to raise our game and not become docile 
and passive citizens. We need to do more in making mainstream service providers 
and commissioners more accountable by playing an active role as part of a wider 
social movement of change in mental health services. Without this proactive 
engagement and informed challenge the taskforce report will not deliver the 
services we deserve and need; the report provides some of the tools to ask 
better questions locally and nationally. Its recommendations set the direction 
of travel. Of course there are those whom are responsible for delivery, but it 
is also up to us to hold them accountable.

Jacqui Dyer is vice-chair of NHS England’s Mental Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Taskforce; Patrick Vernon OBE is a 
non-executive director of Camden and Islington NHS foundation trust

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
