
I was 14 when I asked a friend’s stepdad where Mount Everest was. We were on a 
hill-walking trip and the sense of achievement at scaling those Lake District 
crags awakened a thirst for adventure. Bullied mercilessly at school, I 
suffered attacks of anxiety and was reluctant to be away from home. But once 
the idea struck, there was no stopping me – having asked where to find the 
world’s highest peak, it would be only four years until I first set foot on it.

During those years, I ran competitively to build up stamina, took up rock 
climbing, completed theThree Peaks Challenge 
<https://www.threepeakschallenge.uk/> and ascended Mont Blanc 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mont_Blanc>. I began fundraising while doing my 
A-levels.

At 18, I would have been the youngest British climber ever to reach the top of 
Everest on the south route, but it was not to be. After weeks of trekking, my 
team arrived at base camp on 19 April 2014, the day afteran avalanche killed 16 
Sherpa guides 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/apr/22/nepal-everest-talks-sherpa-strike-avalanche>
. It was, at that time, the worst human tragedy in Everest’s history, and all 
climbing on the mountain was abandoned for the rest of the season.

It would be 12 months until I was able to venture back. An extra year’s 
training left me feeling much more prepared and I started to feel excited about 
the prospect of some real climbing. The morning we set out to climb to camp one 
from base camp was grim, stormy and turbulent. We left at first light, heading 
up the icefall on the south side of the mountain, laden with rucksacks.

We passed towering columns, crumbling ledges and yawning crevasses; but as 
thick fog obscured the route, I kept my head down, focusing on one step at a 
time. After several tough hours, I was past the most technical section of the 
climb, on some big, open ice blocks. I was close to camp one but completely 
alone – Tim, the team leader, and Ellis, another climber, were perhaps 20 
minutes behind me. Most other members were already at the camp when the 
earthquake struck.

I’ll never forget the cracking noise that echoed through the valley. I looked 
up, startled, knowing it was ice breaking away from the mountain, but was 
unable to see more than a few metres ahead. There was nowhere to run; I barely 
had time to wonder whether I’d be better off unclipping myself from my climbing 
rope before the avalanche hit me like an express train.

It just kept coming, forcing snow into my nose and mouth. Gasping for air, I 
tried to swim against the white tide. I felt pure fear, a sickening, helpless 
sensation in my stomach. I knew that vast chunks of ice would be crashing down 
and had no way of knowing whether I was in their path. I thought of my family 
back home and imagined the headlines announcing my death – I had no expectation 
of surviving.

Abruptly, the wind subsided and the mountain fell silent. I’d only been hit by 
powder snow and had escaped the worst of the avalanche, but knew a further 
collapse could be on the way. There was no response when I tried to radio ahead 
and I wondered if everyone above and below me had been swept away: was I the 
only team member left alive? Crying, I pressed on, eventually reuniting with 
Tim, Ellis and two more members of the team; alive, but overwhelmed. There were 
tears when we reached the camp: the rest of the team had assumed we were dead.

Related: Experience: I paid to have my daughter kidnapped  
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/25/i-paid-to-have-my-daughter-kidnapped-experience>

When we radioed base camp, we realised how lucky we’d been. The whole area had 
beenhit by a much bigger avalanche and completely destroyed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/26/nepal-quake-everest-base-camp-looked-like-it-had-been-flattened-by-bomb>
. It was two days before we could be helicoptered down, and the camp still 
looked like the site of a plane crash. Twenty-two people had been killed, 
including three members of our support team. One of the Sherpas who died was 
just 19, the same age as me. His death affected me badly. On the way home, I 
broke down, eaten up by survivor’s guilt.

Nearly 9,000 people were killed by that earthquake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nepal-earthquake-2015>. Since then, I’ve 
focused on raising funds to help rebuild Nepal. I plan to return to Everest for 
a third attempt one day. Like the bullying at school, it’s something I need to 
overcome before I can move on.

• As told to Chris Broughton

Do you have an experience to share? Email experience@theguardian.com 
<mailto:experience@theguardian.com>
