
Hix Oyster & Chop House
35-37 Greenhill Rents, Cowcross Street, London EC1, 020-7017 1930

I love Mark Hix's cooking because it's all about great, traditional British 
ingredients and dishes, both of which I'm obsessed by. That's what the menu at 
his new place is built around - things like Barnsley chops and well-hung beef 
sirloin, cooked on the bone and cut very thick. Unpretentious food, made 
incredibly well.

Les Vapeurs
160 Quai Fernand Moureaux, 14360 Trouville, France, 0033 2 3188 1524

I used to be a tripe hater, but the tripes à la mode de Caen at this classic 
Normandy brasserie changed all that. It's cooked very slowly in a sealed pot 
with onion, carrot, calf's foot, garlic, leek, herbs, cider and calvados, and 
it's delicious. They also serve great Normandy mussels and grey shrimps.

Tawana
16-18 Chepstow Road, London W2, 020-7221 6316

Six sorts of chilli, 10 types of noodles, huge bunches of herbs, incredible, 
unidentifiable varieties of fruit and veg - this fantastic oriental supermarket 
has it all. The smell alone is wonderful - walking into the shop is like 
stepping into another country.

Joe's Stone Crab
11 Washington Avenue, Miami Beach, Florida, US, 001 305 673 0365

You can't book ahead, so you have to ask the scary maître d' for a table - 
he'll call you back in an hour, or two, or three, according to how important 
you are in the States. But the sweet, succulent stone crab claws make it all 
worthwhile. Kill the time before a table comes up with a drink at the lovely 
courtyard bar. Or stroll around the corner to the takeaway and treat your claws 
as street food.

Lishman's of Ilkley
25 Leeds Road, Ilkley, West Yorkshire, 01943 609436

Everything a top butcher's should be. David Lishman makes his own black 
pudding, hams and bacon, and sources all his meat locally. Customers are a real 
mix - locals dropping by for a pound of sausages and foodies who travel to shop 
here.

The George Inn
4 West Street, Lacock, Chippenham, Wiltshire, 01249 730263

A 15-minute walk from my mum's place, this beautiful pub is a really good 
place for a Saturday afternoon session. Nice local beers, proper pub grub, a 
garden out back for the summer, a roaring fire inside for the winter.

· Tom Parker Bowles co-presents Market Kitchen on UKTV Food.
