
Rachel Reeves MP, shadow secretary of state for work and pensions, has said 
thatshe plans to continue her political career 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/01/maternity-leave-not-all-women-are-created-equal>
 if her party comes to power while she is – gasp – pregnant. To read some of 
the comments and think pieces about this revelation, you might be forgiven for 
thinking that she had admitted an ambition to make bonfires of taxpayers’ money.

The “stupid woman” is “setting the case for working women back by about 50 
years”according to one column 
<http://www.express.co.uk/comment/columnists/virginia-blackburn/560407/Virginia-Blackburn-on-Rachel-Reeves-Dakota-Johnson-gerbils>
. Anotherspits that she is 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2966117/Sorry-Rachel-taking-Cabinet-seat-going-maternity-leave-feminist-says-BELINDA-BROWN.html>
 “treating motherhood as a part-time obligation, almost a hobby”, is not “fit 
to represent women” and should be disqualified forthwith from “ever making 
important policy decisions affecting women”. FellowMP Andrew Rosindell fretted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/feb/23/cameron-hits-back-tory-mps-out-maternity-leave-comments-rachel-reeves-andrew-rosindell>
 that she might not be able to give the job her “full attention”, arguing that 
“people need to be put in the positions they can handle.”

Since when has being pregnant become a shocking and shameful act? For those 
who might still find the very common act of reproduction a bewildering 
minefield, here are seven handy questions to ask yourself before making 
judgments about somebody else’s pregnancy …

1. Am I being patronising to the pregnant woman? 

“Have you thought this one through?” is one example of what not to say. Don’t 
worry – the person intending to push a human being out of a very small hole and 
subsequently house and care for that small human for the foreseeable future 
has, in all likelihood, given it a bit of thought.

Worried about how they’ll juggle childcare with their job? The chances are 
they are too, but they’ve probably got a plan to make it work. Concerned 
they’re not taking their job seriously enough? Relax – considering they’re the 
one that’s been doing the job up until now and are intimately acquainted with 
its challenges and demands, they’ve probably got it covered.

2. Am I treating it as an anomaly rather than a normal part of life?

Much of the criticism seems to stem from the idea that pregnant women are 
selfishly swanning off to satisfy their desire to “have it all”, to the 
detriment of taxpayers/business owners/neglected children (delete as 
appropriate). Let’s stop and realise how ridiculous an idea that is. A child is 
not a luxury accessory, but a normal – though not of course essential – product 
of a human life.

Collectively dealing with the needs of pregnancy and parenthood should be 
built into the very fabric of our workplaces, businesses and societal ideas 
about careers, not bolted on as an afterthought. The experience of pregnancy 
and new parenthood shouldn’t be treated as something shameful that women feel 
they have to hide in order to be seen as competent. For those who choose to 
stay in work it should simply be assumed that necessary support during and 
after pregnancy – such as flexible working hours, shared parental leave and 
on-site crèches – will be provided. It should be a national scandal that around
50,000 women a year 
<http://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2013/nov/20/fifty-thousand-women-lose-jobs-maternity>
 lose their jobs as a result of maternity discrimination.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F46hqg%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F46hqg%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F13%2F1426240983022%2Fb9ccbfdf-33ca-4c70-b9e9-d3ff68da4245-2060x1521.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Seven%20questions%20to%20ask%20yourself%20before%20judging%20a%20pregnant%20colleague&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F46hqg%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Seven+questions+to+ask+yourself+before+judging+a+pregnant+colleague&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F46hqg%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F13%2F1426240983022%2Fb9ccbfdf-33ca-4c70-b9e9-d3ff68da4245-2060x1521.jpeg>
 ‘Why is it that we don’t discuss the impact a new baby will have on a man’s 
work life?’ Photograph: Jamie Grill/Getty Images/Tetra images RF 
3. Am I making assumptions about the reasons for a woman’s choices?

Is a mother who quickly returns to work really a selfish, career-obsessive? In 
fact, she might just be passionate about her job, have a partner more readily 
able to take on childcare, or not be able to afford more time off.

Is the woman who chooses to stay at home really a feminist failure, yummy 
mummy or dropout? Or might she have made a careful decision about what’s right 
for her and her family? Might she have exercised precisely the kind of choice 
that feminists want women to have? Might prohibitive childcare costs have made 
the decision for her?

4. Would I say this to the father?

Worried that sleepless nights, nappy changes and general emotional exhaustion 
will take their toll on a new mum? They might, to an extent. In much the same 
way that illness, bad breakups and family bereavements sometimes take a toll on 
all of us. But we don’t suggest that people dealing with these problems should 
be sacked, do we? Sleepless nights are a natural part of life as a new parent. 
But fathers aren’t deaf to babies’ night-time screams.

They, too, are experiencing major life upheaval and the emotional 
rollercoaster of early parenthood. Why is it that we don’t discuss the impact a 
new baby will have on a man’s work life?

5. Have I considered the impact that publicly debating this woman’s fitness to 
work might have on her?

It’s 2015. We should be so far beyond the indecency of creating a public 
“debate” about someone’s career competency on the basis of procreation. What 
kind of impact might it have on a person to see their work called into question 
by the comment police when they’re continuing to kick ass in the workplace, 
even while lugging around the weight of a sack of potatoes, creating a new life 
and constantly battling the urge to pee?

In Reeves’ case, as for other high-profile figures, the point is particularly 
pertinent, given the impact such chatter could have on voters’ impressions of 
her performance.

6. Have I considered the fact that women may experience pregnancy differently?

#NotAllPregnancies will prevent women from being able to continue working. If 
you think pregnancy is by default a completely debilitating condition,check out 
Olympic athlete Alysia Montano 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jun/27/thirty-four-week-pregnant-montana-800m-us-race>
, who competed in the 800m while in her third trimester; Amy Poehler, who
brought the house down with a rap about Sarah Palin on Saturday Night Live 
while nine months pregnant 
<http://www.today.com/popculture/seth-meyers-calls-amy-poehlers-sarah-palin-rap-most-historic-2D12107747>
; and Marissa Mayer, whotook over Yahoo while 28 weeks pregnant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/us-news-blog/2012/jul/17/yahoo-marissa-mayer-pregnancy>
.

What’s important is that we offer whatever help and support a woman needs, 
instead of making our own assumptions about what she will or won’t be able to 
handle.

7. Am I expecting this woman to represent all women?

It is neither Rachel Reeves’ nor any other woman’s responsibility to represent 
all women in her life choices. We all have different needs and priorities, and, 
including single parents, same sex couples and adoptive parents, different 
situations.

Choosing to continue working doesn’t “denigrate” or cheapen motherhood. 
Choosing to leave work to raise children doesn’t fly in the face of feminism or 
let down other women. Continuing to hold a high-profile political position 
whilst pregnant doesn’t fail the country. What does hold women back is acting 
as if we are a homogenous group, ignoring our right to make our own individual 
choices, and asking stupid questions when we do.
