
Sowing sunflower seeds is like scattering happiness over the soil; it is a 
gesture in optimism. Hello summer, hello sun.

I intend to have rows of them this year on the allotment. I want to follow 
their cheerful faces as they track the sun. I want to pick them by the armful 
and fill the house with their extravagance and glamour. In my garden, I’m going 
to use them to create a little rhythm architecturally, adding height and late 
summer colour to the back of my beds, which can be a little flat by the end of 
the year. Then I’m going to leave them standing as bird feeders until that time 
when they are nothing more than stripped-bare, weather-worn stems for earwigs 
to hunker down in over winter.

Sunflowers are greedy, greedy things. It is said that if you want to sow a 
wildflower meadow and need to impoverish the soil, then you should sow a 
sunflower meadow first. They suck up all sorts from the soil. They do such a 
good job that they are starting to be used for bioremediation – sucking up 
pollutants, even nuclear radiation – from the soil, cleaning it up as they grow 
(see thislovely film about it 
<https://buddhismnow.com/2011/08/20/invisible-snow/>). If you’re growing them 
in the vegetable garden, it’s worth remembering this, and following with 
something replenishing – field beans or winter tares – to put nitrogen and 
organic matter back into the soil.

Related: Alys Fowler: make the most of your windowsills 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/02/alys-fowler-tomato-windowsills>

Although you can get away with growing sunflowers in thin soils, as long as 
they sit in the sun, they do best in rich, organic, free-draining conditions. 
You can sow direct now if your soil feels warm (if you can keep your hand on 
the surface of the soil comfortably, it’s there) or you can sow indoors on 
windowsills, with a single seed to each 9cm pot. To sow outside from now until 
May, place two seeds per position, 45cm apart, thinning to the strongest 
seedling. If you start off your seedlings on a windowsill or in a cold frame, 
however, they’ll need to be repotted often; nothing makes them more upset than 
to come to the bottom of the pot and have nowhere else to grow.

There are numerous varieties to choose from: strange dwarf hybrids, giants, 
multi-headed forms and those for food production. If you are limited for space, 
go for the multi-headed‘Velvet Queen’ 
<http://www.thompson-morgan.com/flowers/flower-seeds/sunflower-seeds/helianthus-annuus-velvet-queen/6081TM>
. It remains one of my favourites, for its jewel-rich, deep red tones. Being 
multi-headed, you can take some for the vase without ruining its majesty at the 
back of the border.

‘Vanilla Ice’ 
<https://www.sarahraven.com/flowers/seeds/annuals/helianthus_debilis_vanilla_ice.htm>
 is another side-branching, multi-headed variety, with creamy yellow flowers 
and a deep chocolate centre.‘Earthwalker’ 
<http://higgledygarden.com/2015/01/14/sunflower-earthwalker-2/> is a rusty, 
burnt orange version and‘Pastiche’ 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/165518/i-Helianthus-annuus-i-Pastiche/Details> a 
multicoloured variety coming in shades of gold, yellow, orange and dusky pink, 
which look effortless together in a vase.

All of these are 1.5m or taller, so if the wind won’t let you get away with 
that, try‘Dwarf Yellow Spray’ 
<http://www.thompson-morgan.com/flowers/flower-seeds/sunflower-seeds/helianthus-annuus-dwarf-yellow-spray/6947TM>
 from Thompson & Morgan. It is suitable for smaller spaces and windy sites, and 
grows to 45-60cm.
