
It’s not always obvious what career paths graduates who studied an arts or 
humanities degree can pursue. What job, for example, awaits you after reading 
literature, art or philosophy at university?

The answer is that there isn’t just one type of career on offer. Arts and 
humanities graduates end up in sectors as diverse as healthcare and computing. 
“The employment opportunities are greater than ever before,”says Emma Hunt 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/sep/03/which-graduates-find-jobs>, 
deputy vice-chancellor of Arts University Bournemouth, who says the idea of 
arts students being less employable is an outdated one. “Creative graduates are 
no longer tied to just one segment of the employment landscape.”

Often employers are less bothered by what students study, and more concerned 
that they have “the right thinking skills and creative skills – and that they 
can apply themselves to the job at hand”, says Stephen Isherwood, chief 
executive of the Association ofGraduate 
<http://www.theguardian.com/careers/graduate-jobs> Recruiters. 

So whether you want to work in communications, education, or law – they are 
plenty of options for arts and humanities graduates. Most jobs don’t require 
specific undergraduate qualifications, “so recruiters are simply looking for 
broader skills,” adds Isherwood.

If you’re graduating with an arts and humanities degree this summer, what’s 
next? What options are open to you? And how can you decide what career path to 
pursue? Join us onWednesday 1 June from 1pm-2.30pm BST for a live chat with the 
experts. We’ll be discussing:

 * Career options for arts and humanities graduates 
 * Picking a career that suits your interests 
 * CV, cover letter and job application tips 
The Q&A will take place in the comments section below this article. Taking 
part is easier than ever: to commentcreate a free Guardian account 
<https://id.theguardian.com/register?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>, or log in 
using your Twitter or Facebook profiles. Alternatively, tweet us@GuardianCareers
 <https://twitter.com/GuardianCareers> or email your questions to 
charlotte.seager@theguardian.com 
<https://mail.google.com/mail/u/0/?view=cm&fs=1&tf=1&source=mailto&to=charlotte.seager@theguardian.com>
, who will post them for you.

Panel

Andrew Fennell is the director of StandOut CV 
<http://standout-cv.com/blogs/cv-writing-advice-blog/41315012-7-easy-cv-formatting-tips-that-will-get-you-more-interviews>
, a London-based CV writing service. Fennell has previously worked as a senior 
recruitment consultant across multiple industries.

Denise Taylor is an award-winning psychologist with Amazing People 
<http://www.amazingpeople.co.uk/start-here.htm>, helping clients to find their 
perfect career. She is also an author of career books, including: Find Work at 
50+ and Now You’ve Been Shortlisted.

Lis McGuire is a professional CV writer and the founder of Giraffe CVs 
<http://www.giraffecvs.co.uk/>. Lis provides useful tips and advice through a 
weekly blog, as well as The CV Confidence Coach podcast series.

Katherine Burik is founder of The Interview Doctor 
<http://www.jobinterviewcoaching.org/>, a consultancy that helps people and 
businesses prepare for interviews. Katherine is also a bestselling author of 
Tell Me About Yourself: Secrets to Strategic Job Interviews, part of The Job 
Search Manifesto.

Dasha Amrom is a founder and managing director of Career Coaching Ventures 
<http://www.ukcareercoaching.com/> – a career and business coaching 
consultancy. Career Coaching Ventures provides CV and cover letter advice and 
career coaching.

Lydia Fairman is an HR and resourcing specialist, who owns HR and recruitment 
consultancy,Fairman Consulting <http://www.fairmanconsulting.co.uk/>. Fairman 
also offers free CV advice, interview guidance and careers blogs to help job 
seekers succeed.

Jon Gregory is a job search, application and interview specialist. He’s the 
author of Winning That Job, a guide for students and graduates, editor of
win-that-job.com <http://www.win-that-job.com/> and is a regional ambassador 
for National Careers Week.

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
