
David Cameron is leading a government with a “worryingly authoritarian streak” 
that is seeking to undermine theLabour 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party’s funding arrangements 
through the trade union bill, the former head of the civil service has said.

In one of the strongest attacks on a government by a retired senior civil 
servant, Bob Kerslake said the bill marked a “partisan and disproportionate” 
attempt to improve the position of theConservatives 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> at the expense of Labour.

Related: I've had bruising encounters with trade unionists, but condemn 
efforts to silence them 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/jan/11/trade-union-bill-silence-civil-service-bob-kerslake>

Lord Kerslake rounded on the government in a Guardian article 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/jan/11/trade-union-bill-silence-civil-service-bob-kerslake>
 on Monday as the House of Lords prepared to debate the bill designed to 
tighten the rules of trade union funding.

A confidential Labour party document released to the Guardian revealed that 
the partyfaced an expected £6m drop 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/10/labour-expecting-6m-loss-in-funding-through-trade-union-bill>
 in its annual income as a result of the changes to the political levy being 
introduced in the trade union bill, making it impossible for it to maintain its 
current structure, staffing or offices.

Kerslake, who was head of the civil service between 2011 and 2014, said the 
bill and other government reforms to the Freedom of Information Act were 
worrying developments.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fy2y%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fy2y%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ba50d3cc150f99fd34de7e8202f8dfb8da1597d%2F529_476_2449_1469%2F2449.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tories%20undermining%20Labour%20funding%20with%20'partisan'%20trade%20union%20bill&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fy2y%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tories+undermining+Labour+funding+with+%27partisan%27+trade+union+bill&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fy2y%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ba50d3cc150f99fd34de7e8202f8dfb8da1597d%2F529_476_2449_1469%2F2449.jpg>
 Bob Kerslake. Photograph: Steve Parsons/PA 
“While there are quite reasonable steps [in the trade union bill] to increase 
transparency, the main thrust of the measures seems to be both partisan and 
disproportionate to the supposed problems that they are seeking to address,” he 
wrote. “Taken with the other measures being put forward by the government – 
curtailing the powers of the Lords, watering down theFreedom of Information Act 
<https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/guide-to-freedom-of-information/what-is-the-foi-act/>
, cutting theso-called ‘short money’ 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/25/osborne-accused-of-despicable-attempt-to-cut-opposition-party-funding>
 to support the opposition parties – they demonstrate a worryingly 
authoritarian streak in this government that is not comfortable with scrutiny 
and challenge.”

On the introduction of a new “opt-in” requirement for trade union members to 
agree to fund Labour, Kerslake wrote: “In the absence of a proper review of the 
funding of political parties, this can only be seen as a one-sided attempt by 
one political party to undermine the main funding source of another. It opens 
the door for a tit-for-tat response by Labour at some time in the future.”

 The change in the trade union bill would mean a cut in Labour’s income from 
unions of at least £35m across a five-year parliament. The loss would come in 
both annual union affiliation fees and grants. The bill is due to become law in 
the summer and is already forcing the party to make contingency plans, 
including the possible sale of property.

 The trade union bill changes the way trade unionists pay into their union 
political fund, the only source from which unions can give money toLabour 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour>. The changes mean each union 
member will have to agree in writing every five years to opt into paying the 
political levy, as opposed to opting out via the current system. The new rules 
will apply to all 4 million existing political levy payers in unions affiliated 
to the party, and those who are not. The bill gives the unions only three 
months to get a union member’s signature agreeing to the levy payment.
