
David Cameron has raised the spectre of war 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/09/david-cameron-rejects-claims-of-hyperbole-over-brexit-risks>
 in support of the case for the UK remaining in Europe, insisting that 
continued membership could help avoid future conflicts.

The prime minister drew on examples from history in his argument, talking of 
the consequences of conflict, with emotional images that included reference to 
the rows of white crosses on Commonwealth war graves.

Related: David Cameron rejects charge of crying wolf over Brexit war risk 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/09/david-cameron-rejects-claims-of-hyperbole-over-brexit-risks>

The speech, parts of which were released in advance, prompted a backlash from 
the leave campaign that his argument amounted to hyperbole and scaremongering.

Even as Cameron was delivering his speech, the foreign secretary, Philip 
Hammond, wasclarifying the prime minister’s comments 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/09/pm-draws-on-history-to-bolster-eu-remain-campaign>
, saying he was not suggesting that UK withdrawal would lead to wars between 
western countries but that the EU without the UK would be less effective.

But if the prime minister was not suggesting Brexit would result in German 
tanks rolling across the French border – as Boris Johnson caricatured it in a 
speech that followed Cameron’s – is he right to suggest that leaving the EU 
could result in a less secure world?

Is the EU responsible for European stability?

In his speech 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/pm-speech-on-the-uks-strength-and-security-in-the-eu-9-may-2016>
 Cameron argued that the EU has helped to “anchor peace and stability across 
the European continent” by binding the continent together.

“The European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> has helped 
reconcile countries which were once at each others’ throats for decades. 
Britain has a fundamental national interest in maintaining common purpose in 
Europe to avoid future conflict between European countries,” the prime minister 
said.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jxmm%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jxmm%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ff8bbac06a56842294bb88229e7ff1cede495f3%2F0_145_4364_2618%2F4364.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20David%20Cameron%20right%20that%20leaving%20EU%20could%20increase%20the%20risk%20of%20war%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jxmm%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is+David+Cameron+right+that+leaving+EU+could+increase+the+risk+of+war%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jxmm%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ff8bbac06a56842294bb88229e7ff1cede495f3%2F0_145_4364_2618%2F4364.jpg>
 Cameron delivers a speech on the EU at the British Museum in London on Monday. 
Photograph: Reuters 
It is an argument that has been made before by the Nobel committee. When the 
EU wasawarded the Nobel peace prize in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/dec/10/eu-receives-nobel-peace-prize> 
the committee president, Thorbjørn Jagland, praised the EU’s role in 
transforming a European “continent of war” into a “continent of peace”.

“That should not be taken for granted – we have to struggle for it every day,” 
he told assembled European leaders (although not Cameron who sent his deputy at 
the time, Nick Clegg, instead).

Decades of trade and political cooperation on the continent through the EU and 
its predecessors have undoubtedly helped to make war between the major European 
powers less likely – unthinkable, even. But the the key word is “helped”.

How important is the EU to European defence?

A key weakness in Cameron’s argument is that security in western and central 
Europe, and parts of easternEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, is not, for the most part, 
within the remit of the EU. It is mainly a matter for the US-led transatlantic 
alliance that has existed since the end of the second world war, Nato.

Nato is a military alliance, with a HQ in Brussels, a central command and 
control structure, running a huge force of soldiers and equipment from more 
than 20 countries. They conduct major training exercises annually throughout 
the region. The EU has no army, no common defence policy and no common foreign 
policy.

If Russia was to mount an aggressive campaign in the Baltics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/17/nato-russia-elaborate-training-exercise-dangerous-signal>
 or along the Polish border, it would be Nato troops that would be confronting 
them.

If the UK was to leave the EU, it would not make the slightest difference to 
its membership of NATO.

How important is the EU to intelligence sharing?

Cameron is also weak on intelligence sharing, making a comparison with 
Iceland, saying that it is still negotiating to participate in the European 
intelligence community.

The UK is a major intelligence-gatherer, partly because of its close 
relationship with the US intelligence services, in particular the partnership 
between GCHQ and the National Security Agency.

Other countries in Europe, including France and Germany, rely on the UK 
sharing intelligence and that will continue whether the UK is in the EU or not.

Where the EU does play a role is in sharing basic data such as air passenger 
lists. But, given the extent to which other countries rely on the UK for other 
intelligence services, the idea that the UK would be treated along the lines of 
Iceland is preposterous.

What are the chances of war in western, central or eastern Europe?

A Conservative defence minister, speaking after the fall of the Berlin wall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/06/-sp-fall-berlin-wall-what-it-meant-to-be-there>
, predicted there would be conflict in some corner of Europe as a result of the 
end of the cold war and reeled off about half a dozen names, including Sarajevo.

That was prescient. But there are few politicians or defence analysts who 
would make such predictions now. The only threats at Nato headquarters 
mentioned these days are from the instability created by migration in 
south-east Europe from the Middle East conflicts and from Russia.

Related: The Ukrainians starting a new life – in Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/05/ukrainian-russia-refugee-conflict>

There is already conflict in Europe, in Ukraine, between pro- and anti-Russian 
forces. In spite of sanctions, no one at Nato is prepared to go to war over the 
Ukraine.

The US, having started a pull-out of troops and equipment from Europe, is now 
hurriedly sending them back. This is intended to deter Russia from interfering 
in countries such as those in the Baltics. In spite of the rhetoric, there is 
no serious expectation of a conflict between Russia and Nato states.

Although Russia has tested the air defences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/23/us-russia-building-air-defence-systems-eastern-ukraine-border>
 in the Baltics and elsewhere – just as the UK and other Nato countries test 
Russian air defences – it held back from interference in the Baltic states or 
any other Nato country. Ukraine is not a Nato member.

 Security elsewhere around the world?

Cameron mentioned the fight against Islamic State and other potential 
confrontations around the world.

But the fight against Isis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/03/how-britain-funds-the-propaganda-war-against-isis-in-syria>
 is being conducted in Iraq and Syria not by the EU but a coalition of US, 
European and, to a much lesser extent, some Middle East countries. If there is 
an intervention in Libya, again it will be by another ad hoc coalition, not the 
EU.

Related: 1956: Suez and the end of empire 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2001/mar/14/past.education1> 

Cameron said that UK influence is greater these days than at any time since 
the low point ofthe Suez crisis 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2001/mar/14/past.education1> in 1956 and 
attributes this in part to Europe. Not true. The UK does not have military 
forces remotely comparable to what it had in 1956 oreven 10 years ago 
<http://www.theguardian.com/news/defence-and-security-blog/2015/mar/09/britain-faces-further-cuts-to-armed-forces>
.

It has influence through being a permanent member of the UN security council 
and leaving the EU would not affect that.

But as always the dominant force in western security is the US. All other 
countries, including the UK, are by comparison bit players. Whether the UK is 
in or out of the EU would not alter that fact.

The US would rather the UK remains in the EU 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/24/leave-campaign-obama-trade-warning-eu-referendum>
 but the close military and intelligence sharing will continue even if the UK 
leaves the EU.
