
This is a tough time to be a graduate in Mali. The uprising and military coup 
of 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jan/16/mali-guide-to-the-conflict>, 
together withongoing attacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/20/mali-attack-highlights-global-spread-extremist-violence>
, mean tourists and foreign investors are nervous. Unless you’re an interpreter 
for the UN – which has more than10,000 troops in the north 
<http://www.un.org/en/peacekeeping/missions/minusma/> – or work in the security 
industry, job prospects look bleak.

In a country where young job seekers aged from 15 to 39 make up about 80% of 
all unemployed people 
<http://www.africaneconomicoutlook.org/fileadmin/uploads/aeo/PDF/Mali%20Full%20PDF%20Country%20Note.pdf>
, one school seems to be bucking the trend. Perhaps surprisingly, it teaches 
art, theatre, dance and music.

“Around 60% of our students get jobs when they graduate,” says Abdoulaye 
Konaté, the director and founder of the renownedBalla Fasséké Kouyaté 
Conservatory, <http://www.conservatoire-arts-mali.org/cadregene.html> known as 
Camm or the Conservatoire.

Konaté <http://www.blainsouthern.com/artists/abdoulaye-konate> is one of 
Mali’s most famous contemporary artists. He uses traditional materials and 
techniques in his textile-based work, which has been featured in exhibitions in 
London’s Hayward Gallery, Washington’s Smithsonian National Museum of African 
Art and the Pompidou Centre in Paris.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tgv6%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tgv6%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa83aa3be844bbd45cc1eb5c1ebd3c91a9ef40042%2F0_0_1500_2000%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Art%20of%20work%3A%20how%20Conservatoire%20graduates%20are%20bucking%20Mali's%20unemployment%20trend%20%7C%20Fleur%20Macdonald&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tgv6%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Art+of+work%3A+how+Conservatoire+graduates+are+bucking+Mali%27s+unemployment+trend+%7C+Fleur+Macdonald&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tgv6%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa83aa3be844bbd45cc1eb5c1ebd3c91a9ef40042%2F0_0_1500_2000%2F1500.jpg>
 Immigration, a work by the Malian artist Abdoulaye Konaté, director and 
founder of the renowned Balla Fasséké Kouyaté Conservatory. Photograph: Fleur 
Macdonald 
At his studio in Bamako, around the corner from the Radisson Blu hotel that 
was the scene of aterrorist attack  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/20/mali-attack-highlights-global-spread-extremist-violence>
last November, Konaté displays some of his large textiles. They arrive neatly 
folded, like quilts, and are spread out on the floor.

The first shows the outline of a man holding his detached cranium, which is 
overrunning with blood. The work is called Immigration and the message is 
clear: when native talent leaves countries, it has devastating consequences.

Migration has always been a part of life in Mali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mali> but it has achieved a new level of 
international visibility now, according to Isaie Dougnon, an assistant 
professor at the University of Bamako who specialises in migration.

“It’s hit the news as Europe has put up legal and physical barriers,” he says, 
noting that young people were also leaving for centralAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, including Angola, Equatorial Guinea 
and Gabon.

Konaté founded Camm in 2004. At first a personal project, it is now funded by 
the government, through the ministry of culture. For Konaté binding people to 
their homeland is part of its mission.

He was among 70 African artists featured in Simon Njami’s 2005 Africa Remix 
show 
<http://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/find/hayward-gallery-and-visual-arts/hayward-gallery-exhibitions/past/africa-remix>
in London. He’s showing work at theEva International <http://www.eva.ie/>, 
Ireland’s biennial of contemporary art, and has a retrospective at theArken 
Museum of Modern Art in Denmark 
<http://www.arken.dk/udstilling/kommer-snart-arken-contemporary-abdoulaye-konate/>
 this year.

Konaté explains that there are three strands to the school’s curriculum. 

The first is academic: students learn the basic principles of art, such as 
proportion, anatomy, technique and the canon. The second strand aims to instil 
a profound knowledge of – and pride in – the Malian heritage.

“It is important that they understand the techniques and concepts behind their 
own culture,” Konaté says. To emphasise this, he has insisted that teachers of 
traditional techniques be paid the same as those with official qualifications.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tgv6%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tgv6%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31882f9ee67da373325ba990a52c413f6a1f19cf%2F0_68_1648_1539%2F1648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Art%20of%20work%3A%20how%20Conservatoire%20graduates%20are%20bucking%20Mali's%20unemployment%20trend%20%7C%20Fleur%20Macdonald&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tgv6%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Art+of+work%3A+how+Conservatoire+graduates+are+bucking+Mali%27s+unemployment+trend+%7C+Fleur+Macdonald&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tgv6%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31882f9ee67da373325ba990a52c413f6a1f19cf%2F0_68_1648_1539%2F1648.jpg>
 Abdoulaye Konaté in front of his work Butterfly, April 2016. Photograph: Fleur 
Macdonald 
The school also teaches its students digital skills, and they are planning to 
open a film department.

Tiécoura N’Daou, a former student and visual artist from Mopti in central 
Mali, now teaches at the Conservatoire. He was recently featured in a 
contemporary art festival inSão Paulo, VideoBrasil 
<http://site.videobrasil.org.br/en/acervo/artistas/artista/1589119>, and is 
even more upbeat than Konaté about the percentage of students who get jobs in 
Mali after studying at the Conservatoire.

“More than 70% find work in media agencies, teaching, freelance projects – or 
they start up their own projects,” he says.

This is important economically. Migrants within Mali send back money to their 
families, and this improves living conditions throughout the country, according 
to Abdoullah Coulibaly, founder and chairman of the annualBamako Forum 
<http://www.forumdebamako.com/> – referred to by some as the Davos of Africa. 

He says that retaining these people in Mali helps “to secure a dynamic 
workforce” and support development more generally.


An international outlook is important to Konaté, who invites teachers from 
France, Guinea, Niger and Ivory Coast to the school under an exchange programme 
known as the Voie Sacrée, or sacred path.


There are about three students to every teacher and 20 of the college’s 80 
teachers are from other countries. The 260 students must take a tough entrance 
exam, and come from all over Mali and the rest of Africa.

Konaté feels that this diversity allows students to experience different 
artistic techniques and current trends, and to question preconceptions.

“Perhaps at the end, the student will find his artistic personality,” he says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tgv6%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tgv6%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31429346e50d478845a141a31af572bc292fbfc2%2F0_0_3000_4000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Art%20of%20work%3A%20how%20Conservatoire%20graduates%20are%20bucking%20Mali's%20unemployment%20trend%20%7C%20Fleur%20Macdonald&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tgv6%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Art+of+work%3A+how+Conservatoire+graduates+are+bucking+Mali%27s+unemployment+trend+%7C+Fleur+Macdonald&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tgv6%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31429346e50d478845a141a31af572bc292fbfc2%2F0_0_3000_4000%2F3000.jpg>
 The Balla Fasséké Kouyaté Conservatory, near Bamako, Mali. Photograph: Banning 
Eyre 
“When they leave they have skills and a portfolio. They have been taught how 
to think. We’re not here to form artists, because that is difficult to do, but 
if they want to become artists, we’ve given them the tools to do so.”

There is more at stake than jobs. As Mali recalibrates after the civil war, 
art and culture are key weapons in the battle for peace, reconciliation and 
economic sustainability.

The Conservatoire’s concert hall hosted the opening night of the Festival 
Acoustik de Bamako 
<http://www.pri.org/stories/2016-02-13/photos-mali-s-holds-its-first-colorful-international-music-festival-its-military>
, the first international music festival to take place in Bamako since 2012. It 
was organised by the Grammy award-winning kora player Toumani Diabaté, who has 
taught at the school. In the courtyard, students performed traditional dances 
from the Mandé, Dogon, Ségou and Djenné regions.

N’Daou says this unity is important. 

“The Conservatoire plays an important role. The students have worked on songs 
and art that talk of peace and reconciliation. One of their songs, which 
encourages Malians to come together, has been played on national television.”

Konaté, who retired in December but is staying on temporarily until a 
replacement is found, also believes that the school, as well as training 
students in skills that will allow them to live and work in Mali, can help 
repair the societal fractures caused by recent conflicts.

“Solutions will not be found in occupying territories or arms sales or 
terrorism. People have to listen to each other, they have to discuss, and each 
side has to yield a little so that people can live in peace together.”
