
Ireland’s political parties have been urged by the National Union of 
Journalists <http://www.theguardian.com/media/nationalunionofjournalists> to 
tackle the thorny issue of media ownership and control in the country.

The NUJ renewed a call for the establishment of a commission on the future of 
the media, arguing that cross-party co-operation should form part of the 
current negotiations on the formation of a new government.

Context is important here. Ireland’s reputedly richest man, Denis O’Brien, 
owns and/or controls companies that dominate the Irish media landscape.

He is the largest shareholder in Independent News & Media (INM), publisher of 
the two largest-selling titles, theIrish Independent 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/irish-independent> and Sunday Independent, 
plus the Sunday World and Dublin Herald. It also has 50% of the Irish Daily 
Star and owns 14 regional titles across the state.

O’Brien’s other media company, Communicorp, owns Ireland’s two leading 
commercial radio talk stations: Newstalk and Today FM. In addition, it owns 
Dublin’s 98FM, SPIN 1038, TXFM and SPIN South West. There are extensive 
holdings acrossEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> as well.

According to Fintan O’Toole, writing in the Irish Times 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/opinion/fintan-o-toole-loud-silence-on-public-interest-in-siteserv-affair-1.2233683>
, O’Brien “has accumulated excessive private power” with “an impact on the 
public realm of democracy.”

Although there are two major rival news operations - the Irish Times 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/irish-times> and the broadcaster RTÉ - 
O’Brien’s media interests have a disproportionately dominating influence within 
the Irish Republic.

So the call for a commission, made by the NUJ’s Irish secretary, Séamus 
Dooley, is hardly a surprise. Indeed, as he told a journalism semionar at 
Limerick university on Thursday, the issue of media dominance inIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> is hardly a new issue.

He reminded the audience that a former NUJ president, John Devine, had raised 
the problem with the Dublin government in the mid-1970s following the 
acquisition of IndependentNewspapers 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/newspapers> by O’Brien’s ownership 
predecessor, Tony O’Reilly, in 1973.

The minister at the time, the late Justin Keating, was unmoved. He told Devine 
that no politician would willingly pick a fight with a newspaper owner, echoing 
the US dictum: “Never argue with a man who buys ink by the barrel.”

Dooley said the issue of ownership and control was “too frequently assumed to 
be about direct editorial interference by owners and shareholders in editorial 
content” which “ignores the reality that ownership shapes media content in a 
variety of ways.” He continued:

“Ownership is linked to financial control and determines the priority given to 
editorial budgets; it determines the business model; and it directly determines 
wages and terms and conditions of employment within the industry.

Owners influence the shape of news in a variety of ways, including through 
editorial appointments and structures.”

He pointed out that the consequences of reduced editorial resources “are less 
coverage of public bodies, courts, parliamentary committees and local 
authorities.”

And, said Dooley, “slashed editorial budgets and shared editorial content 
between sister titles means less diversity, not just in opinions but in what is 
covered andhow stories are covered.”


The NUJ believes all potential government partners (who are still arguing over 
the terms to form a government) should consider setting up a commission on the 
future of the media industry in order to avoid it becoming “a political 
football”.

More pertinently, Dooley argued that it would help to overcome the fear of a 
campaign by vested commercial interests against any political party that 
individually sought to address the issue of concentration of commercial control 
of the media.

Source: NUJ 
<https://www.nuj.org.uk/news/parties-urges-to-tackle-media-ownership-as-priority/>
