
• Have a go at human bowling at Lakeland in Cumbria (015395 35999, 
lakeactivities.co.uk <http://www.lakeactivities.co.uk>; from £5.50 per person, 
minimum four people). One poor person gets strapped into a ball-shaped cage and 
rolled down a hill towards a set of pins. Strike!

• Extreme Dodgems does what it says on the tin – with rally cars adapted for 
ramming – a cross between a go kart and a banger, as they put it (0845 862 9900,
exelement.co.uk/experience/extreme-dodgems-142.php 
<http://www.exelement.co.uk/experience/extreme-dodgems-142.php>; £145 per 
person), to speed around a race track in Birmingham.

• Rent a sumo wrestling ring for the day (01483 825804, sumoexperience.co.uk 
<http://www.sumoexperience.co.uk>; delivered to venues throughout southern 
England from £200 for a party), which comes complete with a referee (agyoji), 
the ring and foam fat suits. Guaranteed hilarity.

• A slightly less arduous country pursuit is sheepdog handling (01827 722123, 
garlandsleisure.co.uk/sheepdog_handling 
<http://www.garlandsleisure.co.uk/sheepdog_handling.html>; packages are 
tailored but cost around £700 for up to 20 people), at Mythe Farm in 
Warwickshire. You'll be given a shepherd's crook and a faithful collie and, 
using voice commands, learn to guide a team of ducks through tunnels and gates, 
down a slide, into a pool and back into their pen.

• Back seat driver teammates will be in their element for this one. As they 
help navigate the vehicle, the driver will be clutching the wheel with very 
sweaty palms indeed as they tryblindfold driving (0800 567 7101, 
gobananas.co.uk/blindfold-driving-in-liverpool-for-stag-weekends.html 
<http://www.gobananas.co.uk/blindfold-driving-in-liverpool-for-stag-weekends.html>
; £40 per person) in Liverpool.

• The Rat Race Urban Adventure (25-26 September, 020-3195 0185, 
ratraceadventure.com <http://www.ratraceadventure.com>; £99 per person) allows 
office-types to let off some steam in London (though it is only one of a series 
of events all over the country). Teams of three-compete in a run on the first 
night, a bike ride the next day, both of which involve secret physical and 
mental challenges that mix the silly and scary (past events included parkour 
and abseiling off office blocks).

• The Nuts Challenge (4 September, 0844 247 3015, thenutschallenge.co.uk 
<http://www.thenutschallenge.co.uk>; £99 per person, or £50 if raising money 
for charity) is a two-mile mud-laced obstacle course near Gatwick in Surrey. 
The team race involves deep squelchy trenches, a tyre wall, pond dip, barrel 
hill and a very high wall.

• Set over a 22-mile course in Llanwrtyd Wells, mid-Wales, long-distance 
purists might argue that theMan Versus Horse Marathon (11 June 2011, 01591 
610666,green-events.co.uk <http://www.green-events.co.uk/events.php#id3>; it 
cost £22 for runners this year) isn't a full marathon. But it's quite clearly 
not your average endurance race – riders and runners tackle a hilly mixture of 
farm tracks, footpaths, forestry roads and open moorland. There are only a few 
short distances over tarmac. It took 25 years before man finally beat beast, 
but it can be done.

• For something a little less Jeremy Clarkson, try a cancan party (07897 
851153,poletwisters.co.uk <http://www.poletwisters.co.uk>; from £100 for a 
teacher for 5-10 people, available at four locations in Wales), and learn how 
to high-kick and flash your knickers. Frilly frocks provided.
