
Against the background of the UK Housing and Planning Act, the US experience 
of deregulated, market-driven, privatised housing policy provides astark warning
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/apr/18/america-public-housing-uk-policy>
 to this country.

US public housing, an approximate equivalent to UK council housing, has never 
been part of the mainstream. With its origins in the 1930s New Deal, it was 
only ever allowed to augment the private sector – never challenge it. Although 
there remain significant concentrations of public housing in US cities, the 
pejorative image of housing projects has provided political cover for 
under-investment and marginalisation, to the point where public housing is 
deemed the housing of last resort.

Now the US government, like that in the UK, is using various devices to 
effectively privatise what remains of public housing, leading to wholesale 
demolition and displacement, the destruction of communities and the replacement 
of genuinely affordable homes with mixed-income housing, to which few of the 
original residents return.

Last week, the national organisation that represents 2.1 million lower-income 
Americans living in rented housing assisted by theUS Department of Housing and 
Urban Development (HUD) 
<http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/groups/tenants> held its annual 
conference <https://saveourhomes.org/naht-conference/conference-workshops/> in 
Washington DC. Members of theNational Alliance of HUD Tenants 
<https://saveourhomes.org/about/> shared experiences of their struggle against 
rapacious corporate landlords and government cuts, with workshops on topics 
such as how proposals to cut the US budget threaten to displace millions from 
their homes.

Related: Sadiq Khan must decide who to side with: residents or developers? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/may/07/london-mayor-sadiq-khan-housing-residents-developers>

Demand for public housing vastly outstrips supply, and access is strictly 
controlled by means testing and regular tenancy reviews, precisely the 
intentions of the UKHousing <https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing> Act. 
Low-income Americans excluded from public housing are thrown into a byzantine 
system of scarce alternative subsidised housing, most of which entail enormous 
public subsidies to private landlords, but with the constant threat of 
disrepair, harassment and eviction.

Residents at Museum Square 
<https://www.theroot.com/articles/news/2016/06/low-income-tenant-leaders-allies-protest-displacement-of-museum-square-residents/>
 in the centre of the nation’s capital are fighting to save their homes. The 
largely Chinese community is being removed so a private owner can replace 300 
homes for people on low incomes with 800 luxury condos. The owner has enjoyed 
30 years of government-funded rent subsidy, but now says the building has “run 
its course of usefulness”.

The US has a housing crisis on a scale so far unimaginable here. Homelessness 
is only the most visible feature of a brutal housing policy. The idolatry of 
home ownership, subsidised by $76bn (£52bn) of tax-breaks a year, drives a 
speculative property investment mania. The similarities and threat to the UK 
differ only in scale.

Avoiding another economic crash has been part of the crusade for change by 
Democratic presidential contender Bernie Sanders. Sanders’ housing policy is 
over-reliant on generalisations and a default to establishment political 
machinery. But addressing the housing crisis has played a significant part in 
persuading 12 million people to back his candidacy.

In both the US and UK, housing inequality is increasingly the main focus of 
class struggle and people are demanding real change. In the UK this means 
campaigning against the Housing and Planning Act. In both countries it means 
direct government investment in decent, secure, affordable, environmentally 
sustainable homes for all.

Join the Guardian Housing Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/housing/register/> to read more pieces like 
this. Follow us on Twitter (@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/GuardianHousingNetwork/?ref=hl> to keep up with the 
latest social housing news and views.
