
Why do designers give names to their bags and clothes?

Sarah, by email

This anthropomorphising of fashion is weird, no doubt, but not that hard to 
fathom. As anyone who ever had a cuddly-toy animal knows, giving a name to an 
inanimate object forces you to form an emotional attachment to it. So it’s not 
just some big clunking ugly leather bag – it’s your Mulberry Roxy. You have to 
buy it, and you have to love it and, if you don’t, you’ll be reported to the 
RSPCB (Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Bags, of course).

But giving a name performs another function: it allows the designers to 
emphasise what brand image they want the bag to have. You might see a (fairly 
impractical) small bag with a giant lock on it, but call that baby “Paddington” 
and suddenly it’s obvious that it’sthe accessory for boho west-London girls – 
or, at least, for women who buy one to feel like boho west-London girls.
Mulberry’s Bayswater 
<http://www.mulberry.com/shop/women/bayswater-search?gclid=CKXZ1qWvuMsCFUa4Gwod-bAIsw&gclsrc=aw.ds>
 aspires to a similarly luxe west-London look, but a bit more prim than the 
more urban Paddington (although, as anyone who has ever been to west London 
knows, both Paddington and Bayswater are totally grim. I guess calling a bag 
Holland Park isn’t quite as catchy.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hfc2%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hfc2%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe892d7ff2acc1e058676ffa99d0076f8824e2d66%2F49_74_851_853%2F851.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zadie%2C%20Alexa%2C%20Coco%3A%20why%20does%20fashion%20love%20naming%20bags%20and%20clothes%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hfc2%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zadie%2C+Alexa%2C+Coco%3A+why+does+fashion+love+naming+bags+and+clothes%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hfc2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe892d7ff2acc1e058676ffa99d0076f8824e2d66%2F49_74_851_853%2F851.jpg>
 Mulberry’s Bayswater bag. Photograph: PR Company Handout 
But place names are one thing. Give a fashion item a person’s name and you are 
revealing not just what image you want your fashion item to have, but what 
image you associate with that name. This isn’t such a problem when a 
generically cool name is used – Alexa, for example, or Coco – but becomes 
weirder when a more distinctive one is used.

I got to thinking about this when I noticed a hideous orange jumpsuit with 
giant flowers vomited all over it on sale by the designerTrina Turk 
<http://shop.nordstrom.com/s/zadie-dress/4299935>. Name of said jumpsuit? 
Zadie. The briefest of Google searches revealed this to be a trend in itself, 
naming terrible faux “ethnic” fashion items “Zadie”: azebra-print vest top 
<http://shop.nordstrom.com/s/ella-moss-zadie-zebra-burnout-tank/3057896>; a 
fake zebra rug 
<http://shop.nordstrom.com/s/4027406?pathAlias=loloi-zadie-zebra-woven-indoor-outdoor-rug>
; anugly raffia backpack 
<http://shop.nordstrom.com/s/mar-y-sol-zadie-raffia-backpack/3514851>; a 
strangely patternedsequinned shift dress 
<https://www.nordstromrack.com/shop/product/1378787/rachel-zoe-zadie-sequin-shift-dress>
 ; and, most terrifying of all, amesh jumpsuit 
<https://www.theoutnet.com/en-GB/product/Diane-von-Furstenberg/Zadie-embroidered-mesh-jumpsuit/673100>
. And every single one called Zadie.

Now, I’m sure there are other Zadies in the world beyond Zadie Smith, but I’d 
be willing to bet the designers weren’t thinking about them when they named 
their wares. No, they were thinking about Ms Smith, who is frequently praised 
in fashion magazines for her style, but who designers seem to have reduced in 
their minds to “generic ethnic woman – bit African, like”.
 Mar y Sol ‘Zadie’ Raffia Backpack Photograph: PR Company Handout 
I could get outraged about this, but I’m afraid I’m too busy dealing with how 
“Hadley” seems to be the byword for “literally the ugliest thing you have ever 
seen”, judging from the nomenclature of certain fashion items. Fancy a 
disgustingleather-trimmed peacoat 
<https://www.net-a-porter.com/gb/en/product/470689/karl_lagerfeld/hadley-leather-trimmed-boucle-peacoat>
? Agrim suede shoe <http://shop.nordstrom.com/s/hadley-bootie/4130575> that 
insists on being described as a “bootie” and should have died in the 90s? Some
completely insane snake-print tapered trousers 
<https://www.theoutnet.com/en-GB/product/Equipment/Hadley-snake-print-silk-straight-leg-pants/674390>
? Of course not – no one ever has. And yet, all given the holy name of Hadley. 
Screw you, fashion.

Is it OK to criticise a woman for tweeting naked selfies – or is that 
body-shaming?

The world

OK, quick background here, which I will try to give without stabbing myself in 
the brain with a spoon. Last week,Kim Kardashian 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/kim-kardashian> tweeted a naked 
selfie. Celebrities, from Bette Midler to Chloe Moretz, queried this decision. 
They didn’t make mean comments about the photo or Kardashian; they just 
questioned the point. Kim, apparently astonished that her naked selfie provoked 
a reaction, then posted a parodically zeitgeisty statement, announcing: “The 
body-shaming – it’s like, enough is enough.”
 Kim’s already notorious Instagram post. 
OK, let’s get something straight here. Not all criticism of a woman is 
“shaming”. If someone had said to Kardashian, “Hey, you’re fat and ugly – put 
some clothes on that disgusting blob, you moose”, that would be body-shaming. 
But saying, “Hey, you’re tweeting a naked photo of yourself to 42 million 
people – um, why?”, that is not body-shaming. That is asking a pretty 
reasonable question.

Kardashian has claimed her highly posed selfie is “empowering”, and such is 
the fear people seem to feel nowadays of saying something that marks them as an 
out-of-touch oldie who oppresses other people, this has pretty much been 
accepted as the truth. But can we all please look up the definition of 
“empowering”? Because I think it has been forgotten. Posting very flattering 
naked photos of yourself when you are already an extremely famous celebrity is 
not empowerment – it’s asking for even more attention. Does this actually need 
to be said? Aren’t I just saying the teeth-bleeding obvious? I feel as if I’m 
eating crazy pills.

Here’s the deal, world: post all the naked photos of yourself you want. Take 
the camera along to your colonoscopy and smear test, for all I care. But accept 
that people will have a reaction to them, and not necessarily the sycophantic 
reaction you so desperately crave. And that acceptance, my friends, is what is 
truly empowering.

Post your questions to Hadley Freeman, Ask Hadley, The Guardian, Kings Place, 
90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Emailask.hadley@theguardian.com <>.
