
Why is aid in the news again? 

On Monday, MPs will, yet again, debate the UK’s commitment to spend 0.7% of 
national income as international aid 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/09/uk-passes-bill-law-aid-target-percentage-income>
 each year. The debate was triggered by anonline petition 
<https://petition.parliament.uk/petitions/125692> that received more than 
230,000 signatures. Launched by the Mail on Sunday, it called on the government 
to drop the spending commitment and “provide money only for truly deserving 
causes, on a case-by-case basis”. In response to the petition, UK NGOs have 
rallied around the Twitter hashtag#ProudofAid 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/proudofaid?ref_src=twsrc^google|twcamp^serp|twgr^hashtag>
.

What is the 0.7% target?

Repeatedly re-endorsed 
<http://www.oecd.org/dac/stats/the07odagnitarget-ahistory.htm> at international 
summits since the 1970s, “0.7” has become a key benchmark by which the 
generosity of donor countries is measured. TheUK first met the target in 2013 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=2&ved=0ahUKEwjOo9Huxp3NAhVYFMAKHa3AAuAQFggmMAE&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.parliament.uk%2Fbriefing-papers%2FSN03714.pdf&usg=AFQjCNHfPMPAbFeULDDF4YRuyelsg4qS0w&sig2=g9QpkZz6BFjYzU3LAfxeRw&cad=rja>
, when its total aid spending reached £11.4bn. Enshrining the target in law was 
included in the 2010 election manifestos ofall three major parties 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=4&ved=0ahUKEwiOtOWMx53NAhUqBMAKHV5GDEoQFgg1MAM&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.ifs.org.uk%2Fbudgets%2Fgb2012%2F12chap7.pdf&usg=AFQjCNGJUzMXLbWCCzWtHks4nfzb2Rd4ZA&sig2=yMXwpoh39_-mrpzpjFC_eA&bvm=bv.124088155,d.ZGg&cad=rja>
. But it took a private member’s bill,introduced by Liberal Democrat MP Michael 
Moore 
<http://services.parliament.uk/bills/2014-15/internationaldevelopmentofficialdevelopmentassistancetarget.html>
 in September 2014, to start the process that would eventually lead to its
passage into law last year 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/09/uk-passes-bill-law-aid-target-percentage-income>
.

Related: With aid under attack, let's be honest about how we spend taxpayers' 
money | Simon O'Connell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/06/aid-under-attack-honest-spend-taxpayers-money-dfid-mercy-corps-syria>

Do we need a target? 

In its new aid strategy 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/478834/ODA_strategy_final_web_0905.pdf>
, published last year, the government said: “We firmly believe that spending 
0.7% ... on international development – alongside our commitment to spend 2% on 
defence – means our country walking taller in the world.” But the target has 
been divisive. Some say it is arbitrary and outdated,based on estimates 
<http://www.cgdev.org/files/3822_file_WP68.pdf> of how much money poor 
countries might have needed in the 1960s. Parliament’s international 
development committee haspreviously warned 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2013/jan/31/uk-risks-spending-aid-poorly>
 that pressure to meet spending targets can result in poor decision-making. For 
others, the 0.7% debate is a potential red herring: a way to focus on the total 
amount of aid, while missing the point of how it is spent.

What constitutes aid?

Rich countries including the UK have agreed on common rules on which spending 
can and can’t count as aid. Only spending for “the promotion of the economic 
development and welfare of developing countries” is eligible. But the list of 
specific activities that can count is longer than you might think. Aid can be 
provided as grants or as loans, for example. Agrowing share 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/13/aid-budgets-hosting-refugees-oecd-figures>
 is now being spent on refugees in donor countries (9% of the total in 2015). 
Donors recentlyrevised the rules 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/20/oecd-redefines-foreign-aid-to-include-some-military-spending>
 for the first time in decades, allowing some military and security spending in 
“fragile states” to count. Charities warned these changes risk diverting money 
from the poorest people.

Where does UK aid go?

The 2002 International Development Act 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2002/1/contents> requires all UK aid to 
have the reduction of poverty as its primary focus.

Most aid is not given directly to poor countries. The bulk of UK spending 
flows through multilateral institutions, NGOs and for-profit contractors. In 
Nigeria, for example, a2014 OECD report 
<https://www.oecd.org/dac/peer-reviews/UK%20peer%20review%202014.pdf> found 
that 75% of UK aid was spent through private sector companies. These 
intermediaries will have their own costs and, in the case of private 
contractors, they’re also looking to make a profit. Following the money remains 
difficult and it’s almost impossible to say exactly how much aid is ever spent 
in the developing countries for which it was budgeted. The UK formally “untied” 
its spending 15 years ago, officially opening up contracts to international 
competition. But according to thelatest annual report 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/445698/Annual-Report-2014-2015.pdf>
 from the Department for International Development (DfID), more than 90% of 
contracts still go to British companies. (This figure may also include UK 
subsidiaries of multinational companies).

The UK’s new aid strategy 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/478834/ODA_strategy_final_web_0905.pdf>
, entitled “tackling global challenges in the national interest”, is explicit 
that aid spending should also benefit the UK, for example, by promoting 
“economic development and prosperity”, which will “strengthen UK trade and 
investment opportunities”. Under the strategy, more aid will be spent through 
other departments, including the Foreign and Commonwealth Office.

How does the UK compare to other donors?

Sweden, Norway, Denmark and the Netherlands met the 0.7% target in the 1970s 
<http://devinit.org/#!/post/0-7-aid-target-2>. Luxembourg joined them in 2000. 
But the UK is the only G7 country to do so. The UK is the world’s second 
largest aid donor; the US is the biggest, spending more than £21bn in 2015, but 
this represents less than 0.2% of its national income.

The UK is not the only donor to have “untied” its aid. According a 2015 OECD 
report,nearly 80% of total bilateral aid is formally untied 
<http://www.oecd.org/officialdocuments/publicdisplaydocumentpdf/?cote=DCD/DAC(2015)37&docLanguage=En>
. Some donors “report relatively low shares of contracts awarded to their 
domestic suppliers – 34% for France and 23% for Japan”, it said, calling on the 
UK and others to ensure spending is untied in practice as well as on paper. In 
2011 the US aid agency USAid launched a plan to spend more of its programme 
funds directly through local organisations. According to its latest data,it 
spent almost 19% this way in 2015 
<http://www.cgdev.org/blog/usaid-didnt-hit-its-30-percent-target-local-solutions>
.

What’s at stake in Monday’s debate?

If the UK decided to end or cut its aid, the impact on total public funding 
for international development would be significant. But don’t expect any 
immediate policy changes from government. Monday’s debate is not being held in 
the Commons’ main chamber and there’ll be no official vote on scrapping the 
0.7% law. What is guaranteed is that the debate about how much is spent on aid, 
and what it is spent on, will continue to rumble on.
