
When I was growing up in India, a career in the civil service was considered 
to be one of the most prestigious careers one could go into. From a young age, 
I remember my parents and teachers pushing me towards it asthe career choice. 
This was not in a controlling sense, but because they wanted the best for me 
and a job in the Indian public sector was just that: one of the most highly 
respected across society.

Like a typical youngster I decided against my parents’ advice and instead 
embarked on a career as an entrepreneur. This has taken me on a journey, not 
only from India to the UK, but to organisations such as Shazam and BCG Digital 
Ventures, via the Arts Council and then to the Department for Culture, Media 
and Sport. So I’ve ended up contributing to the public sector after all.

Related: I thought I was blazing a trail for minorities in Whitehall. I was 
wrong 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2015/nov/21/minorities-whitehall-civil-service-racial-discrimination>

Being part of the public sector is an absolute privilege, but unfortunately 
that word privilege still rings true for too many of the wrong reasons. Recent 
research conducted by youth employment charityElevation Networks 
<http://www.elevationnetworks.org/> found that an overwhelming 96.5% of the 
public sector’s senior leaders are white and, unfortunately, I can’t say that I 
was shocked by the revelation.

In today’s multicultural world, it’s easy to assume that discrimination is a 
thing of the past. Sadly, it’s ever present, and our public sector is no 
stranger to it. It can still bean old boys’ club 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2015/dec/04/whitehall-diversity-bme-informal-networks-career-equality>
 – like a party you didn’t get invited to – and an impenetrable maze for those 
who don’t know someone at the top. With just 3.5% of people at the top coming 
from non-white backgrounds, it’s easy to see why.

That’s not to say that people from black and minority ethnic (BME) backgrounds 
aren’t attracted to the public sector full stop – quite the opposite. The 
Department of Health’s workforce as a whole is broadly representative of the 
population, with 17% of staff from BME backgrounds. But there are nearly ten 
times the number of BME employees in administrative roles (39%) as there are in 
Whitehall’s senior civil servant positions (4%). Compare this with tech 
entrepreneurs in the US: Indians hold some of the most powerful positions in 
some of the largest companies, including Microsoft, Google, Intel, Facebook, 
Cisco, Adobe… the list goes on.

Clearly, we have a real problem with attracting and promoting diverse talent 
to the top. And this is a problem – for everyone. It’s a problem for young 
people who won’t be aiming for a career that could just be their passion, and 
for those of us in society that don’t benefit from their skills, talent and 
leadership.

Related: 'The right sort of female chap' – the story of women in Whitehall 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/mar/08/women-whitehall-civil-service-gender-diversity-workforce>

This must be changed. That doesn’t mean creating an old boys’ network of our 
own (for a start,we need more women, too 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/mar/08/women-whitehall-civil-service-gender-diversity-workforce>
) but it does mean, that whoever we are and whatever position we’re in, we do 
everything in our power to educate, encourage and promote those around us, 
whatever their background. Parents and teachers ought to encourage young people 
to actively seek out roles in the public sector because they are jobs to be 
proud of, but also jobs that are within our grasp.

What’s essential is that people don’t discount themselves for any role at any 
level because they are from a BME background. I hope that as we move forwards 
as a nation, the way can be paved for other individuals to achieve their full 
potential.

Ajay Chowdhury is a non-executive director at the Department of Culture, Media 
and Sport

This series 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/series/public-servant-my-letter-to-the-public>
 aims to give a voice to the staff behind the public services that are hit by 
mounting cuts and rising demand, and so often denigrated by the press, 
politicians and public. If you would like to write an article for the series, 
contacttamsin.rutter@theguardian.com <mailto:tamsin.rutter@theguardian.com>.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
