
The Daily Mail <http://www.theguardian.com/media/dailymail> is clearly 
enjoying itself with its extracts from the unauthorised biography of the prime 
minister. It ran another large front page “Cameron Confidential” blurb on the 
third day of its serialisation and carried six more pages inside.

The paper, with due immodesty, announced that its series has “got the world 
talking.” Not quite. There were signs that the initial interest by rival 
newspapers (and broadcasters) in the claims made byLord Ashcroft 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/lord-ashcroft> and Isabel Oakeshott in 
their book, Call Me Dave, was beginning to wane by Wednesday.

Even so, it’s fair to say there were plenty of references elsewhere. The Daily 
Telegraph found room fora news piece on page 6  
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/11883466/Gen-Richards-views-maliciously-portrayed-in-Lord-Ashcroft-Cameron-biography-extracts.html>
and its columnist Allison Pearson laid into Ashcroft,calling him “a peevish 
billionaire” 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/david-cameron/11882352/David-Camerons-decision-not-to-promote-this-treacherous-vengeful-donor-now-looks-justified.html>
.

She also accused Oakeshott of publishing “fiction” (yes, Allison, I go with 
that, as my London Evening Standard column later today will reinforce).

The Independent carried a news piece 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/david-cameron-attacked-over-foreign-policy-after-second-instalment-of-lord-ashcrofts-biography-10513355.html>
 and Matthew Normandevoted his column to it. 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/comment/ashcrofts-farmyard-fun-diverts-us-from--camerons-serious-incompetence-10513318.html>
 The Times mentioned the book in its diary column. The Daily Express ignored 
it. The Daily Mirror splashed on Cameron’s light-hearted reaction to it, with
the Guardian 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/22/just-a-little-prick-cameron-takes-swipe-at-ashcroft>
, Sun and Metro carrying similar articles on inside pages.

So, not the whole world perhaps, but - allowing for the hype - a fairish slice 
of continuing media interest.

What was so fascinating, however, was the way in which the Mail began its 
serialisation on Monday. By its own standards, the paper appeared rather 
tentative. It seemed to be having its cake and eating it.

First, I noted the main front page headline: “Revenge!” Given that the Mail 
was serialising Ashcroft’s book, it was an odd way to treat the author (wholet 
it be known through his co-writer 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-34312744>that revenge was not his 
motive).

Second, the references to drug-taking were played down (and notably played up 
by other newspapers). Third, there were the two pages about Cameron’s 
relationship with his disabled son, Ivan,The tragic child who made Dave human 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3242585/The-tragic-child-Dave-human-spin-doctor-called-posh-t-er.html>
, which was wholly sympathetic to the prime minister.

Fourth, the leading article that day pleaded for understanding about the prime 
minister’s “youthful indiscretions” 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-3242642/DAILY-MAIL-COMMENT-Gesture-solutions-unanswered-questions.html>
, mitigating the effect of the tittle-tattle about his exotic university 
behaviour.

And fifth, there was the matter of timing. Why was the Mail serialising a 
blockbusting book so far in advance of both publication and the start of the 
Tory party conference? Would it not have had maximum impact in two weeks’ time?

(Incidentally, I also noticed in that editorial that the Mail said: “We fought 
off strong competition from rival newspapers, believing Mail readers deserved 
first sight of what is an important, if controversial, anatomy of modern 
politics.” In fact,as Media Guardian revealed 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/sep/21/daily-mail-paid-ashcroft-more-than-50000-for-cameron-book>
, the Mail fought no-one: there was no auction because it was offered the book 
before any other paper got a sniff).

All in all, I did wonder on Monday whether the Mail’s editor-in-chief, Paul 
Dacre, had got cold feet about trashing Cameron. Was he concerned about his 
proprietor,Viscount Rothermere 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/viscount-rothermere>, not sharing his 
journalistic passion for causing mischief?

By Tuesday, however, I put those thoughts to one side because the Mail’s 
presentation was not in the least ambivalent. It was altogether more bold, even 
gung-ho.

Dacre knew he had set the agenda and didn’t hang back in the least. Indeed, as 
I reflected that day 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2015/sep/22/ashcrofts-cameron-biography-serious-questions-amid-the-pig-jokes>
, the extracts had provoked some serious questions, not least Cameron’s 
relationship with the armed services’ chiefs.

I am still unsure whether, beyond the pig nonsense, this will have much effect 
on Cameron. But watching a rightwing newspaper pour ordure over a rightwing 
prime minister has been wonderfully entertaining anyway.

With more than four years of a Conservative government yet to run, and Jeremy 
Corbyn <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> leading the Labour 
party, the Mail clearly feels confident that it can do as it likes without 
causing lasting damage to its party of choice.
