
A London <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> “superhead” and Department for 
Education adviser praised by Michael Gove has been banned from teaching after a 
disciplinary panel upheld allegations of financial mismanagement and conflicts 
of interest involving £1m worth of IT contracts.

Greg Wallace, the former executive headteacher of the Best Start Federation of 
schools in Hackney, wasbarred for a minimum of two years 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/teacher-misconduct-panel-outcome-mr-greg-wallace>
 after the DfE overruled a recommendation that Wallace should avoid a ban 
because of his “inspirational example” as an educator.

The National College of Teaching 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/teaching> and Leadership had heard that 
Wallace conspired to award contracts worth more than £1m, without seeking 
approval from school governors, to a firm owned by a friend and partner, and 
then attempted to cover up evidence by deleting emails. The NCTL panel also 
heard that Wallace received payments from the firm, including one of £4,000.

Related: Nicky Morgan aide forced to resign after facing inquiry over IT 
contract 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/06/nicky-morgan-education-forced-to-sack-aide-over-it-contracts>

The panel said Wallace was a victim of “an element of duress brought about by 
a combination of his own natural enthusiasm and others outside of the 
federation encouraging him to take on responsibility for more schools in order 
to address poor achievement levels in the local area”.

The panel suggested that Wallace was overburdened by “the breadth of 
responsibility on his shoulders” and that “an apparent lack of supporting 
infrastructure appeared to impact on his attention to the detail of some 
procedural requirements”.

However, the DfE’s decision-maker responded: “I believe that the panel has not 
taken sufficient account of the public concern that would arise, and that 
public confidence in the profession could be seriously weakened, if the conduct 
found proved in this case was not treated with the utmost seriousness.”

Last December the Observer revealed 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/06/nicky-morgan-education-forced-to-sack-aide-over-it-contracts>
 that Wallace was working for the Harris Federation chain of academies as well 
as serving as an unpaid adviser on maths teaching to the DfE. Several senior 
Harris staff members testified to Wallace’s abilities as an teacher before the 
NCTL hearing.

In 2012 Wallace was praised in a speech by Gove 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/education-secretary-michael-goves-speech-to-ascl>
, the then education secretary, as a “magnificent” academy head running 
outstanding schools in deprived areas. However, two years later, Wallace was 
dismissed by Hackney council following an investigation into the awarding of 
the computer contracts to C2 Technology.
