
If you are the boss of a small business, or a full-time freelancer, how do you 
squeeze in a holiday? How do you make time for your friends and family? And how 
can you stop your professional responsibilities from overwhelming you?

A survey 
<https://www.xero.com/blog/2015/07/7-business-apps-for-your-next-beach-holiday/>
 last year by accounting software company Xero found that 76% of small business 
owners have sacrificed a holiday to business obligations. Meanwhile, as the 
number of freelancers grows, this issue is becoming more commonplace – between 
2008 and 2015 there was a36% increase 
<https://www.ipse.co.uk/sites/default/files/documents/research/Exploring-uk-freelance-workforce-2015-summary-v1.pdf>
 [pdf]. When you are solely responsible for maintaining a stable income, the 
pressures can outweigh the perks of being your own boss.


In this webchat, our panel of experts will offer their advice for finding a 
better work-life balance. We’ll discuss how good time-management and planning 
can cut down on the stresses of being a business leader or freelancer.

Some points to cover might include: managing finances more carefully, using 
technology to streamline business processes, and the benefits of taking up a 
hobby or allocating work to specific hours. We’ll also look at tips for 
effectively delegating so that a business can still run smoothly when the boss 
takes a break. Put your questions to our experts from 1–2pm on Monday 13 June.

Taking part is simple: just register to comment 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/register?skipConfirmation=true&INTCMP=HEADER_GU_REG&returnUrl=https%3A%2F%2Fmembership.theguardian.com%2Fjoin%2Ffriend%2Fenter-details>
. Once you’ve signed up, you can post your questions in the comments thread 
below this article. Alternatively, tweet @GdnSmallBiz 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSmallBiz> with your questions, or email them to 
smallbusinessnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:smallbusinessnetwork@theguardian.com> and we will put them to the panel 
for you. Comments are currently open and we welcome questions in advance.

Our panel

Dr Jill Miller is a research adviser at the CIPD <http://www.cipd.co.uk/>, the 
professional body for HR and people development.


Chris Bryce is the chief executive of the Association of Independent 
Professionals and the Self-Employed <https://www.ipse.co.uk/> (IPSE). He was 
one of the original members of the organisation when it was formed in 1999.

Alan Price is a senior director at Peninsula Business Services 
<http://www.peninsulagrouplimited.com/>, an employment law and HR consultancy. 
He is also an elected director and trustee for the CIPD.


Dr Gary Wood is a chartered psychologist <https://psycentral.wordpress.com/>, 
life coach and author of personal development books on the topic of work-life 
balance.

Nic Williams is the founder and owner of My Own Den <https://myownden.com/>, 
an online shop selling ethical products for children’s bedrooms. She is an 
adoptive mother of two and set up her business to fit work around a busy family 
life.

John Chidlaw is managing director of fast growing facilities management company
Unita Maintain <http://www.unitamaintain.co.uk/>, which he set up with his wife 
Emma. The couple oversee 442 staff across the country while looking after their 
four children.

Ant Clifford is owner of Creative Stream <http://www.creativestream.co.uk/team>
, a digital design agency specialising in websites. He is also a father of four 
children.


Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.

