
I am in Ireland to address the Irish Press Council’s annual general meeting in 
a lecture entitled “Have newspapers got a future?”

My theme is that they have no future. Declining circulation figures tell us 
that people are switching week by week from print to screen. It is simply a 
matter of time before it becomes unprofitable to continue publishing newsprint 
papers.

Sales aside, the main problem has been the gradual retreat by the major 
funders of the press: advertisers. Publishers of local and regional titles have 
been facing that drama for several years. Nationals, however, have done 
better... until now.

The news that one of the strongest publishing companies, Daily Mail & General 
Trust,had to issue a warning to investors 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/26/dmgt-print-ads-daily-mail-mail-online-metro>
 after its newspaper division reported a 29% fall in profits should be seen as 
a landmark moment.

It was largely due to a 13% decline in print ad revenues at its titles - Daily 
Mail <http://www.theguardian.com/media/dailymail>, Mail on Sunday and Metro - 
over a six-month period (with worse likely to follow).

There was some compensation in the growth of digital advertising at Mail Online
 <http://www.theguardian.com/media/mail-online>, up to very healthy £44m, which 
must be seen in the context of the Mail’s print advertising of £80m.

Related: Silicon Valley’s hoover leaves newspapers hunting for profit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/26/silicon-valleys-hoover-leaves-newspapers-hunting-for-profit>

DMGT’s drama comes against the gloom of announcements by other national 
publishers, incuding theTelegraph Media Group 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/telegraphmediagroup>, Trinity Mirror, and 
Guardian Media Group. And it follows soon after the print closure of the 
Independent.


Despite all the prior warnings, a harsh reality has suddenly kicked in. We are 
in the midst of a crisis.

John Gapper, writing in the Financial Times 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/f897b0ec-2330-11e6-9d4d-c11776a5124d.html>, did not 
exaggerate in remarking that “Fleet Street is following Britain’s regional 
papers and US metropolitan ones in being hollowed out.”


As he pointed out, his own paper warned staff last month of “daunting trading 
conditions in 2016” 
<http://www.politico.eu/blogs/spence-on-media/2016/04/financial-times-we-are-facing-daunting-conditions/>
. The EU referendum may have had a negative impact, but its effect has been 
marginal. The trend could not be clearer: advertisers have taken flight.


It confirms what we have long known: the newspaper industry’s business model 
is wrecked. The inevitable result will be cost-cutting on an even greater scale 
than has been apparent for the past decade.


And don’t be fooled by the apparent success of the free titles, such as Metro 
and theLondon Evening Standard 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/london-evening-standard>. Despite their high 
distribution figures, 1.35m and 900,000 respectively, the profit margins are 
slight. Without shared overheads, I doubt they would survive as stand-alone 
enterprises.

It is time to recognise that the whole UK newspaper industry is heading for a 
cliff fall, that tipping point when there is no hope of a reversal of fortune.

It does not mean the immediate closure of papers because the lesson from 
regional owners is that it is possible to continue publication through 
cost-cutting. Papers can be produced with skeleton editorial staffs. Indeed,
Richard Desmond <http://www.theguardian.com/media/richard-desmond> has been 
doing that at the Daily and Sunday Express and Daily Star for several years.

Space in newsprint papers can be filled. The end result is something that 
looks like a paper, but the content lacks any real value. It is not journalism. 
It is pointless material without any public benefit.

Keep in mind the scenario outlined by Nick Davies in Flat Earth News about 
“churnalism”, a mixture of agency stories and PR-generated “oven-ready copy”. 
It will get much worse as newsroom numbers are reduced.

Local paper publishers think it’s magic that they can produce papers on such 
slim staffs. I think it’s tragic because they are treating their audiences to a 
fake product.

And, of course, readers gradually catch on and stop buying. The cynical 
management of decline - maximising profits while reducing the quality of the 
output - is a vicious circle.

Regional paper cutbacks have cut staffs to such a low level that they are 
unable to cover courts and council meetings. Instead, the owners have have gone 
cap in hand to the government and forced theBBC 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> to fund 150 reporters to provide the 
public service journalism they have turned their backs on.

It is doubtful if this will make any difference to the eventual outcome: the 
end of newsprint. The oddity is that we have been aware of this end game since 
the dawn of the digital revolution. But too many publishers and editors have 
been in denial. The latest fall in advertising revenue across the industry is a 
loud wake-up call.
