
There are some compelling reasons why businesses should team up and work 
together; they can reduce costs by sharing resources, improve the service they 
offer to their customers, and boost their promotional power by entering into a 
joint marketing arrangement.

In the case of the latter, promoting other companies’ products and services 
can be a cost effective way for small businesses to grow, reducing the 
marketing budget involved, while increasing marketing exposure, and ultimately, 
sales. The key to a successful joint venture lies in choosing the right 
organisation to work with, and being clear about what is expected of both 
parties.

Sarah Brown, director of marketing company inspire2aspire 
<http://inspire2aspire.co.uk> says: “In choosing a company to work with it is 
critical they share your values, style of working, attitudes to quality, for 
example, and that you trust each other. [But] however much you trust each 
other, it is important to clarify the practical details such as who will own 
and manage any customer data, who invoices and how is any money shared, and 
when.”

Thinking outside the box
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jhbv%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jhbv%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F967802ab1a6b79524997a0bbc0f15293e5bdfdd5%2F30_0_1988_1193%2F1988.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Spreading%20the%20word%3A%20how%20to%20use%20cross-promotion%20as%20a%20marketing%20tool&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jhbv%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Spreading+the+word%3A+how+to+use+cross-promotion+as+a+marketing+tool&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jhbv%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F967802ab1a6b79524997a0bbc0f15293e5bdfdd5%2F30_0_1988_1193%2F1988.jpg>
 Les Cliff from Framearound works with local photography studio fourTwographs 
to promote each others’ businesses. Photograph: John Bentley 
When Bolton-based photography studio fourTwographs  
<http://fourtwographs.co.uk>and framing business Framearound 
<http://framearound.co.uk> embarked on a joint venture earlier this year, the 
owners of both businesses were completely frustrated with their lack of success 
using conventional marketing channels.

John Bentley, owner of fourTwographs, found it difficult to increase new 
footfall to his studio, which was based several miles from the town centre. He 
said: “I’d tried everything, from social media advertising to leafleting. Last 
year I spent £1,000 on marketing but it failed to deliver anything. I’d tried 
approaching other businesses with the idea of cross promoting each other, but 
with little success. I realised later I was approaching the wrong businesses.”

Bentley had been dealing with Framearound owner Les Cliff for two years when 
he suddenly realised that the shop’s town centre location and relevant customer 
base presented the opportunity he’d been looking for.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jhbv%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jhbv%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f2fe05f3543365466ddff1ba72d42072f37c6ef%2F0_246_1085_1355%2F1085.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Spreading%20the%20word%3A%20how%20to%20use%20cross-promotion%20as%20a%20marketing%20tool&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jhbv%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Spreading+the+word%3A+how+to+use+cross-promotion+as+a+marketing+tool&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jhbv%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f2fe05f3543365466ddff1ba72d42072f37c6ef%2F0_246_1085_1355%2F1085.jpg>
 John Bentley from fourTwographs realised Les Cliff had the town centre 
location and customer base he needed. Photograph: John Bentley 
He says: “Les had always bought artwork to show off his frames in store. I 
suggested that he used local artists’ work, including mine, instead, and rented 
out some wall space. It would give me the town centre presence and exposure 
that I needed.”

Cliff had had a similar lack of success with his own promotional efforts, 
which had included advertising on buses, on menus, in theatre magazines, and in 
pamphlets delivered to select areas.

He says: “By forging links with John I can capitalise on his experience with 
using social media and make some new contacts within the art and photography 
groups that he is involved with. Working with another business in a connected 
field is still a gamble, but it’s one that we both know should be beneficial if 
we can help each other in a common goal.”

The joint marketing venture has incurred some initial expenses, but overall 
Bentley expects to make significant savings on his own marketing expenditure 
and see an increase in revenue for both businesses.

He says: “It is about helping each other to maximise business opportunities. 
For me it is about promoting my photography services in a more targeted way to 
a much bigger potential customer base, and for Framearound, it is about growing 
that customer base and the business. It is a win-win situation.”

Utilising each other’s skills

In looking for a joint marketing partner, small firms could find what they are 
looking for outside the business sector. Two years ago, dog behaviourist Peter 
Archer, owner ofPawsitive Training <http://www.pawsitivetraining.co.uk> was 
asked by local dog rescue centre, Lancaster-basedAnimal Care 
<http://www.animalcare-lancaster.co.uk> to work with some of those who had 
adopted rescue dogs with behavioural issues.

Animal Care assistant manager Abi Sadler says: “Without Peter’s help some of 
these dogs would end up being returned to us, and taking up space that we 
desperately need for new dogs coming in. Since he started working with us, we 
haven’t had a single dog returned to us.”
 Peter Archer, founder of Pawsitive Training, works with the local shelter to 
train rescue dogs. The move has dramatically increased referrals from satisfied 
owners. 
For Archer, who had trained dogs in the Army before setting up his own 
business, the move was the boost he needed. He says: “To succeed in this 
industry you need word of mouth recommendations from satisfied dog owners. The 
referrals that have come via Animal Care and the fact that the team promotes my 
services to potential adopters, has kept me extremely busy.”

Animal Care and Pawsitive Training promote each other through their websites 
and social media networks. This brings more potential adopters to the rescue 
centre and its various fundraising events, while Archer has been able to reduce 
his marketing and advertising spend to zero.

Safeguarding against problems

While these collaborative marketing agreements can go wrong, it is usually 
because the two parties have different motives, which have not been properly 
discussed. A formal agreement that sets out how the arrangement will work, who 
will do what, and how any costs and other financial issues will be handled, 
should help to avert such issues.

“Problems can arise when assumptions are made and verbally agreed details have 
not been confirmed in writing,” says marketing director Brown. “One issue for 
smaller firms can be VAT, if one company is charging another, and the other 
isn’t registered. Friction can also occur if there appears to be an unequal 
level of commitment; one party does all the work or bears lots of the costs.

“A good place to find potential collaboration partners is at networking 
events, particularly where you can meet people regularly and develop a 
relationship before you work together so that you minimise the risks and 
maximise the potential. When it works it is great.”

Content on this page is paid for and produced to a brief agreed with Kia Fleet 
<http://www.kia.co.uk/kia-business-fleet-cars.aspx>, sponsor of the Guardian 
Small Business Network Accessing Expertise 
<http://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/accessing-expertise> hub.
