
Miss Great Britain Zara Holland has been stripped of her title 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/17/miss-great-britain-title-sex-itv2-love-island-zara-holland-alex-bowen>
 after having sex with fellow contestant Alex Bowen on ITV2 reality showLove 
Island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jun/09/love-island-what-can-12-horny-men-and-women-teach-us-about-romance>
.

The official Miss Great Britain Twitter account 
<https://twitter.com/Official_MissGB/status/743534619438485504> released a 
statement saying that the decision had been taken with “great regret”, adding:

“We pride ourselves on promoting the positivity of pageants in modern society 
and this includes the promotion of a strong, positive female role model in our 
winners... The feedback we have received from pageant insiders and members of 
the general public is such that we cannot promote Zara as a positive role model 
moving forward … We wholly understand that everyone makes mistakes, but Zara, 
as an ambassador for Miss Great Britain, simply did not uphold the 
responsibility expected of the title.”

As if Holland hasn’t already suffered enough after spending the past two weeks 
stuck on an island with a bunch of sexist men 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3115229/Worst-case-misogyny-ITV-s-new-prime-time-reality-Love-Island-slammed-sexist-behaviour-just-ONE-night-air.html>
 talking about “leathering” the female contestants and boasting of “letting” 
their girlfriends out so other men could admire them before taking them home. 
Now she has been hung out to dry by a group that has collectively dissected her 
sexual behaviour and found it wanting, publicly describing her decision to 
sleep with Bowen on the show as a “mistake”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m9d5%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m9d5%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff05ef9dac13356cc363158133fe93e2320bc6b63%2F409_130_1251_1382%2F1251.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stripping%20Miss%20Great%20Britain%20of%20her%20title%20for%20having%20sex%20on%20TV%20reveals%20our%20double%20standards&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m9d5%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stripping+Miss+Great+Britain+of+her+title+for+having+sex+on+TV+reveals+our+double+standards&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m9d5%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff05ef9dac13356cc363158133fe93e2320bc6b63%2F409_130_1251_1382%2F1251.jpg>
 Zara Holland as Miss Great Britain. Photograph: Stephen Coke/Rex/Shutterstock 
After facing a backlash from Twitter users accusing the pageant of sexism and 
slut-shaming the 20-year-old, the accounttweeted 
<https://twitter.com/Official_MissGB/status/743545345989296128>: “To be clear 
we have no problem at all with sex – it is perfectly natural. We simply can’t 
condone what happened on national tv.”

Thus, Miss Great Britain provided a fascinating insight into the outdated, 
double standards ingrained into the modern beauty pageant.

In fairness, the organisers of Miss Great Britain aren’t entirely ignorant of 
how archaic the pageant is; theirwebsite 
<http://www.missgreatbritain.co.uk/history/> enthusiastically reminds readers 
that the first ever winner won seven guineas and a swimsuit, in an exercise 
designed so that “men could enjoy watching pretty girls”. A quick glance at the 
2013 finalistsphotograph 
<http://www.missgreatbritain.co.uk/photo/miss-gb-photos/#prettyPhoto[pp_gallery]/6/>
 on the website suggests that very little has changed: identikit women are 
lined up like cattle, with identification numbers to boot.

 An organisation that judges women on how sexy, thin and attractive they are 
to men has publicly humiliated and degraded its own winner for going on a 
television programme all about being sexy, thin and attractive to men. When 
these women are passive objects, the pageant revels in and profits from their 
sexual attractiveness. But heaven forbid they should actually live a real life 
or follow through on that titillating promise. The idea of them taking 
ownership of their own bodies and desires is apparently unthinkable, unless it 
is done in secret.

It all plays into the double standard that sees young women facing enormous 
pressure to be as sexy as possible, yet lambasted if they dare to step outside 
the realm of the watched object and into the role of the self-possessed woman. 
Looking attractive is all well and good, but dare to engage in actual sexual 
activity and suddenly you’re a slut, a slag, a whore, while your male peers 
mysteriously become studs, lads, or players. It is often the court of public 
opinion that disgraces and shames women for sexual activity: a pattern 
replicated in the Miss Great Britain statement, which makes it clear that it is 
only after receiving feedback that they decided Holland could not be promoted 
as a role model – a decision based on other people’s judgments rather than her 
own actions.

Looking attractive is all well and good, but dare to engage in actual sexual 
activity and suddenly you’re a slut

The move is particularly ironic given that the pageant only recently updated 
<http://www.missgreatbritain.co.uk/miss-great-britain-entry-rules-expanded/> 
its rules to allow married women and mothers to take part (they were banned 
from entering until 2013). So having had sex in the past is clearly acceptable, 
just not in the future.

Of course, Miss Great Britain isn’t alone in its double standards – they were 
also on full display on Love Island itself, where fellow contestantsdescribed 
Holland 
<http://www.birminghammail.co.uk/whats-on/film-news/love-islands-alex-bowen-centre-11497343>
 as an “absolute idiot” and a “stupid girl”, while Bowen was reported to have 
escaped “unscathed by scandal”. In this case, as in so many, others benefitted 
richly from a young woman being torn down:ratings rocketed after Holland was 
dethroned 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/20/miss-great-britain-leaving-love-island-gives-itv2-ratings-boost>
.

Stripping Holland of her title is further proof that no matter how hard women 
try to play by society’s sexist rules, they still can’t win.
