
There’s a palatable horror when one sees a tie-dye T-shirt. It’s the recoil 
you get when overwhelmed by the mental image of the wearer sipping rare brews 
of herbal tea, talking about fracking and possibly being a minor member of the 
Manson family. “I hate tie-dye T-shirts,” Kurt Cobain toldMelody Maker 
<http://www.livenirvana.com/interviews/9206et/index.html> in 1992. “I wouldn’t 
wear a tie-dye T-shirt unless it was dyed with the urine of Phil Collins and 
the blood of Jerry Garcia.”

Get her. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k86q%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k86q%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2bd48cc6dd4efb9b02eb286d7a7aca179efe2e1f%2F944_201_1059_1395%2F1059.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20return%20of%20tie-dye%3A%20from%2060s%20throwback%20to%20badge%20of%20cool&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k86q%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+return+of+tie-dye%3A+from+60s+throwback+to+badge+of+cool&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k86q%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2bd48cc6dd4efb9b02eb286d7a7aca179efe2e1f%2F944_201_1059_1395%2F1059.jpg>
 Tyler the Creator, bringing back tie-die. Photograph: Roger Kisby/Getty Images 
The tie-die print, previously a signifier of arrested development and surfers 
in Newquay, has returned as the go-to pattern for conveying a rebellious, IDGAF 
attitude. Exactly the kind of thing, some would say, that Cobain stood for. Now 
labels such asSaint Laurent 
<http://www.mrporter.com/mens/saint_laurent/tie-dyed-cotton-t-shirt/653172?ppv=2>
 andElder Statesman 
<http://www.mrporter.com/en-gb/mens/the_elder_statesman/tie-dyed-cashmere-and-silk-blend-t-shirt/662428?ppv=2>
 have made the vertiginous pattern almost haute.

There was a change in the air a few years ago when the pattern was 
re-appropriated by the hip hop scene; XXL magazine hailed it as “the new black” 
when rappers such as Chance the Rapper, Tyler the Creator and ScHoolboy Q wore 
the acid-washed look on their T-shirts and bucket hats. Meanwhile, designers 
such as Alessandro Michele for Gucci, Louis Vuitton, Tillmann Lauterbach and 
Lou Dalton all used the pattern.
 Jared Leto, right, at the Coachella festival. 
Cut to summer 2016 and it’s hard to avoid photos of post-Yeezus Kanye West 
going for the acid-fried look, pairing ripped jeans with bong-ready tops, while 
Justin Bieber has been dotting his emergence as a post-enfant-terrible with 
swirly, whirly patterns on his Fear of God jeans. Inevitably, Jared Leto wore 
the design at Coachella, and evenChris Martin’s One Outfit 
<http://www.gq.com/story/chris-martin-purple-t-shirt-outfit> features a coat 
with blotchy tie-dye prints.

It’s the pattern that has been embraced by fashion, but it probably hasn’t 
completely removed itself from wearers who will probably get the munchies at 
around, ooh, 3am.
