
British politicians attempting to undermine the independence of the BBC 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/07/john-whittingdale-bbc-governance-channel-4>
 should be careful what they wish for.

Public service broadcasting 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/public-service-broadcasting> is precious and 
its credibility depends on it not only being at arm’s length from the 
government of the day, but being perceived as such.

The BBC is admired abroard precisely because it has, thus far, managed to 
avoid becoming an arm of the state, a fate that has befallen several supposedly 
independent broadcasting outlets in easternEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.

In the communist era, state TV and radio services acted on behalf of the 
government, which financed them, selected their managements and maintained 
strict censorship over content.

In the aftermath of the collapse of communist regimes, privately owned media 
filled the vacuum during a period in which state broadcasters were reorganised, 
often with guidance from theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>.

Dunja Mijatovic, the human rights advocate who is the OSCE’s representative on 
freedom of the media*, points out that in some cases the transformation of 
state television into a public onewas a condition of these new democracies 
becoming member states of the Council of Europe. 
<https://www.indexoncensorship.org/2016/06/dunja-mijatovic>

Commitment to an authentic public service remit was assumed to be crucial to 
becoming a candidate for EU entry. But “developments in younger EU member 
states”, writes Mijatovic, show that claims to public service “can be misused.”

There has been considerable backsliding in the battle to establish credible 
public service broadcasters in transitional democracies. And she lists some 
examples:

Poland: In December 2015, the Polish parliament adopted a law 
<https://mappingmediafreedom.org/#/1657> giving the treasury minister the 
mandate to appoint and dismiss members of management and supervisory boards. 
Since the law came into effect in January this year,more than 100 journalists 
<https://mappingmediafreedom.org/#/2044> in public media have lost their jobs, 
allegedly for not being government-friendly.

Croatia: Its parliament first dismissed the director general 
<https://mappingmediafreedom.org/?k=croatia#/1976> of the radio and television 
broadcaster and then, a week later, the government proposed that parliament 
should reject a report by the independent media regulator. Both eventsraised 
serious concerns about the country’s media freedom 
<http://www.osce.org/fom/226861>.

Hungary: Post-communist public service broadcasting was, in effect, turned 
back into state broadcasting. New media laws in 2010 led, within a year, to all 
public service media being subordinated to political decisions. The governing 
party was able to nominate all new heads of public service media and the Media 
Authority controls the budgets.

Bosnia: The steering board of Bosnia & Herzegovina Radio and Television 
decided last month to stop broadcasting from 30 June 
<https://mappingmediafreedom.org/#/2361> because of its critical financial 
situation. BHRT relies mainly on funds from a TV licence fee that is paid by 
only 50% of Bosnia’s citizens.

In other words, in these countries, and several others, there is a desire to 
recreate the “state broadcaster” model.

There are lessons here for Britain that the government, especially culture 
secretary John Whittingdale, should take on board. Its wish tochange the way 
the BBC is governed 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/12/bbc-white-paper-key-points-john-whittingdale>
 by packing the board with its own appointees raises questions of impartiality. 
The BBC has never been, and should not be, a “state broadcaster”, neither in 
practice nor in perception.

Government control exercised through its planned unitary board takes the UK 
closer to eastern European models, even allowing for the fact that the 
government already appoints the chair and deputy chair overseeing theBBC 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>. Is this really the direction of travel 
Britain should be taking?

At least, for the foreseeable future, the BBC’s funding mechanism, the licence 
fee, will continue. Under-funded public service broadcasting carries its own 
dangers, as Mijatovic argues.

To read her recipe for curing the problem in east European and Balkan 
countries,see her excellent article on the Index on Censorship site 
<https://www.indexoncensorship.org/2016/06/dunja-mijatovic>. 

*In the original posting, Dunja was described as being the former 
representative. In fact, her mandate has been extended.
