
Chris Evans’ Top Gear <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/top-gear> has 
dropped to its lowest Sunday night audience of any episode since it was 
reinvented by Jeremy Clarkson nearly a decade and a half ago.


The BBC2 motoring show, which was handed to Radio 2 breakfast DJ Evans after 
Clarkson was axed last year, fell to 2.34 million viewers for the fourth 
episode of its new run on Sunday.

It was the lowest overnight audience of the new series to date, just over half 
the 4.3 million viewers who watched its return three weeks ago, and below the 
previous record low, of 2.36 million viewers on 15 June 2003.

Its total audience, including people who recorded it and watch it over the 
next seven days – and on the BBC’s iPlayer – is likely to be substantially 
higher.

But it will still be hugely disappointing for the BBC, which has seen the 
show’s overnight audience cut in half since Clarkson’s departure, followed out 
the door by his former Top Gear co-presenters, Richard Hammond and James May.

Related: Top Gear: viewing figures fall to new low 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jun/13/top-gear-viewing-figures-fall-to-new-low>

Critics’ reception of the show since it was reinvented by Evans, one of a team 
of new presenters including former Friends star Matt LeBlanc and German racing 
driver Sabine Schmitz, has ranged from lukewarm to outright hostile.

It was always going to be an uphill challenge to step into the shoes of 
Clarkson, who had 22 series to perfect his presenting style, 21 of them 
alongside Hammond and May.

Under the trio, alongside executive producer Andy Wilman, it became less a 
motoring show and more a sitcom about three middle aged men messing about with 
cars.

The chemistry has been impossible to emulate, and not helped by reports of 
internal tensions on the new show and the premature departure of its executive 
producer, Lisa Clark.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Ftop-gear-the-stig-interview-john-plunkett-video&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Ftop-gear-the-stig-interview-john-plunkett-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%20Gear's%20The%20Stig%3A%20the%20Guardian's%20hard-hitting%20interview%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Ftop-gear-the-stig-interview-john-plunkett-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top+Gear%27s+The+Stig%3A+the+Guardian%27s+hard-hitting+interview+%E2%80%93+video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Ftop-gear-the-stig-interview-john-plunkett-video&media=>
Top Gear’s The Stig: the Guardian’s hard-hitting interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/video/2016/may/26/top-gear-the-stig-interview-john-plunkett-video>
Evans has dismissed reports of difficulties on the show, including reports 
that he did not get along with LeBlanc 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/25/chris-evans-says-perfect-storm-of-top-gear-criticism-facile-and-fictitious>
 – but now the show appears in need of further reinvention.

Top Gear is one of the BBC’s most-valuable properties, earning an estimated 
£50m for its commercial arm, BBC Worldwide.
