
This week Virgin Australia and Air New Zealand held a conference with the 
biofuel industryafter joining forces to investigate options 
<http://www.airnewzealand.com.au/press-release-2016-airnz-and-virgin-australia-launch-search-for-aviation-biofuel-opportunities>
 for locally produced biojet fuel for their domestic and international routes.

This striking step signals the two airlines’ intention to aggregate their 
purchasing power in order to reduce their reliance on a single fuel, while at 
the same time significantly reducing their carbon emissions. Jet fuel, a 
petroleum distillate, has been used to power air travel since the first flights 
in the 1940s because of its high-energy density and thermal stability. And each 
year, the world’s airlines burn about 300bn litres, which represents about 10% 
of global oil consumption.

Although electric, solar or hydrogen power systems will be deployed in light, 
short-haul aircraft within the next decade, it will take much longer for the 
mass-transport, commercial aviation market to adopt them. Engines, aircraft as 
well as fuel storage and distribution infrastructure are all designed 
specifically to handle jet fuel and many technical, safety, reliability and 
infrastructure challenges still need to be overcome for these sources to become 
viable alternatives.

Related: Australia's defence force could run on sugar cane and tyres under 
biofuel plan 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/apr/06/australias-defence-force-could-run-on-sugar-cane-and-tyres-under-biofuel-plan>

The Virgin Australia/Air New Zealand search for biofuel options demonstrates 
that they are on the look out for solutions. Biojet is a so-called drop-in fuel 
that is compatible with existing engines and infrastructure, and it recycles 
carbon rather than emitting “new” fossil carbon.

The two airlines seek supply for 10 years, beginning in 2020, of 200m litres 
of biojet fuel a year. This is about 5% of their projected fuel consumption. 
This is a significant market given that jet fuel costs for Virgin Australia 
added up to about $1.1b in 2015.

Moreover, they seek this supply from up to five bio refineries, located across 
Australia and New Zealand, none of which exist currently.

Air New Zealand and Virgin Australia issued the RFI (request for information) 
in partnership to strengthen the demand signal to the biojet industry. Aviation 
currently contributesonly 3% 
<https://www.weforum.org/reports/repowering-transport-2011> of manmade carbon 
dioxide emissions per year but relative and absolute emissions will continue to 
increase <https://www.weforum.org/reports/repowering-transport-2011> unless the 
projected growth of up to 5% of the industry each year is decoupled from fossil 
carbon emissions.

Additionally, they see biojet supply as a way to increase business resilience 
by increasing diversity, security and price stability of their energy supply, 
given fuel accounts for 20% to 50% of an airline’s operating costs.

They are also aware of measures such as the Australian government’s emissions 
reduction fund 
<http://www.environment.gov.au/climate-change/emissions-reduction-fund/publications/factsheet-erf-safeguard-mechanism>
 safeguard mechanism, which requires the largest emitters, including airlines, 
to keep emissions within baseline levels from 1 July 2016.

The international aviation industry as a whole is committed to change. The 
International Air Transport Association (IATA) has set targets for an annual 
average increase in fuel efficiency each year from 2009 to 2020 of 1.5%; 
carbon-neutral growth from 2020; and reduction in emissions of 50% of the 2005 
figures by 2050.

The UN’s International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) has similar 
ambitions. This year the ICAO assembly will vote on a recommendation for a 
global market-based measure to cap aviation’s net carbon emissions from 2020.

Related: European diplomats criticise UN plan to curb airline emissions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/07/european-diplomats-criticise-un-plan-to-curb-airline-emissions>

To achieve these targets, all international airlines have adopted IATA’s 
strategy of improved technology, more efficient aircraft operations, 
infrastructure improvements , and a single global market-based measure.

They are looking to biojet to play a significant role. The global industry is 
requesting 4bn to 5bn litres of biojet each year from 2020, at prices 
competitive with petroleum jet fuel.

Over in the US, the federal aviation administration wants 5% of the jet fuel 
consumed each year from 2018 to be biojet. This represents US$2.5bn of the 
US$50bn that US airlines spend on jet fuel each year.

Like conventional jet fuel, biojet must meet stringent technical 
specifications and tough environmental standards, including lower CO2 emissions 
compared to jet fuel, which is not an easy task.

There are several certified pathways to biojet, including the hydroprocessed 
esters and fatty acids (HEFA) pathway that produces biojet from oil seed crops, 
animal fat or microalgae. It can used in up to a 50:50 blend with petroleum jet 
fuel.

This was the fuel that Air New Zealand 
<http://www.airnewzealand.com.au/press-release-2008-airnz-and-partners-ready-for-biofuel-test-23dec>
 used in 2008 when it became the second airline in the world to conduct a test 
flight on biojet. In 2012, Qantas and Jetstar used HEFA to demonstrate the 
potential of biojet on regularly scheduled commercial flights. These and many 
other airlines have conducted commercial flights on this and other types of 
biojetwithout incident 
<https://www.iata.org/publications/Documents/2015-report-alternative-fuels.pdf>.

Yet despite strong global signals, policy incentives and certification of four 
additional biojet production pathways, viable cost-competitive biojet 
production facilities have been slow to materialise.

While it seems like a painstaking process, there have been some indications 
that a biojet industry may yet get off the ground.

In January this year, the US navy launched the great green flee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/21/us-navy-launches-first-biofuel-powered-aircraft-carriers>
t in which each ship is deploying energy efficiency measures, renewable diesel 
and biojet.

Then in March, United Airlines  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/nov/08/us-airlines-biofuels-powering-flights>
became the first US airline to fly regularly scheduled flights powered by 
biojet. The airline will use up to 15m gallons of biojet, produced in Los 
Angeles from inedible agricultural waste fats and oils. And theTotal-Amyris 
program <http://www.airtotal.com/About-us/biojet.html> continues to use biojet 
manufactured in Brazil for commercial flights in Europe and Brazil, and has 
been tested by Air France, Etihad and Lufthansa.

Related: Only biofuels will cut plane emissions | Ben Caldecott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/may/16/only-biofuels-will-cut-plane-emissions>

This new partnership between Air New Zealand and Virgin Australia is a welcome 
signal to the domestic market that it is not too late for Australia and New 
Zealand to enter the field.

Earlier this month the Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, announced 
that Southern Oil’s pilot plant would produce 1m litres of fuel annually 
<http://www.sor.com.au/Queensland%20Government%20media%20statement_March%202016.PDF>
 from waste lube oil and renewable feedstocks for use in field trials by the 
Australian navy and the great green fleet. Along with thebiofutures roadmap 
<http://www.statedevelopment.qld.gov.au/industry-development/biofutures.html> 
and the 10-year action plan, Queensland is clearly positioned as a leader in 
the biofuels industry.

On a national scale, the Australian Renewable Energy Agency has consistently 
provided support <http://arena.gov.au/projects/> to low-emissions biofuels 
projects around Australia, as has its New Zealand government counterpart.

Additionally new bio refineries, which produce products for a wide range of 
markets in addition to the fuels market, would generate economic growth, new 
manufacturing jobs and help to revitalise rural communities.

So while Australian and New Zealand airlines are demonstrating their 
willingness to be innovative and early adopters of biojet fuel, now it is up to 
the market to respond.
