 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
The high-level panel appointed by the UN secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, to 
draw up a post-2015 development agenda might well be casting envious backward 
glances at the small team that drafted themillennium development goals (MDGs) 
<http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/>.

Lord Mark Malloch-Brown <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/malloch-brown-mark>
, then the head of the UN Development Programme, explains how he and the small 
group wrote up the MDGs in the basement of the UN office in New York in 
"relative casualness", so much so they almost forgot to include a section on 
the environment – MDG seven onenvironmental sustainability 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/global-development/2011/aug/05/millennium-development-goal-environmental-sustainability>
.

"The document had gone to the printing presses as I passed the head of the 
UN's environmental programme," saysMalloch-Brown 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/global-development/video/2012/nov/16/malloch-brown-weak-states-video>
 (video). "I was walking along the corridor, relieved at job done, when I ran 
into the beaming head of the UN environment programme and a terrible swearword 
crossed my mind when I realised we'd forgotten an environmental goal … we raced 
back to put in the sustainable development goal."

Unlike the sometimes improvised nature of the MDGs, the post-2015 development 
framework promises to be a more elaborately choreographed affair. Banhas 
appointed three co-chairs 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/global-development/2012/aug/01/panel-lead-global-development-agenda-named>
 – the UK prime minister David Cameron, the Liberian president, Ellen Johnson 
Sirleaf, and the Indonesian president, Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono – to head a 
panel of 26 experts.Their job is to produce a "bold and ambitious" report by 
the end of May 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/global-development/2012/oct/24/un-panel-development-goals-ambitious-timetable>
.

To avoid the impression that the new framework is being cooked up by experts 
in a backroom – or basement – there is anambitious outreach programme 
<http://participationpower.wordpress.com/2012/11/02/post-2015-high-level-panel-to-prioritise-the-perspectives-of-voiceless-people/>
. Malloch-Brown commends the effort to consult widely but worries about the 
"committee-isation" of the process.

In an interview at his office at FTI Consulting in London, Malloch-Brown says 
the eight MDGs melded a human-rights based approach embodied in the Human 
Development Report; a World Bank pro-market structural adjustment strategy; and 
the target-setting mindset of rich donors in the Development Assistance 
Committee of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. "The 
development of the MDGs was a bit like nuclear fusion," he said. "There was a 
lot going on in lots of labs."

Malloch-Brown credits Kofi Annan, the then UN secretary general, backed by the 
Labour government, including a high-profile development secretary, Clare Short, 
in pushing for the MDGs at the UN millennium summit in 2000. "It was a benign, 
optimistic time, before 9/11 and the Iraq war, when peace and harmony was not 
thought to be impossible. It was in that context that Kofi directed myself and 
others to get universal support of the whole membership", for the MDGs, says 
Malloch-Brown.

Despite the promising international backdrop at the time, Malloch-Brown speaks 
of civil war within the development community, hence the focus in the MDGs on 
targets. With different and competing political and economic models, the MDGs 
did not specify how those goals they were to be achieved. "It was all about 
outcomes in a world of division and confrontation," he says.

Malloch-Brown believes a consensus now exists on what constitutes successful 
development, citingCameron's golden thread 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/global-development/poverty-matters/2012/aug/27/david-cameron-development-theory-convenient>
, although he prefers the term common threads, to include transparency, rule of 
law and accountability of governments.

Malloch-Brown asserts that as China 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/oct/18/china-economy-slows-seventh-quarter>
 andIndia 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/nov/12/vijay-mallya-kingfisher-broke-india>
 develop – although not at such a breakneck speed as before – the world's poor 
people will be concentrated in an arc of weak or failing states, stretching 
from west Africa through Yemen to Afghanistan and Pakistan. In dealing with 
those countries, Malloch-Brown argues that it will not be sufficient to provide 
better healthcare and access to education or to provide a dynamic private 
sector to create jobs.

"You need accountable institutions, accountable to their own people, and the 
rule of law both to police that private sector and to prevent it from behaving 
monopolistically and in rent-seeking ways – but you also need that rule of law 
to stand up for the rights of the poor," he says. "These are the threads which 
bring political leaders of very different political persuasions together. For 
2015, we have an opportunity we didn't have in 2000 to capture that consensus."

He acknowledges that any reference to democracy in a post-2015 development 
agenda would be a step too far for some, just as opposition from conservative 
religious groups, including the Vatican and some Islamic countries, led to a 
watering down of MDG three on gender equality.

But Malloch-Brown believes – perhaps he is overoptimistic in this – that the 
need for successful development rather than any triumphal march of, in his 
words, "Westminster-style democracy" will ensure that the common threads will 
find their place in any development model. He cites the growing number of 
protests in China as a sign that top-down development, so seemingly successful 
in east Asia, has its limits.

As for what should succeed the MDGs, he agrees with many commentators on the 
need to address inequality; a strengthening of MDG eight,which was vague on the 
responsibilities of rich countries 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/global-development/2011/aug/05/millennium-development-goal-global-partnership>
; consolidating health, which is scattered across MDGs; and fleshing out MDG 
three on gender equality.

"What you want to avoid is a Christmas list of goals with every interest group 
racing to get in their goals," says Malloch-Brown. "We know what's missing: 
infrastructure, jobs and definitely a stronger MDG eight about the obligations 
of those of us in richer countries."
