
For the first time in the history of the UN, countries competing for a 
non-permanent seat on the security council will participate in an open debate 
to present their candidacies to the world.

The security council, the body within the UN charged with maintaining global 
peace and security, is something everyone wants to see work more effectively 
and efficiently. TheWorld Federation of UN Associations <http://www.wfuna.org/> 
has a mandate focused on strengthening and improving the UN, and has worked 
hard to makeelection debates 
<http://www.wfuna.org/wfuna-security-council-election-initiative> – which will 
take place in New York from Monday – a reality.

Related: The world's humanitarian burden is too big. How can we lessen it? | 
Robert Glasser and Stephen O'Brien 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/25/the-worlds-humanitarian-burden-is-too-big-how-can-we-lessen-it>

Through the debates, the UN ambassador representing each candidate country 
will present the platform and policies they will be pursuing at the security 
council. There will be none of the antics seen during the US presidential 
election debates; discussion will instead focus on policy issues that matter. 
For a slow-moving, reform-phobic institution, this will be a huge step forward 
towards a new era.

While there have been many proposals on security council reform, the body has 
not changed in procedural make-up since 1965. Every year, five seats for a 
two-year term are up for election on the 15-seat council. This year, seven 
candidates are competing to assume a place on 1 January 2017.Elections will be 
held earlier than usual, on 28 June 
<http://www.wfuna.org/wfuna-security-council-election-initiative>.

To maintain a geographic balance in the membership, spots on the security 
council are granted on a regional basis. It is not uncommon for just one 
candidate to be put forward from each regional grouping. This year, though, 
there will be two regions with contested elections.

Competing for two seats from the group Western Europe and Other will be Italy, 
the Netherlands and Sweden. In the Asia-Pacific group, meanwhile, Kazakhstan 
and Thailand will contest a seat. The remaining seats will go to Ethiopia, the 
sole candidate for the Africa group, and Bolivia, the only representative from 
the Latin American and Caribbean states.


The stakes are high. Those outside the permanent members of the security 
council –known as the P5 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2015/sep/23/un-security-council-failing-70-years>
 (US, UK, France, Russia and China) – are often quick to criticise the body’s 
role, yet many member states still invest vast resources in campaigns to get 
elected. Elected members of the security council cannot have the influence of 
the veto-wielding P5, but they can pursue important agendas and affect crucial 
decisions.

In December, Jordan was instrumental in pushing forward security council 
resolution 2250 <http://www.un.org/press/en/2015/sc12149.doc.htm>, the body’s 
first motion on youth, peace and security. Togo took a principal role on the
situation in Guinea-Bissau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/13/guinea-bissau-coup-suspected> 
during its time on the council in2012 and 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/13/guinea-bissau-coup-suspected>, 
while Australia, Luxembourg, New Zealand and Spain have all been influential in 
the council’s response to the Syria crisis.

The forthcoming debates will be an important next step for transparency and 
accountability; what is said will matter. Candidates will be expected to adhere 
to their stated policy positions during their time on the council.

Those who agree to take part will be offering a refreshing show of partnership 
, confirming their commitment to making the UN more fit for purpose. Standing 
for transparency and accountability in principle is very different from acting 
upon it, and it will be a great testament to each participating country that 
they are willing to be pioneers for the debates.

Change, however incremental, is always viewed with suspicion at the UN, but it 
seems to be the flavour of the day with therecent opening up of the secretary 
general selection process 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/12/candidates-for-un-top-job-given-public-hearing>
 through campaigns such as1 for 7 billion <http://www.1for7billion.org/>. 

What we are trying to do is bring these candidacies into an era of openness, 
where votes are secured for policy substance, rather than for favours owed. If 
each member state now has to think slightly longer about the platform and 
promises they will put forward, then this initiative is an overwhelming 
success. This is what partnership looks like at the UN: member states working 
with civil society to try to improve the work of the organisation as a whole.

The debates will be a vital way of promoting better engagement between member 
states, civil society and the wider UN community, to ensure that the security 
council works not just for a few, but for us all.

• Bonian Golmohammadi is the secretary general of the World Federation of 
United Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> Associations, 
a global civil society network of almost 100 nationallybased UN associations
