
It’s breaktime at Sydney Russell school in Dagenham, east London 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, on the day before national offer day, 
when primary school pupils find out whether they have got into their first 
choice of secondary school, and the students in their emerald green blazers 
begin to emerge from all directions, spilling out of dozens of classrooms 
across the vast site.


Related: Fears rise over school places as secondaries battle the bulge 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/feb/29/fears-secondary-school-places-bulge>

As the numbers multiply, the noise volume rises. The canteen area rapidly 
fills with hundreds of children; in the space immediately outside there are 
hundreds more, and round the corner in the playground beyond there are hundreds 
more again, laughing, chatting, holding hands, playing football.

Sydney Russell is one of a growing breed of so-called “titan” schools – 
supersize secondaries – which are being rolled out across the country in 
response to the growing demand for places caused by increased birth rates.

First it was primary schools that were forced to expand rapidly; now the bulge 
is moving into secondaries, with more than 300,000 additional secondary pupils 
expected in the system by 2020, putting unprecedented pressure on schools and 
local authorities. Sydney Russell is playing its part and now has 1,900 pupils.

Related: National offer day: how many families will get their first-choice 
school? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/01/national-offer-day-how-many-get-first-choice-school>

Like many other schools this year, Sydney Russell received more applications 
than ever before. Just under 1,500 children applied, of which almost a third 
made it their first choice. Though the school is one of the biggest in the 
country, with a 12-form entry offering 360 places in year 7, many families will 
still be disappointed to find they have not got their preference.

Roger Leighton was head of Sydney Russell until last October and has overseen 
the massive expansion programme with a new £2.4m block plus a £25m rebuilding 
programme funded by the now defunct BuildingSchools 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> for the Future programme.

When he was a boy he went to a grammar school with just 500 pupils. Now he’s 
firmly of the opinion that big is beautiful.

“It doesn’t make any difference if you are 10-form entry or 12-form entry,” he 
says. “There was a trend where some parents worried about their child in a big 
school – ‘Oh, my child is going to get lost in this great big school with lots 
of kids’. But [with record applications this year] these parents are clearly 
not put off. They are desperate to get in.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h6tk%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h6tk%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e430d4c8aa194cafe592e8fbbe6e96bfff186ba%2F0_402_5997_3598%2F5997.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rush%20of%20the%20titans%3A%20supersize%20secondary%20schools%20for%20surging%20population&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h6tk%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rush+of+the+titans%3A+supersize+secondary+schools+for+surging+population&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h6tk%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e430d4c8aa194cafe592e8fbbe6e96bfff186ba%2F0_402_5997_3598%2F5997.jpg>
 Inside Sydney Russell school. Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
Leighton is now chief executive of Partnership Learning, the multi-academy 
trust of which Sydney Russell is the lead school, and is helping the east 
London borough of Barking and Dagenham to create enough spaces for its 
burgeoning school-age population.

In the last few months alone the borough has had to find 250 extra secondary 
places beyond the projections last October for children who have unexpectedly 
moved into the borough. It’s a constantly changing picture.


When the Guardian visits, Leighton is putting the finishing touches to an 
application to open three more schools – free schools – in the borough. Sydney 
Russell, meanwhile, is expanding further. It is opening its own 
three-form-entry primary section, which will feed into the secondary school, 
taking the total up to a staggering 2,700 pupils.


He says the size of the school allows for economies of scale. There may be 
1,900 pupils but you need only one headteacher, one business manager, one 
facilities manager. As a result there’s more money to spend elsewhere – he says 
Sydney Russell has “the best IT in the country” – and the curriculum offer is 
much broader, particularly in sixth form.

Janis Davies has taken over as principal and she says her team works hard to 
make sure pupils don’t feel lost in such a big environment – particularly heads 
of year who make it their job to get to know all 360 children in their 
immediate care. “It’s about making sure the students are all known, so they can 
form an identity and links,” she says.

But it’s a massive operation. As well as the children, there are 120 teachers, 
plus 80 other staff. The staff car park is vast and the staff room looks like 
the waiting hall at Stansted airport. There are more computers than pupils and 
Davies jokes that she could buy a house with the amount of money the school 
spends on toner for the 200-plus printers at the school.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h6tk%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h6tk%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37880180cadee5e803cce501412eb7fa8b6bc7bb%2F0_180_5256_3155%2F5256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rush%20of%20the%20titans%3A%20supersize%20secondary%20schools%20for%20surging%20population&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h6tk%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rush+of+the+titans%3A+supersize+secondary+schools+for+surging+population&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h6tk%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37880180cadee5e803cce501412eb7fa8b6bc7bb%2F0_180_5256_3155%2F5256.jpg>
 Sydney Russell school in Dagenham. Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
The original school on the site was a grammar school, Dagenham County High. 
The main building with its 1930s brickwork and attractive wooden floors still 
survives but would be barely recognisable to its famous alumni, which include 
the comedian and musician Dudley Moore and the former archbishop of Canterbury 
George Carey.


Sydney Russell may be big but Walton High in Milton Keynes will be even 
bigger. It currently has 1,500 pupils, and an extra 270 will start in September 
on a second site, which will eventually also hold 1,500 pupils making a total 
of 3,000.

Related: Supersize schools: how big is too big … 2,000? Or 4,000? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/oct/27/supersize-schools-too-big-add-places-pupils>

It originally opened in 1999 with 120 children. The executive principal 
Michelle Currie, who was the founding vice-principal, says she always knew the 
school would get bigger – Milton Keynes is one of the fastest-growing areas in 
the country.


Like Davies and Leighton at Sydney Russell, Currie says there are clear 
advantages to a big school – the broader curriculum offer and the economies of 
scale. In addition, having two sites means pupils have the advantages of 
belonging to a larger community, without feeling dwarfed by their immediate 
surroundings. “The biggest issue is for the whole school community in Milton 
Keynes,” she says.

“Whilst Walton High will be OK because we know this growth is coming in and we 
will get those economies of scale, some of that’s being subsidised by other 
schools.” Per-pupil funding has gone down across all Milton Keynes schools to 
pay for expansion at Walton High and elsewhere.

According to Labour, the number of titan secondary schools with a pupil 
population in excess of 1,600 pupils is likely to increase by more than a third 
over this parliament and the number with more than 2,000 could increase by 
two-thirds.

Leighton is unfazed. For Sydney Russell it brings greater freedoms. And for 
the children? “For a student, their experience is a classroom of 25 or 30 kids 
and that’s it.”
