
Newspaper sales in Ireland appear to be falling slightly faster than in the 
UK. According to the latest set of ABC figures for the island ofIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>, overall circulation decreased in 
the second half of 2014 by more than 7% compared to the same six months the 
year before.

Interestingly, papers published in the UK but sold in Ireland, suffered larger 
falls than the home-produced titles, which is something of a turn-around in the 
fortunes of the Irish press.

Even so, there is little for Ireland’s publishers to celebrate as far as print 
sales are concerned with year-on-year dips for the three national titles.

Sales of the Irish Times fell 6.3% (to 76,882); the Irish Independent 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/irish-independent> fell 4.1% (to 112,502); 
and the Irish Examiner was down by 7% (to 34,424).

The main city titles, Dublin’s Herald and Cork’s Evening Echo registered 
substantial falls. The former lost 11.8% of its circulation, with sales dipping 
below the 50,000 mark, and the latter lost 7.4% to sell just 13,110 copies.

Among the daily tabloids, the Irish Daily Mail fell 10% (to 44,117); the Irish 
Daily Mirror <http://www.theguardian.com/media/daily-mirror> was down 10.2% (to 
46,870); the Irish Sun dropped 7% (to 59,119); and the Irish Daily Star was 
down by 9.5% (to 53,245).

On Sundays, the Sunday Independent continues to dominate the market despite a 
4.5% year-on-year fall, taking sales down to 219,007. By contrast, the Irish 
edition of theSunday Times <http://www.theguardian.com/media/sundaytimes> lost 
7% of its sale, recording a total of 86,059.

The Sunday Business Post managed to keep its loss down to just 3.2%, giving it 
a regular weekly sale of 33,233.

And the red-top Sunday World <http://www.theguardian.com/media/sunday-world> 
lost 9% of its sale over the period, dropping to 189,562.

North of the border, the Belfast <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/belfast> 
Telegraph lost 3.4% of its sale, to total 45,905.

Sources: ABC/Irish Times 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/business/media-and-marketing/newspaper-sales-down-by-more-than-7-in-second-half-of-2014-1.2110155>
/Irish Independent 
<http://www.independent.ie/business/media/irish-independent-cements-bestselling-position-as-the-countrys-favourite-title-31006678.html>
