
My husband and I married when we were 21 and I was his first sexual partner. I 
love him as my best friend but, despite still having sexual urges, I no longer 
feel attracted to him. I first told him six years ago and he was devastated, so 
I have kept my feelings quiet since. We went on to have two children as I felt 
I should just get on with life. He is a hard worker, a good father, a loving 
husband and we share similar tastes. He is no chauvinist and always treats me 
as an equal when it comes to housework and money. We are intimate as I do not 
want to deprive him of a sexual relationship, but I tend to switch off. Divorce 
is very frowned upon in our social community, but I can’t imagine spending the 
rest of my life with somebody who I view as a brother. I appreciate sexual 
attraction can wane, but we are in our early thirties and I still feel young. I 
can’t discuss the subject as I know it still upsets him. He tells me I am the 
love of his life. I desperately want to avoid hurting him and our very young 
children, but I don’t know what to do.

• When leaving a message on this page, please be sensitive to the fact that 
you are responding to a real person in the grip of a real-life dilemma, who 
wrote to Private Lives asking for help, and may well view your comments here. 
Please consider especially how your words or the tone of your message could be 
perceived by someone in this situation, and be aware that comments that appear 
to be disruptive or disrespectful to the individual concerned will be removed.

• If you would like fellow readers to respond to a dilemma of yours, send us 
an outline of the situation of about 150 words. For advice from Pamela 
Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your 
concerns.

• All correspondence should reach us by Wednesday morning. Email:
private.lives@theguardian.com <mailto://private.lives@theguardian.com> (please 
don’t send attachments).
