
In healthcare, the focus is often on brilliant surgeons, nurses or doctors 
(who, of course, we applaud). However, nurses and other medical professionals 
in the UK would not be able to do their job without the dedicated assistance of 
the support workforce.

The level of responsibility these health and care support workers have is 
increasing as the financial strain on the NHS makes the case for transferring 
more activities away from clinical staff.

Skills for Health <http://www.skillsforhealth.org.uk/ourhealthheroes/research> 
recently concluded that for every 1% of activities shifted from band five to 
band four (ie from clinical staff to support staff), a total of £100m might be 
saved across the health sector. This is based on a model whereby numbers of 
nurses remain static, while the proportion of support workers increases. The 
development of the support worker roles in the sector could therefore provide 
considerable savings and quality improvements.

Support workers therefore have a vital role to play in the future of the NHS 
and it’s no exaggeration to say that brilliant clinicians require a brilliant 
support workforce. To make this happen, managers and employers need to ensure 
that support workers across the board are given the support and time to develop 
their craft.

Related: Our Health Heroes: Campaign celebrates vital role of unsung 
healthcare staff 
<http://www.theguardian.com/skills-for-health-partner-zone/2016/feb/09/our-health-heroes-campaign-unsung-healthcare-staff>

This hasn’t always been the case and the 2013 Cavendish review  
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/review-of-healthcare-assistants-and-support-workers-in-nhs-and-social-care>
of healthcare assistants and support workers in NHS and social care identified 
inconsistencies in support worker development as well as lapses in oversight 
that saw support workers taking on clinical responsibilities without 
supervision or training.

Launched in April 2015, the care certificate 
<https://www.skillsplatform.org/skills-blog/the-complete--jargon-free-guide-to-the-care-certificate>
 has been a big step towards improving patient care by helping to standardise 
the initial training given to new entrants to the sector. The certificate has 
been designed to improve care across the board, especially in the development 
of so called soft skills such as teamwork and communication.

The support worker ecosystem 

Sadly, some areas of support work, such as administration, are thought of as 
“back office” and unrelated to patient care. This is a narrow view, however, as 
one of the main complaints about the health service is the lack of information 
given to patients and customer service.

While the 15 care certificate standards are primarily aimed at patient facing 
staff, there are certain aspects that could be applied to all support workers. 
Clerical staff may not be on the front line, but they can enhance the patient 
experience though a strong understanding of standards such as information 
governance and communication.

Beyond the care certificate 

A 2014 ONS labour force survey found that just 35% of support workers received 
some form of training in the previous 13 weeks compared to 55% in the 
non-support workforce. Customer service and administrative staff fared even 
worse, with just 26% and 34% reporting job related training over the same 
period. The introduction of the care certificate will address some of this 
disparity, but this only covers the induction period for new staff and does not 
apply to so-called “back office staff” .


In any job, self-motivation will be a key factor in success and the same will 
be true for support workers. Believing that they are worthy of and fighting for 
training investment may be an important step for support worker development, 
especially if employers are not forthcoming in allowing time or budget.

Related: Support workforce who power healthcare - in pictures 
<http://www.theguardian.com/skills-for-health-partner-zone/gallery/2016/feb/15/support-workforce-healthcare-in-pictures>

Psychologist Carol Dweck <http://mindsetonline.com/abouttheauthor/> has led 
research into self-belief and the difference between a fixed and growth 
mindset. Essentially she has found that people who believe they can progress 
through hard work (a growth mindset) rather than through innate talent (a fixed 
mindset), are more likely to persist and gain expertise.

Literacy and numeracy skills may be an area of development for some support 
workers, but this could remain unaddressed if they believe that they “don’t 
have a brain for figures”. They may be less likely to push for training from 
their managers or take up more advanced courses to further their learning.

By contrast, if the supporter worker or their manger believes in the power of 
hard work, support workers may be more motivated to improve their ability to 
handle information and take on further training. AsMatthew Syed 
<http://www.matthewsyed.co.uk/books/> put it in his book Bounce: The Myth of 
Talent and the Power of Practice, they might begin to think, “I may not be good 
at maths now, but if I work hard, I will be really good in the future”.

Support workers can find ideas for training at the Skills Platform’s dedicated 
learning page <http://landing.skillsplatform.org/supportworker/>.

Managers and management

A truly brilliant porter, radiographer or health care assistant won’t be 
developed overnight. Only through years of experience will they develop the 
necessary technical and interpersonal skills. Managers need to ensure that 
support workers gain the right experience through training and daily work place 
interventions.


Managers and leaders can help in many ways, not least by providing clarity to 
support workers on their roles and responsibilities.Change management skills 
<http://landing.skillsplatform.org/leadership/> are also vital as the NHS 
experiences regular upheavals from the top down.

However, the biggest role that managers can play in the development of a 
brilliant support workforce is by acting as a coach and mentor.

In another experiment involving 400 students, Dweck found that praise that 
emphasised effort over intelligence (such as “wow you must have worked very 
hard”) resulted in more students choosing a tougher task over an easier option. 
The students praised for effort then improved their performance on a subsequent 
task by 30%.

Managers therefore play a crucial role in fostering the development of support 
workers. If a young support worker believes that they can be brilliant through 
the force of their efforts, it could have a profound impact on their career and 
the entire health sector.

Support workers and their managers can find management, leadership and 
coaching courses on the Skills Platform’s dedicatedleadership section 
<http://landing.skillsplatform.org/leadership/>. 

Content on this page is produced and paid for by Skills for Health 
<http://www.skillsforhealth.org.uk/>
