
One of the most challenging and demanding things I ever did as a 
vice-chancellor was to sit down with six to eight potential personal donors and 
try to engage them in the future of the university. I had to have a very clear 
view of the over-arching strategy of the university and also be able to 
articulate our priorities: why we had chosen them, and why investment in them 
from a donor would have positive outcomes.

The potential donors were successful in their field and their questioning was 
rigorous, penetrating and occasionally very challenging. If I hadn’t known our 
script backwards, I would have been in serious trouble. This meant that we not 
only had to have a very clear institutional strategy but also that fundraising 
had to be directly aligned with it. This benefited planning at the university 
enormously.

Related: Higher education philanthropy: four steps to fundraising success 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2012/aug/09/higher-education-philanthropy-development-strategy>

By going out and asking individuals and organisations for support, you 
introduce them to the university and bring them closer to you. The university 
and I benefited from the donors’ advice and we also gained substantially from 
their networks and connections. Some of them went on to take very important 
non-executive positions in the university. Their support was a great personal 
booster for my morale and the overwhelming majority of them were great fun.

There can be no doubt that philanthropic donations to higher education have 
risen following theThomas (2004) 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0ahUKEwjrqKSh3OXLAhXFPxoKHbYxCncQFggcMAA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.case.org%2FDocuments%2FPublicPolicy%2FCASE_Europe%2Fincreasingvoluntarygivingreport.pdf&usg=AFQjCNF-JF4i_wCtGGq7F2WJZzNGJv46Gw&sig2=bmQL-cqDUTtXG1Ib42RGxg>
 andPearce (2012) 
<http://www.hefce.ac.uk/pubs/rereports/Year/2012/philanthropyreview/Title,92282,en.html>
 reports and the government’s matched funding initiatives. The total amount 
ofmoney raised has increased year on year, as has the total number of donors 
and the value of future financial commitments. It’s possible that the amount of 
annual income raised will increase to over £1bn per year in the near future.

While the universities of Oxford and Cambridge dominate fundraising, with 
income between £200m and £250m per year, others are raising substantial sums. 
And £1bn is no small amount when you consider that the total government grant 
to higher education in 2015-16 was £4.2bn and it is falling. UK higher 
education also has the highest number of gifts per year in excess of £1m of any 
charitable sector.

So, are universities generally resourceful in their fundraising? Yes and no. 
As a broad analysis, the higher education sector is divided into two groups: 
Universities who take fundraising very seriously (a relatively small number); 
and the rest who concentrate on alumni relations and are not really resourcing 
fundraising. This contrasts with the USwhere even the smallest community 
college will take fundraising very seriously.


We need institutions to see the benefits of fundraising, over and above the 
simple increase in income. Actively choosing to resource fundraising is not 
just about financial return on investment. For me there are three additional 
areas of benefit:


 * Fundraising concentrates the institution on a clear articulation of its 
strategy;

 * It brings influential and important stakeholders much closer to your 
university; 
 *  Success brings liberation, and is excellent for morale. 
To expand on my final point about morale: success in fundraising gives the 
sense of being in charge of your own destiny. In a world increasingly monitored 
by external agencies – the Research Excellence Framework, the Quality Assurance 
Agency and soon the Teaching Excellence Framework – fundraising is the one 
thing of which you are completely in charge, and for which success can clearly 
be laid at the university’s door.

In addition, it is in the nature of those involved in fundraising that they 
are outgoing, positive and socially adept. They are a great antidote to a 
higher education world that does doom and gloom so very well.

One very clear conclusion I have reached is that successful fundraising 
happens when the senior management of a university gets involved both 
operationally and through leadership and representation. My advice to all parts 
of the sector is to embrace fundraising for the many benefits it generates.


Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com



