
In the hype around HS2 and George Osborne’s northern powerhouse, there are 
communities in the south west of England that feel forgotten. The region has a 
legacy of under-investment, and spending is on a downward trajectory,according 
to Department for Transport data 
<http://www.plymouthherald.co.uk/Government-told-cough-rail-cash-figures-South/story-29198710-detail/story.html>
. Rail spend per head is just £35 in the south west, compared with an average 
of £113 across England as a whole.

“There is really heavy emphasis on the northern powerhouse but no recognition 
that the north-south divide is actually a south east – rest of Britain divide,” 
says Joanie Willett, lecturer at Exeter university who researches regional 
policy and economic development. “Such grotesque underfunding inCornwall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/cornwall> only reproduces a cycle of 
peripherality.”

Governments think the south west stops and starts at Bristol, and the rest is 
all cream teas and coastlines
Matthew Leadbetter, Devon county council 
Further along the coast, Bristol is missing out on funds for a modern public 
transport system, despite its much-vaunted title of European Green Capital 
2015, says Jenny Raggett, a local transport campaigner for the Bath andBristol 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/bristol> area. “There is too much emphasis on 
much longer distance, strategic development, while there is a paucity of local 
transport connecting our rapidly growing urban areas,” she says.

Investing in rail and road projects

But the West of England local enterprise partnership – a network of local 
authorities and businesses covering Bristol, Bath and Weston-super-Mare – says 
Bristol’s MetroWest rail improvements are on course to open by early 2020 and a 
new network of buses will be up and running in early 2017. It is being 
part-funded by a £230m growth fund handed down from central government in 2014.

Robert Goodwill, HS2 <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/hs2> minister, added: “We 
want the south west to have a world-class transport network and we are 
investing record amounts in major rail and road projects to improve journeys 
and make this a reality.” This includes over £400m on rail projects such as 
electrifying the Great Western mainline, funding new expressways on the A30 in 
Cornwall and A417 in Gloucestershire, and £2bn to create a new strategic 
corridor to the south west along the A303 and A358.

HS2 will allow businesses across the south west to benefit from investment in 
infrastructure and supply chain contracts, added a Department for Transport 
spokesperson, who was keen to highlight its HS2supply chain roadshow 
<https://www.hs2roadshow2016.co.uk/>, coming to Bristol later this month. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kyh8%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kyh8%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe545d3a566ccaf05f89be19cc99b0783bf25ab4f%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Not%20just%20cream%20teas%20and%20coastlines%3A%20the%20south%20west's%20plea%20for%20investment&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kyh8%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Not+just+cream+teas+and+coastlines%3A+the+south+west%27s+plea+for+investment&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kyh8%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe545d3a566ccaf05f89be19cc99b0783bf25ab4f%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
 Waves crash over trains at Dawlish, Devon, where part of the railway line 
collapsed into the sea during a storm in 2014. Photograph: Theo Moye/Alamy 
A fairer share of funding

Many in the region believe it has a history of being overlooked. “We feel we 
have been very much forgotten in the south west. Traditionally governments 
think the south west stops and starts at Bristol, and the rest is all cream 
teas and coastlines, when there is actually a lot of dynamic business down 
here,” says Matthew Leadbetter, a conservative cabinet member at Devon county 
council and chair of the peninsula rail task force, which lobbies for a fairer 
share of funding. It came to the fore when the railway line at Dawlish 
collapsed into the sea during a storm in 2014, and there werecalls for funds to 
be diverted away from HS2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/feb/16/hs2-divert-cash-southwest-railway>
 to repair it.

Related: Do major transport projects only benefit wealthy commuters? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/may/31/major-transport-projects-commuters-hs2-crossrail>

The task force is working with the Department for Transport 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/transport>, Network Rail and 
Great Western Railway on a 20-year plan for the peninsula network, to be 
delivered to the prime minister in September. “We need more than warm words, 
but we anticipate the situation will improve and we will get our investment 
from the government,” says Leadbetter. It has been made clear that no funds 
will be diverted away from HS2.

Some transport campaigners have called for a high-speed line to Cornwall, but 
that would be counterproductive according to Lord Taylor, a Liberal Democrat 
peer who spent 23 years as MP for Truro and St Austell in Cornwall, before 
stepping down in 2010. “High-speed lines are designed for very long distances 
but because Cornwall is a series of towns, rather than one big city, we need 
trains that can stop and start at different stations quickly, rather than 
bullet through them,” he says.

Besides, the cost would never justify a high-speed line all the way to 
Penzance, and probably not Plymouth, he says, so the risk would be that 
Cornwall stations became relegated to branch lines. “The last thing Cornwall 
needs is to be on the slow uncomfortable little train line you have to change 
onto from your high-speed train to Bristol or even Exeter,” says Taylor.

Any government needs to decide – does it back the winners, or does it support 
the ones who need a hand up?
Vinita Nawathe, TravelWatch SouthWest 
He welcomes the replacement of InterCity 125 trains with fast, lighter trains 
that can get up to speed more quickly. These will combine both diesel and 
electric traction in one train, so that passengers don’t need to switch trains 
when they travel into the south west, beyond the electrification planned 
between London and Bristol. His irritation is only that progress is happening 
too slowly. Bristol will be the first recipients of the new trains; Cornwall 
may have to wait several years.

High-speed broadband

But ultimately, his top ask is not trains, high-speed or otherwise, but 
faster, reliable mobile communications serving rail lines. With the journey 
from west Cornwall to London some four to five hours or more, communication and 
space to work is more important than shaving 20 minutes off the journey. “The 
biggest and most important asset Cornwall needs to grow economically is the 
ability to communicate with the rest of the UK via 4G and high-speed broadband 
whether working from home or office, or on the train,” says Taylor.

Local authorities up and down the country are now in fierce competition for 
the next round of rail investment, and the rail industry is very cautious about 
where it puts its cash, says Vinita Nawathe, chair of social enterprise
TravelWatch SouthWest <http://travelwatchsouthwest.org/>. “There is a need to 
prove the demand before seeing investment, and that can become a very 
chicken-and-egg scenario,” she says. “Any government needs to decide – does it 
back the winners, or does it support the ones who need a hand up? At the 
moment, our productivity levels in the south west are below par with the rest 
of the country; we are punching below our weight, but economic growth needs to 
be supported by transport that is strategic, resilient and reliable.”

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
