
How close has the world come to ensuring every child receives a primary 
education? In the latest instalment in our series looking back at the 
millennium development goals, we examine the second goal: universal primary 
education. There’s anexplainer 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/23/millennium-development-goal-education-explainer>
 on what global leaders agreed to in 2000, a list of15 achievements 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/23/millennium-development-goal-2-15-achievements-on-education>
 of the past 15 years, and case studies of education delivery inUganda 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/23/uganda-success-universal-primary-education-falling-apart-upe>
 andMali 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/23/mali-education-sabalibougou-school-global-challenge-bamako>
.

As the migrant crisis escalated and more lives were lost at sea, we spoke to 
Eritreans 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/21/escaping-eritrea-migrant-if-i-die-at-sea-at-least-i-wont-be-tortured>
 who explained why they felt compelled to flee their country. Researcher Dan 
Connell also shared his views on thecrushing repression 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/20/crushing-repression-eritreas-citizens-italy-migrant-boats>
 that drives Eritreans to risk their lives crossing the Mediterranean, and 
Syrian-Palestinian refugee Ali Sandeed spoke of his earlierplans to pay a 
smuggler 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/24/syrian-palestinian-refugee-lebanon-migrant-i-thought-the-boat-was-my-only-chance>
 to take him to Europe.

And as the Nepal earthquake disaster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/27/nepal-earthquake-fears-grow-for-uncontacted-villages-as-more-than-3200-confirmed-dead>
 continues to unfold,here is a list 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/27/nepal-earthquake-how-you-can-help-donate-aid>
 of some of the appeals that have opened to assist survivors.

Elsewhere on the site

 * Less pay, more work, no pension: the 21st-century woman’s lot laid bare 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/27/un-women-report-less-pay-more-work-no-pension-the-21st-century-womans-lot-laid-bare>

 * ‘When people come with severe malaria, it is like a race against time’ 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/25/ethiopia-severe-malaria-race-against-time>
 * World malaria day – quiz 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/quiz/2015/apr/25/world-malaria-day-quiz>
 * Chibok: ‘For over one year, our children haven’t been to school’ 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/21/chibok-nigeria-boko-haram-kidnap-girls-school-borno>
 * Dadaab refugee camp closure would risk 350,000 Somali lives, warns Amnesty 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/17/dadaab-refugee-camp-closure-risk-350000-somali-lives-amnesty>
Opinion

Two years after the Rana Plaza factory collapse in Bangladesh, which killed 
more than 1,000 garment workers,Labour Behind the Label 
<http://www.labourbehindthelabel.org/>’s Sam Maher asked why worker conditions 
hadn’t changed 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/23/rana-plaza-bangladesh-factory-tragedy-little-changed>
. Kishore Singh, UN special rapporteur on the right to education, arguedagainst 
the privatisation of education 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/23/education-is-a-basic-human-right-why-private-schools-must-be-resisted>
, claiming it worsens inequality. Plus, Anti-Slavery International director 
Aidan McQuade wrote on the important distinctions betweensmuggling and 
trafficking 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/22/migrant-crisis-smuggling-trafficking-politicians-dont-seem-to-know>
, and why politicians must know this in order to address the migrant crisis.

Multimedia 

Video: Sierra Leone: ‘Schools are opening, but I can’t afford food or to pay 
the children’s school fees’ 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/global-development/video/2015/apr/28/sierra-leone-education-ebola-schools-video>

Podcast: Water and sanitation in health centres in Mali 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/audio/2015/apr/28/water-and-sanitation-in-health-centres-in-mali>

Gallery: Fishermen and tigers struggle for survival in India’s Sundarbans 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2015/apr/27/fishermen-bengal-tigers-struggle-survival-indian-sundarbans-in-pictures>

Take part

Is education making the grade in your part of the world? Tell us what 
education delivery is like where you live or work. 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/15/education-sustainable-development-goals-quality>
 If you’re a student, teacher or parent,share photos of your classroom via 
Guardian Witness 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/552d18e1e4b04b4dc25b77cb>. If 
possible, please include any details you have on average class sizes at the 
school, the graduation rate, teacher-to-staff ratios, and how the quality of 
education has changed over the past 15 years. We’ll publish the best 
submissions as part of our coverage on the state of education around the world.

What you said: top reader comment


On the piece Rana Plaza: Two years after the tragedy, why has so little 
changed? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/23/rana-plaza-bangladesh-factory-tragedy-little-changed>
,igloo43 wrote:

Though I don’t disagree with any of the points made by the author, we have to 
be careful we don’t throw the baby out with the bathwater here. I’ve been 
working in Bangladesh for the last three years and have had the opportunity to 
visit both RMG factories and also the rural villages from which the workers 
originate. While it is no doubt true that working conditions in the factories 
are often unacceptable and need to be reformed, there is certainly nothing 
idyllic about life in poor, rural communities in Bangladesh and it is doubtful 
that the women would be better off if they stayed back in the village. Economic 
growth and industrialisation is not the problem; it is actually a major part of 
the solution (the other ‘part’ being to ensure that a policy and regulatory 
framework exists that ensures that the economic growth is equitable). It is not 
beyond a country like Bangladesh to achieve this, though it will take time and 
- regrettably - more pain along the way.

Highlight from the blogosphere

From Oxfam’s Poverty to Power: Sport can reach places where other aid and 
development programmes struggle. So why are we ignoring it? 
<http://oxfamblogs.org/fp2p/sport-can-reach-places-where-other-aid-and-development-programmes-struggle-so-why-are-we-ignoring-it/?utm_source=feedly&utm_medium=rss&utm_campaign=sport-can-reach-places-where-other-aid-and-development-programmes-struggle-so-why-are-we-ignoring-it>

And finally …

Poverty matters will return in two weeks with another roundup of the latest 
news and comment. In the meantime, keep up to date on theGlobal Development 
website <http://www.theguardian.com/global-development>. Follow @gdndevelopment 
<https://twitter.com/gdndevelopment> and the team – @swajones 
<https://twitter.com/swajones>,@LizFordGuardian 
<https://twitter.com/lizfordguardian>, @MarkC_Anderson 
<https://twitter.com/MarkC_Anderson> and @CarlaOkai 
<https://twitter.com/CarlaOkai> – on Twitter, and join Guardian Global 
Development on Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardianglobaldevelopment>.
