
It sounds like something Yes Minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2011/aug/17/tv-matters-yes-minister>
’s Sir Humphrey might have described witheringly as a “brave” move. One of 
England’s largest academy chains, under pressure over its performance, has 
advertised for a new chief executive who, it says, need not have experience 
working in education. Instead, a “commercial” focus will be a prerequisite.

School Partnership Trust Academies (SPTA), England’s fourth-largest chain with 
43 academies, advertised for candidates to take over from the recently departed 
Sir Paul Edwards shortly before Christmas. Theadvert 
<http://appointments.thesundaytimes.co.uk/job/449501/chief-executive/> said: 
“We seek an ambitious and inspirational chief executive … you will be a 
visionary leader, commercial in outlook, with a passion for our work. Schools 
or education experience is not considered essential. This is about innovative 
leadership of a £130m distributed organisation.”

Last month Schools Week reported 
<http://schoolsweek.co.uk/spta-to-be-stripped-of-isolated-nottinghamshire-schools-and-future-of-doncaster-academies-in-doubt/>
 that SPTA was to be stripped of three schools amid concerns by one of the 
government’s regional schools commissioners about 13 of them.

The TeacherROAR <https://twitter.com/TeacherROAR> twitter feed, which 
highlighted the advert, was scathing: “It may seem like a good idea to some for 
schools to be run by people with no relevant classroom experience, but schools 
are more than a business. Parents should be extremely worried.”

SPTA seems to have cut the rate for the job, with it now advertised at “circa 
£160,000”, compared with the £185,000-£190,000 Edwards received in 2014-15, as 
documented in its accounts.

The chain faced controversy in 2013 when one of its schools advertised for two 
“unqualified” maths teachers 
<http://www.jobsgopublic.com/jobs/unqualified-teacher-of-maths-x-2-n-a/from/ysb5zvlipqch0/334/of/1041/opening_at/desc>
.

SPTA said: “The advert for the chief executive officer post is inclusive for 
those with both an education and a non‑education background. SPTA is looking to 
attract applicants with a strong track record of achievement whether in 
schools, the broader education sector or more widely.”

School accounts reveal five-figure payoffs


Staff leaving their jobs in schools have been receiving “non-contractual” 
payoffs running in some cases well into five figures, an initial analysis of 
the first academy trust annual accounts filed for the 2014-15 academic year 
reveals.

An unnamed employee of Future Academies, the London-based chain chaired by the 
academies minister, Lord Nash, received a £29,750 pay-off during 2014-15, its 
accounts reveal, while £20,000 payments were recorded at the Inspiration Trust, 
Ark Schools and School Partnership TrustAcademies 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/academies>.

The payments, which often include “gagging clauses” 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/public-accounts-committee/news/confidentiality-clauses-por/>
 forbidding the recipients disclosing details of their employment publicly, 
have been controversial. We will be keeping a close eye on academy accounts as 
they come in from other chains this month.

Free meals funding left in the freezer again


The subject of universal free school meals has taken a new twist, we learn, 
with the Department for Education seemingly quietly slipping out an 
announcement before Christmas that the funding available to schools to pay for 
the service is being frozen for another year.

“The meal rate for universal infant free school meals stays at £2.30 for the 
2016-17 academic year. Further details will be available in the new year,” said 
a low-profileemail bulletin 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/efa-e-bulletin-17-december-2015-issue-112/efa-e-bulletin-for-academies-17-december-2015>
 to academies sent out on 17 December.

This will have made difficult reading for schools. One source tells us: “With 
the minimum wage rise coming into effect, many schools will have even higher 
costs, especially small schools who rely on extra DfE funding [for specific 
schemes]. Some will continue to be seriously out of pocket by this.”

A spokesman for the DfE said: “We decided that the fairest way to continue to 
programme was to keep the existing rate of £2.30 per meal, found to be the 
average cost of providing a primary school meal.”

Honours still uneven for heads in New Year list


Another set of gongs, another clean sweep of knighthoods and damehoods for 
school leaders from England’s academy sector. Both the headteachers handed 
education highest honours in theNew Year list 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/new-year-honours-list-2016-education-and-childrens-services>
 – Susan Jowett and Steve Lancashire, and congratulations to them both – lead 
academy chains.

In fact, in the past five honours lists, 13 school leaders to receive 
knighthoods or damehoods have been from the academies sector, with only three 
leading non-academy state schools. No non-academy school leader has been 
honoured in this way since June 2014.

All this might seem unremarkable if academies outnumbered non-academies by 
three to one. However, in fact, the proportions are the other way around, with 
most primary schools remaining in the local authority fold.

Keen observers might point to the membership of education’s honours committee 
<https://www.gov.uk/guidance/honours-committees#education>, where the only two 
career school headteachers are current academy chain chief executives, and 
wonder if things are a little unbalanced. If this really is a “one-nation” 
government, perhaps it needs to more fully recognise public service leadership 
across all types of schools.

Press gets early start on times tables tests


Finally, experienced observers of education policy were sighing again after 
teachers appear to have been told about the detail of plans for a newtimes 
tables test for 11-year-olds 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jan/03/pupils-face-new-tests-to-ensure-they-know-times-tables-by-age-11>
 days after it was revealed in a Sunday newspaper.

An email was sent out last Thursday by the government’s Standards and Testing 
Agency notifying local authorities of the plans to trial the test in June and 
introduce it next year. However, this was four days after details had been 
revealed in theSunday Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/education/primaryeducation/12078695/Pupils-must-know-all-times-tables-by-age-11.html>
.

The email update also underscores the big changes in line for this year’s Sats 
and key stage 1 assessments. These include year 6 teachers having to complete 
their teacher assessment judgments weeks earlier than before.

An experienced assessment source tells us: “I heard from a year 6 teacher who 
was pulling her hair out trying to keep up with the changes. It seems the DfE 
is makes things up as it goes along.”

Asked to respond, the DfE simply sent us its press release on the new tests.
