
“Think outside the box,” I was told by my manager back in the US, when I asked 
them how on earth they expected me to promote a programme that was clearly 
failing.


Related: Secret aid worker: buzzwords are killing development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/mar/08/secret-aid-worker-buzzwords-are-killing-development-human-centred-grassroots>

I come from a small country in Asia. I have been working at this development 
organisation as a communications person for several years. It has not been 
quite the journey I’d expected but, unlike my other colleagues, I get to write 
about the community, interact with them and get their stories out – that has 
been my biggest pleasure so far.

Running a development programme educating citizens about their rights is not 
easy in a country fraught with political instability but writing about it is 
even harder when the programme is battling to get off the ground. I struggle 
for good stories.


The problem is perhaps me rather than the organisation. Like many 
communications professionals, I come from a journalistic background, but 
despite several years of being immersed in the PR world, I can’t quite get 
beyond the idea that most of the outreach projects we run are essentially 
propaganda, with little weight to them.

In this job, telling it as it is, writing what you see is not good enough. A 
capacity-building workshop or a report can’t just be called that, it should 
have several glorifying adjectives and a social media campaign.

Worse though is the feeling that much of what I’m asked to do by my superiors 
is ethically questionable. In a previous job with another big aid organisation, 
I was asked to make up quotes to “enhance” beneficiary case studies. When I 
refused, the programme officer acted surprised and told me: “It’s fine, I know 
what that person would say.”


It’s also expected that communications professionals will use their contacts 
to get their organisation as much coverage as possible, but where do you draw 
the line? I don’t think it’s OK to call in personal favours to get out positive 
stories about a programme that isn’t delivering what it promised the community 
it would. My boss disagrees.

Related: Secret aid worker: is there such a thing as being too French? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/apr/13/secret-aid-worker-is-there-such-a-thing-as-being-too-french>

The international community is too focused on using gimmicks in outreach 
campaigns rather than considering who their audience is and what they want. I 
was recently asked to design an outreach campaign to educate the local 
community we work in about the work we do. So keeping in mind the low literacy 
rate of our audience and the limited access they have to online and print 
media, I designed a communcations campaign accordingly. However, that was 
considered old and outdated.

For my organisation, the use of new technology such as apps and social media 
held priority over the local regional media, even though I explained much of 
these were inaccessible to the people we were trying to reach. Too often people 
think that if a country has access to the internet and mobile phones, every one 
has access. They don’t consider the cost of mobile data, the literacy rate, or 
if the locals would even use their devices the same way as in the US and Europe.

Instead, we are told to shape our communication strategy around the coolest 
buzzwords 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/mar/08/secret-aid-worker-buzzwords-are-killing-development-human-centred-grassroots>
 making the rounds in the US or Europe. All because one person back at 
headquarters, who has no idea of what goes on in the more rural districts of 
this country, says so. There is little understanding that projects need to be 
tailored to each community, rather than just replicated on a grand scale.

While discussing my frustrations with other colleagues, I found out the 
reality of working in development comms was the same pretty much everywhere in 
the aid world. If the design of an outreach programme isn’t the problem, the 
focus of the communication concentrates too much on one person rather than the 
issue it is meant to be highlighting, or on the gimmicks, drawing attention to 
meaningless events with celebrities rather than grassroots outreach activities 
promoting behaviour change vital for the programme’s success.


Often the programming team don’t think we know how to do our jobs either. With 
the best intentions, they want to squish each and every detail of their work 
into one story. They do not understand that the readers don’t care much about 
the technicalities of the programme. If they did, they would read the project 
documents and progress reports.


Related: Secret aid worker: Why do expats earn more than the rest of us? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/mar/29/secret-aid-worker-why-do-expats-earn-more-than-the-rest-of-us>

Ultimately, I’ve learned that in the aid world, the visibility of a project 
based on its results, its intent and scope of work holds no value compared with 
the visibility of the department responsible for the project, or for the career 
progression of the few within a huge organisation.


Do you have a secret aid worker story you’d like to tell? You can contact us 
confidentially atglobaldevpros@theguardian.com 
<mailto:globaldevpros@theguardian.com> – please put “Secret aid worker” in the 
subject line. If you’d like to encrypt your email to us, here areinstructions 
<https://www.mailvelope.com/help> on how to set up a PGP mail client and our 
public PGP key <https://pgp.theguardian.com/PublicKeys/Global%20Devpros.pub.txt>
.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
