


Women are outliving men in every country in the world 
<http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/releases/2014/world-health-statistics-2014/en/>
, despite facing higher levels of poverty than men, greater odds of 
encountering sexual violence and many additional, diverse forms of 
discrimination.

But while women are living longer, it’s unclear whether their wellbeing is 
showing comparable strides. As women gain political, economic and social 
freedoms, one would expect that they should feel even more contented relative 
to men. But this isn’t so.

The “paradox of declining female happiness” was pointed out by economists 
Betsey Stevenson and Justin Wolfers,who also happen to share a house and kids 
<http://chronicle.com/article/Much-Watched-Couple-in/133195>. They analyzed the 
happiness trends of US citizens between 1970 and 2005 and found a surprising 
result.

Related: Could sourdough bread be the answer to the gluten sensitivity 
epidemic? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/23/sourdough-bread-gluten-intolerance-food-health-celiac-disease>

Stevenson and Wolfers discovered that American women rated their overall life 
satisfaction higher than men <http://ftp.iza.org/dp4200.pdf> in the 1970s. 
Thereafter, women’s happiness scores decreased while men’s scores stayed 
roughly stable. By the 1990s, women were less happy than men. This relative 
unhappiness softened after the turn of the century, but men continue to enjoy a 
higher sense of subjective wellbeing that is at least as high — if not higher — 
than women’s.

Those 35 years saw advances 
<http://www.annualreviews.org/doi/abs/10.1146/annurev-economics-061109-080201> 
in American women’s rights and financial power. For example, in 1974, Congress 
outlawed credit discrimination based on sex; in 1975, states were prevented 
from excluding women from juries. Until 1976, marital rape was legal in every 
US state. Over the 35-year period, women working full time went fromearning 
<http://www.aauw.org/files/2016/02/SimpleTruth_Spring2016.pdf> less than 60% of 
a man’s median salary to earning about 76% of it — still an embarrassment for a 
country that aspires to be a meritocracy but an improvement nonetheless.

Of course, things happened during the period in question that probably made 
American women less happy. Take, for example, the massive rise in incarceration 
rates among their actual and potential male partners. (This rise wouldn’t have 
left traces in the male happiness data because prisoners were not included in 
life satisfaction surveys.)

The 20 years between 1980 and 2000 saw a five-fold increase 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2002/08/28/us/study-finds-big-increase-in-black-men-as-inmates-since-1980.html>
 in the number of African American men in jail, leading to more black men 
behind bars in the US than were enrolled in colleges and universities. Those 
kinds of statistics imply big changes to the marriage market.

Household chores make men statistically less likely to become depressed but 
contribute to depression in women

Although increased incarceration has affected African Americans more than 
others, even when all Americans are considered together, the rise in male 
incarceration between 1970 and 2000 has been held responsible for a13% drop 
<http://www.iza.org/en/papers/2391_13122005.pdf> in US marriage rates. The 
reduced pool of free men has also encouraged many women to accept marriage 
proposals from men they would have otherwise rejected, an effect that has been 
shown to be sufficient toshift the economic advantage of marriage away from 
women and toward men <http://www.iza.org/en/papers/2391_13122005.pdf>.

But putting more men in prison cannot fully explain the lessening happiness of 
American women, because women in other industrialized countries – which do not 
lock up nearly as many of their men – have also become less happy in recent 
decades. Stevenson and Wolfers found the gap between male and female happiness 
in Europe, over approximately the same period, had a strikingly similar trend 
and magnitude to the US gender happiness gap.

So why is this? Evidence supports the idea that women’s rights and roles in 
the home in the US and Europe have not moved in step with changes in the 
workplace. Therefore, because women with jobs often do most of the chores and 
childcare, they shoulder a dual burden that cuts into their sleep and fun.Long 
commutes <http://eprints.whiterose.ac.uk/10005/> are thought to make British 
women more miserable than British men because of the greater pressure on women 
to meet responsibilities at home as well as work.

Related: Continuing to limit access to birth control would wreak economic havoc
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/03/planned-parenthood-title-x-pregnancy-abortion-family-planning-cdc>

When the dual burden is carefully measured – as it has been across European 
<http://esr.oxfordjournals.org/content/early/2010/11/15/esr.jcq059.1.abstract> 
countries – the results illustrate the influence that expectations have on how 
happy we feel. Experiencing the dual burden leads working women in Sweden, for 
example, to feel more miserable than their counterparts in Greece, probably 
because Swedes’ expectations around gender equality are more ambitious. (Fewer 
than 35% of Swedish women do three-quarters of the housework, compared to 81% 
of Greek women.)

Expectations also lie behind the curious finding that performing household 
chores makes men statistically less likely to become depressed 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1741-3737.2000.01208.x/abstract;jsessionid=2C406237AD0711ABECA44E5F0456C128.f04t02?userIsAuthenticated=false&deniedAccessCustomisedMessage=>
 but contributes to depression in women. Taking on housework seems to encourage 
men to judge themselves as generally likeable, fair-minded dudes, kindly 
reducing their wives’ load. On the other hand, taking on housework seems to 
make women feel exploited.

The social history of Switzerland, where women weren’t allowed to vote until 
1971 
<http://history-switzerland.geschichte-schweiz.ch/chronology-womens-right-vote-switzerland.html>
, reveals the subtleties of employment expectations on happiness. A decade 
after Swiss women gained suffrage, the country’s citizens voted in a referendum 
on whether the constitution should be amended to state that women deserve equal 
pay for equal work.

Different parts of Switzerland voted very differently. Unsurprisingly, cantons 
(Swiss states) with a high proportion of votes in favor of the amendment were 
recorded as having a small gender wage gap some years later. Butstrangely 
<http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%252Fs00148-009-0257-4>, working women 
in areas with strong traditional values – where most people had voted against 
equal pay – were happier than working women in liberal cantons.

Even though their salaries were further below those of the men around them, 
the women in more traditional communities were less likely to report 
discrimination than their countrywomen in more liberal areas.

Related: Men live longer when they marry younger spouses. Why don't women? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/31/women-marrying-younger-men-dying-earlier-research>

This inside-out result probably arises from different cognitive comparisons. 
Women <http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> in liberal communities 
are less happy and notice discrimination because they automatically compare 
their opportunities and salary to everyone else around them, men included. 
Traditionally minded women perhaps base their identities more firmly on their 
gender roles, and think only of other women when they evaluate their privilege 
and opportunities.

This kind of difference might explain the lessening happiness of American 
women. As women’s rights and opportunities have increased, it seems reasonable 
that women in industrialized countries have internalized ever more complex and 
optimistic expectations, and judged reality against these. Asked how satisfied 
she is with her lot in life, the housewife of the early 1970s probably just 
reflected on whether things were going well at home. The same question today 
evokes evaluations across many areas of life.

Declining happiness among women may seem depressing. But who ever claimed an 
expanded consciousness brings satisfaction?
