
The UN’s new goals for a more equal and sustainable world are designed to 
apply to all countries, rich or poor.


The sustainable development goals 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-united-nations>
 (SDGs), which include lofty targets such as eliminating extreme poverty and 
providing quality education for all, wereadopted by world leaders 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/sep/25/global-goals-summit-2015-new-york-un-pope-shakira-malala-yousafzai>
 in September.

Related: Can Beyoncé, Ed Sheeran and Coldplay make the global goals famous? – 
podcast 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/audio/2015/oct/05/global-goals-summit-beyonce-ed-sheeran-coldplay-new-york>

Unlike the millennium development goals 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/datablog/2015/jul/06/what-millennium-development-goals-achieved-mdgs>
 that came before them, the SDGs position wealthy countries as not just 
providers of aid, but sites of development themselves. In other words, rich 
countries have a role to play in mitigating climate change, achieving gender 
equality and addressing the other goals within their own borders and overseas. 
The goals are attempting to dismantle the north-south divide.


So, with a wider remit and a more ambitious agenda, can the SDGs succeed? We’d 
like to know your thoughts on the role wealthy countries should play in 
implementing the new goals.

Do you think high-income countries will take these goals on board? Or should 
the poorest countries be the sole priority? And if the 17 goals equally apply 
to high- and low-income countries, which of the goals should the wealthy 
countries prioritise? We’d like to hear examples of specific countries if you 
have them.


Submit a response of up to 250 words, answering the question: what role should 
wealthy countries play in delivering the SDGs?

Keep your submissions clear and concise, avoiding development or academic 
jargon.

Email your response to development@theguardian.com 
<mailto:development@theguardian.com> with “Students Speak” 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/series/students-speak> in the 
subject line. Please include your name, the country where you live, and the 
university or college you attend. Submissions close at 6pm BST on Friday 30 
October.
