
Under the shadow of a colossal Buddhist monastery, nestled deep in a mountain 
valley in India’s remote Ladakh region, a row of greenhouses grows fresh fruit 
and vegetables. They are a lifeline for the villagers during the harsh winter 
months when heavy snow cuts off the area from the outside world, but they were 
not put there by a charity or non-governmental organisation (NGO). They were 
built by a group of 30 teenagers from Devon.

The 16- to 18-year-olds from Exeter school <http://www.exeterschool.org.uk/> 
travelled to the country with maths teacher Will Daws in 2013. During the 
29-day expedition, organised by theSchool Travel Consultancy 
<https://www.thestc.co.uk/>, the students lived with families in the village 
and worked with local builders to clear the site and construct the greenhouses. 
Malnutrition is a common problem among children and pregnant women in the 
village, so the ability to grow fresh produce all year round has made a huge 
difference.

Related: Sustainable classrooms: mud walls, rainwater and visits from lizards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/oct/06/sustainable-classrooms-mud-walls-rainwater-and-visits-from-lizards>

It’s not the first expedition Daws has taken his students on – previous 
destinations have included Vietnam, Peru and Namibia. He explains that each 
trip has been a unique opportunity to educate students about the impact of 
humans on our fragile environment, while teaching a host of curriculum 
subjects. The trip to India, for example, sparked discussions about the 
developmental and economic challenges facing the villagers, as well as how the 
area’s isolated location affects their lives.

Daws explains that these trips are far from jollies abroad for students: “They 
really pick up on the challenges that people are facing and the poverty, what 
little people have and how hard it is to make a living in some of these other 
countries.”

“It’s quite easy in a classroom to see a picture and write an essay about it, 
but until you see it face to face it is very hard to understand what that 
actually means for someone’s life and how it affects them,” he adds.

Jen Lynn, head of outdoor learning at Nottingham girls’ high school 
<http://www.nottinghamgirlshigh.gdst.net/>, says taking students out of their 
comfort zone and into a culture that is radically different to their own can be 
extremely empowering. Since joining the school six years ago, Lynn has expanded 
opportunities for outdoor learning, setting up an “exploration society” which 
includes archery lessons, horse riding, canoeing and international expeditions.

She recently took students to Tanzania to climb Mount Kilimanjaro, as well as 
trekking in Iceland and kayaking through the Norwegian fjords. All trips open 
the teenagers’ eyes to different ways of life and help them develop an 
appreciation of the natural world. They witnessed the power of the Earth by 
seeing how Iceland’s volcanoes shaped the landscape, and our planet’s fragile 
beauty in the Norwegian ice-caps. The girls learned how to care for the 
environment during a biking expedition in south Norway by camping in the wild 
and employing the “take only memories, leave only footprints” philosophy. One 
of the students was so inspired she decided to study environmental engineering 
at university.

Students also learned another important lesson – independence. Every trip is 
entirely student-led, from how to get to and from the airport to the activities 
they want to do. Lynn explains that by allowing the students to take control, 
they learn resilience, leadership and teamwork skills.

“I am there as a safety officer who will step in if needed, but it is teaching 
them the life skills they need to be confident women, wherever they are, and to 
realise that they can do more than they can possibly ever imagine,” she says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yxep%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yxep%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6bd7a90423b7b3e7add3ac5903b99e98a2cd81cd%2F0_95_1417_850%2F1417.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Independence%2C%20empowerment%20and%20the%20environment%3A%20school%20trips%20are%20more%20than%20jollies&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yxep%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Independence%2C+empowerment+and+the+environment%3A+school+trips+are+more+than+jollies&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yxep%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6bd7a90423b7b3e7add3ac5903b99e98a2cd81cd%2F0_95_1417_850%2F1417.jpg>
 Young students in the slum district of Madanpur Khadar, India. Photograph: 
David Levene 
For Ringwood school <http://www.ringwood.hants.sch.uk/> students Millie Wells 
and Sam Whittingham, a trip to the slums of Delhi led them to direct action to 
improve the lives of the people they met there. They travelled to India in 2013 
with former biology teacher and sustainability coordinator Gill Hickman after 
winning the Steve Sinnott award to become young ambassadors for theSend My 
Friend to School <http://www.sendmyfriend.org/> campaign, which aims to improve 
access to education in developing countries.

During the fact-finding mission, funded by the Global Campaign for Education UK
 <http://www.campaignforeducation.org/en/> and the National Union of Teachers 
<https://www.teachers.org.uk/> (NUT), the pair – who were in year 10 at the 
time – visited primary schools and met campaign groups working in Delhi to 
improve the health and education of children living and learning there. Hickman 
explains that a lack of clean water and sanitation prevents many children from 
attending school, especially girls starting puberty. Some students, she says, 
didn’t even have access to a toilet.

“There were open sewers and great piles of treacle-like sludge with animals 
rooting through heaps of rotting rubbish. That was one of my lasting memories,” 
she says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yxep%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yxep%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F117915f8b5ddbad5b0c546c419820ab12146a442%2F0_0_3794_2277%2F3794.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Independence%2C%20empowerment%20and%20the%20environment%3A%20school%20trips%20are%20more%20than%20jollies&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yxep%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Independence%2C+empowerment+and+the+environment%3A+school+trips+are+more+than+jollies&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yxep%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F117915f8b5ddbad5b0c546c419820ab12146a442%2F0_0_3794_2277%2F3794.jpg>
 A cow rummaging through an open sewer. Photograph: Gill Hickman 
It inspired the students to campaign for change and, when they returned to the 
UK armed with compelling first-hand accounts, they began campaigning to 
encourage other young people to push for universal primary education.

As well as sharing their experiences at the NUT conference, assemblies and in 
local schools, they blogged and wrote to MPs and the prime minister. They were 
even invited to attend Malala Day at the UN in New York where they met and 
shared ideas with other young campaigners from around the world.

While Wells and Whittingham were lucky enough to have their trip funded for 
them, a commercial expedition can come with a hefty price tag. But both Lynn 
and Daws insist it is possible to afford these trips without relying on the 
bank of mum and dad. Daws says many of his students worked a Saturday job, 
while Lynn suggests running fundraising activities. Some of her students raised 
£4,000 in one evening by holding a music concert, while others offered to take 
away cut grass from people’s lawns in areas of Nottingham where the council 
don’t do collections.

In a digital age, the opportunity to gain direct experience of global issues 
is something which adventure education expert Bryan Richardson believes is 
invaluable if we are to tackle the huge environmental, social and economic 
challenges which face the next generation.

Richardson, who is the general manager of Schools Worldwide 
<http://www.schoolsworldwide.co.uk/home.html>, a company that runs educational 
expeditions, adds: “Giving kids a perspective on the world will help shape them 
as people going forward and might even influence the education and career 
decisions that they choose in the future.”

The green schools series 
<http://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/green-schools> is supported by the 
WWF <http://www.wwf.org.uk/>. All content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled “brought to you by”. Find out morehere 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
