
I see Vanity Fair’s annual best-dressed list 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/style/photos/2015/08/international-best-dressed-list-2015>
 is out this month. What conclusions can we draw from it this time?

Marie, by email

Oh you know, all the usual deductions one can glean from a best-dressed list: 
the secret of life, the existence or otherwise of free will, the truth about 
God, the answer to whether there is life after death. Some people believe that 
all these lists do is provide a vaguely legitimate excuse for readers to stare 
at photos of beautiful people and make fascinating insights such as, “God, I 
hate her fringe.” Truly, is there any demographic more underestimated than a 
fashion magazine reader? If only the people knew of the terrible mental burdens 
we are all shouldering as we read yet another interview with a 20-year-old 
model and ponder whether polo necks truly are “essential” this season.

Anyway, to Vanity Fair’s best-dressed list! As a longterm connoisseur of 
best-dressed lists, the Vanity Fair one is truly one of my favourites, for the 
simple reason that it is the most reliably deranged. This is, of course, 
because the magazine itself is so very, very odd, with its numbing mix of puff 
pieces about bland celebrities and po-faced investigative pieces about rich 
people. Reading Vanity Fair is what being trapped in Virgin’s upper-class 
lounge in Dubai airport must feel like, with its self-satisfaction, lack of 
oxygen, overwhelming arrogance and unshakable belief that having money makes 
you an inherently interesting person. As you can imagine, this value system 
makes for some fascinating results when applied to judging aesthetics. Those of 
us who have ever seen photos of political firebrandDonald Trump’s various homes 
<http://www.hellomagazine.com/celebrities/201107185783/donald-trump-melania-hello-exclusive/>
 in such cutting-edge magazines as Hello! know that, truly, nothing gives a 
person better taste than thinking money is synonymous with style.

Which brings us to this year’s list which is, of course, as hilarious as ever. 
How hilarious? Well, according to Vanity Fair, one of the best-dressed women in 
the world is … the Countess of Wessex. Who? Oh, that woman married to one of 
the chinless royals, a person I imagine most people in this country don’t think 
about ever but, according to Vanity Fair, is literally one of the most chic 
women in the world. Some poor work-experience kid at Condé Nast even had to 
cobble up the “Most Notable Ensemble of 2015” worn by Sophie Wessex, which 
really puts all the coffee fetching and photocopying I did in my days of work 
experience into perspective. Honestly, I don’t think even I can remember a 
single outfit this woman wore in her entire life. The best the Vanity Fair work 
experience could come up with was “a striped silk-satin Emilia Wickstead dress 
and a custom Jane Taylor hat, worn at Royal Ascot” a description which, what it 
lacks in justifying the countess’s presence on the list, it makes up for in 
evoking the Windsor women’s pitiable lives.

On and on this joyless list goes, with its inclusion of celebrities incapable 
of getting dressed without the help of at least five stylists. Then there are 
the requisite pointless European royals, includingPrince Harry 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/prince-harry> and Samantha Cameron 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/samantha-cameron> who is, if not strictly 
royal herself, almost undoubtedly related to some random aristos. Seriously, of 
all the people in the world, this is the bestGraydon Carter 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/graydon-carter> could come up with?

Yes, taste is a subjective thing. As Peter Preston pointed out in the Observer 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/aug/09/restaurant-critics-serve-dishes-with-little-meat-aa-gill-giles-coren>
 this weekend, even restaurant critics can’t agree on whether a lamb shank is 
good or not, so lord pity the fashion editors who have to make a ringing 
declaration aboutCate Blanchett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/cate-blanchett>’s dress at the Oscars. 
(Fashion law No 1: never criticise Cate Blanchett.) Another issue here is that 
Vanity Fair is an American magazine and, speaking as an American, American 
magazines have absolutely terrible taste when it comes to fashion. Bland, blah 
and beige tends to be the rule of thumb, whereas European fashion magazines, 
especially British ones, don’t recoil in absolute horror at the idea of clothes 
being about having fun as opposed to looking as boring as possible. This partly 
explains, I suspect, Vanity Fair’s interest in the British royals’ clothing, 
but that also stems from America’s fascination with royals in general, a fetish 
among my native countrymen that causes me enormous pain.

But all that aside, anyone with sense knows that the truly best-dressed people 
are those who convey their personality through their clothes and are able to 
choose outfits on their own. People like, for example,Iris Apfel 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/jul/29/iris-apfel-documentary-film-better-happy-than-well-dressed>
,Solange Knowles <https://www.theguardian.com/music/solange-knowles> and FKA 
twigs <https://www.theguardian.com/music/fka-twigs>. The latter does, to Vanity 
Fair’s credit, somehow slip on to the list. That’s actual style. The rest is 
just advertising and money which, contrary to what Vanity Fair might think, are 
very different.

Now, on to a slightly separate issue. This shall be my last column for a while 
as I’m taking the next six months off work for reasons that have nothing to do 
with either Vanity Fair or even Sophie Wessex Wotsit. I’ll be leaving you in 
very capable hands and this isn’t even a goodbye as I shall be back, so, like 
the Von Trapp children, I’ll just say auf wiedersehen, good night. And yes, 
I am wearing lederhosen as I say this. Put that on your best-dressed 
list, Vanity Fair.

Post your questions to Hadley Freeman, Ask Hadley, The Guardian, Kings Place, 
90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Emailask.hadley@theguardian.com 
<mailto:ask.hadley@theguardian.com>.
