
Billing itself “the experts’ guide to the best pizza places in the world”, 
Where to Eat Pizza 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/405322/> features 
1,705 pizzerias. Now its compiler, Daniel Young 
<http://www.youngandfoodish.com/>, has revealed the restaurant that received 
the most nominations from the guide’s 1,077 contributors: Pepe in Grani, 
Caiazzo, Campania.

Naples may be square one of the pizza world, writes Young, but Caiazzo, a 
hilltop town some 30 miles north, has emerged as its ground zero or rather its 
kilometre zero. As a proponent of the Kilometro Zero movement (KM0), Franco 
Pepe is a local hero, in every sense. He sources mostly from nearby producers. 
It is only people who travel great distances to Pepe in Grani, his stone-walled 
pizza palazzo.

Franco Pepe is passionate about using pizza to promote this part of Campania 
and the artisanal food producers with whom he works. He has even revived an 
ancient wheat not produced for 50 years for use in his handmade dough. Tomato 
sauce is made from heritage tomatoes; the oil comes from ancient groves a few 
kilometres away.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j3bv%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j3bv%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c570bc13017c69e3dbfd3c20fc00bdb44ba557f%2F0_178_1250_750%2F1250.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20this%20the%20best%20pizza%20in%20the%20world%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j3bv%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is+this+the+best+pizza+in+the+world%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j3bv%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c570bc13017c69e3dbfd3c20fc00bdb44ba557f%2F0_178_1250_750%2F1250.jpg>
His mastery covers the three stages of pizza preparation: the before (dough 
analysis, preparation and maturation), the during (shaping the dough, arranging 
toppings, cooking) and the after (finishing touches). From a growing list 
ofpizzas on his menu comes the Pinsa conciata del ’500, topped withconciato 
romano cheese, fig preserve from the Cilento, basil, and lardo from Nero 
Casertano pigs; and Il Sole nel Piatto (sunshine on a plate) with buffalo 
mozzarella, tiny Piennolo del Vesuvio tomatoes, Cetara anchovies, basil, extra 
virgin olive oil and Caiazzo olives.

True pizza lovers who can’t bear to tear themselves away can stay the night in 
one of two stylish bedrooms – directly above the raising rooms, where the next 
day’s batch of dough will be gently rising to perfection.

• Pizzas from €4.50, double rooms from €100 B&B, Vico San Giovanni Battista 3, 
Caiazzo, +39 0823 862718,pepeingrani.it <http://www.pepeingrani.it/>

Where to Eat Pizza is published by Phaidon (£16.95). To buy a copy of for 
£13.56, including UK p&p, seebookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/405322/>
