 Some people declare that the island of Rhodes has been spoilt by tourism, but 
to anyone who has despaired of the jam-packed roads, the crowded dirty beaches, 
the appalling caf√© food, the weather of southern coastal England, it is still a 
paradise of solitude. Hire a bicycle, moped or car, and you can soon be on an 
almost deserted beach of great beauty. Moreover there will be a taverna, tucked 
into a cluster of rocks and oleanders, or by a small quay, happy to provide you 
with simple food at a sensible price.
However long you have spent in the serene ruins of cities that had the sense 
to keep out of history, you can rely on being greeted at a beach nearby with 
cheerful hospitality. First you go into the kitchen to choose your fish - 
lobster, prawns, bass, bream, squid or octopus. Then you sit outside and look 
at the brilliant landscape, the painted boats, the fishermen mending their nets 
or playing backgammon, as the meal builds up slowly in front of you - retsina, 
the most refreshing of drinks on a hot day, or wine from Lindos, then the usual 
Greek salad with its slice of feta cheese on top, a basket of cream-coloured 
bread with the close texture of cake, then at last the high point of the meal, 
the fish, hot from pan or grill.

Not an ambitious or expensive gastronomic programme, but the perfect summer 
lunch. Even if you substitute stuffed vegetables, or vegetable fritters for the 
fish, it involves the minimum of work.

Greek salad 

From about 10 May, people go out to pick the leafy tips and buds of wild 
marjoram to dry and store for year-long use. The flavour is characteristic of 
much Greek cooking, and unlike that of our northern marjoram. It is sold in 
Greek and Cypriot delicatessens under the name of rigani. Greek salad is often 
built up in layers on individual side plates, in the following order - 
quantities are for one salad:

2 lettuce leaves, cut in ribbons 

2 large tomatoes, peeled, cut up 

1/2in cucumber, peeled, sliced 

2 spring onions, chopped, or slices of sweet raw onion 

2-3 sprigs fresh mint, chopped 

1/4tsp rigani 

1 tbsp Greek dressing 

11/2 x 3in slice feta cheese 

6-8 black olives to go round the edge 

You can leave out the lettuce, add rings of green pepper, or a few capers. 

Greek dressing 

Whisk together and season to taste 4oz of olive oil and the juice of a large 
lemon. If the dressing is for lightly cooked vegetables, add 1/4 teaspoon each 
rigani and dried mint, and a tablespoon of chopped spring onion.

Greek batter 

This gives the lightest coating of crispness for fish and vegetables, not the 
blanket swaddling of west European fritters.

Beat together: 

4 oz flour 

teaspoon baking powder 

1 egg 

tablespoon olive oil 

generous 1/4pt water 

dessertspoon ouzo/Pernod (optional) 

1/4 teaspoon each powdered bay leaf and rigani. 

Dip the cleaned fish, or half-cooked vegetables into this batter and fry in 
olive oil. Serve with lemon quarters.

 JANE GRIGSON 

 The Observer 's pioneering cookery writer from 1968 until her death in 1990, 
she relished food with a terribly un-English passion for her time. Grigson was 
one of the first to detect the latent enthusiasm beneath the apparent lack of 
inspiration and talent in English kitchens. Though she spiced her writing with 
literary and historical allusions, she also addressed her readers in an 
unpatronising, 'eggs is eggs' manner. Her daughter Sophie, also a food writer, 
set up the Jane Grigson Trust, which awards an annual bursury to aspiring food 
writers.
