
I vividly remember switching on Monsters Inc, thinking it would entertain my 
two-year-old nephew. As the shadow of the monster loomed over a sleeping child, 
my nephew sat rooted to the spot, wide-eyed, barely breathing. I switched off 
the film and scrambled around for another form of amusement more appropriate 
for toddlers. Together, we exhaled.

Related: US students request 'trigger warnings' on literature 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/may/19/us-students-request-trigger-warnings-in-literature>

 I teach the history of the idea of monstrosity in the eighteenth-century 
British Empire, its relationship to deformity, disability and gender 
nonconformity. Unlike with two-year-olds, I do not let my students avoid 
difficult or disturbing topics. We read and talk about sexual assault, racism, 
mutilation, and violence against women. I expect my students to think 
critically and carefully about the subject matter.


But before we can begin learning, the most important thing that I need each of 
my students to do is to breathe. The harder they need to think, the deeper they 
need to breathe. A stuffy classroom can be the death of a debate and critical 
thinking requires copious amounts of oxygen. I use trigger warnings because 
they help students to stop for a moment and breathe, which helps them to think.


Disturbing content

A trigger warning (or content note) alerts readers or viewers to violent and 
disturbing content, which could be sexual assault, racist violence, transphobic 
or homophobic slurs. There are various ways of issuing a warning, for example 
in a lecture I might state that the next slide has a reference to mutilation, 
or I might add a note in parenthesis on the reading list where a text includes 
graphic description of sexual violence.

It reminds them to be aware of the coping strategies that they have developed 
and switch them on

A trigger warning does not give permission for students to skip class, avoid a 
topic or choose alternative readings. What it does do is signal to survivors of 
abuse or trauma that they need to keep breathing. It reminds them to be 
particularly aware of the skills and coping strategies that they have developed 
and to switch them on.

Trigger warnings are necessary adjustments for students who hold in their 
bodies one of the most prevalent but also most disabling of wounds – trauma. 
Like adjustments for dyslexia, they do not solve the challenges of being 
different, they simply make it easier to navigate the difficulty of living in a 
world that assumes certain norms.

Yet if you read the recent deb 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/he-phrased-it-badly-but-stephen-fry-pointed-out-something-important-trigger-warnings-are-oppressive-a6982731.html>
ates 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/he-phrased-it-badly-but-stephen-fry-pointed-out-something-important-trigger-warnings-are-oppressive-a6982731.html>
on trigger warnings you would think that they banned all reading or 
intellectual engagement. Trigger warnings have become the sign of a generation 
wrapped in cotton wool; “infantilised” as Stephen Fry recentlyclaimed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/apr/12/stephen-fry-fury-comments-abuse-victims-self-pity-charity-mind>
, or “coddled”according 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/obama-college-political-correctness_us_55f8431ee4b00e2cd5e80198>
 to President Obama. They are represented as the weakening of the stiff upper 
lip, and thereby the undoing of the “manly” fabric of society. They are seen as 
the ultimate form of censorship, often ranted about in the same breath as
no-platforming and safe spaces. 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/feb/06/safe-space-or-free-speech-crisis-debate-uk-universities>

Related: Student protests: are young people too sensitive these days? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/mar/10/student-protests-are-young-people-too-sensitive-these-days>

In fact, trigger warnings are the opposite of this so-called infantilisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/12/stephen-fry-free-speech-child-abuse-bullying-safe-spaces?CMP=share_btn_fb>
 - they tell students to hold themselves. They implicitly demand that students 
assess their own needs and take responsibility for them.

Make no assumptions

Trigger warnings also remind me, as a teacher, to think carefully about how I 
present material, to ask myself why I am including a particular image or text 
and to what purpose. Having “triggers” in mind forces me think about the 
potential diversity of experiences in my classroom, not to make assumptions 
about my students’ lives and to think carefully about the language I use and 
the framing of the topic.

Equally, trigger warnings remind students who may not have suffered a trauma 
or may never have faced prejudice and abuse, that these experiences happen. 
They tell students that they are sitting in a class with people with different 
life experiences and they cannot take for granted that their personal story is 
the norm.


For me, trigger warnings are a fundamental part of feminist teaching because 
they help create a community of learners who acknowledge difference. Overall, 
trigger warnings remind everybody, regardless of their personal history, to 
keep breathing, and to think carefully and compassionately about what they are 
learning. They indicate that learning is, and should be, challenging and that 
learning is, and should be, for everyone.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>
