
The second world war was important in the development of the Manchester 
Guardian as a national newspaper. It faced pressures such as a shortage of 
staff, the Blitz, the fear of invasion, censorship and the rationing of paper 
but despite this readership grew.

The war led to a staff shortage for the Manchester Guardian as many younger 
staff enlisted. Many retired journalists came back to work at its offices with 
editorWP Crozier 
<http://www.theguardian.com/newsroom/crozier/page/0,,917541,00.html> and manager
John Scott 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/apr/06/from-the-archives-obituary-john-russell-scott>
.

Manchester was frequently targeted during the Blitz 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/the-blitz>. As is shown in the above photograph 
from 1939, Manchester was removed from both the Guardian and Manchester Evening 
News office building signage. It was believed that it could be spotted by 
German bomber planes from the air. During the first day of the Blitz in 
Manchester, 22 December 1940, Crozier wrote in his diary that the building had 
come under fire; "eleven incendiaries on our own roof – all put out…..home at 
9am." Frequent bombing alerts also placed a great strain on meeting deadlines 
and getting out editions. Often staff had to abandon producing the paper and 
use the cellar as a makeshift shelter. On 20 October 1941 Crozier noted "Alert 
at 8.50. All clear about 12.20. MG down (in the cellars) for 164 minutes, much 
the worst of all."

Further pressure came in terms of censorship 
<http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/theartofwar/inf3.htm>. Occasionally 
editions were cancelled if they fell foul of the censor. The first edition of 
the London print run of 5,500 copies on Sunday 17 November 1940 had to be 
scrapped after printing as the censor did not like the picture of a plume of 
clouds covering Kew after a bombing raid as this could possibly damage morale. 
The second edition omitted the picture.

According to Guardian historian David Ayerst, John Scott was concerned at the 
beginning of the war as to how the Guardian would be preserved if Hitler 
invaded Britain. He put in place plans so that a newspaper in exile could be 
set up. Two new trustees to theScott Trust 
<http://www.gmgplc.co.uk/the-scott-trust/history/interactive-timeline/#timelineWrap>
 who did not live in the country were appointed - F A Montague, a colonial 
civil servant, andPaul Patterson 
<http://www.spartacus.schoolnet.co.uk/SPYpatterson.htm>, publisher of the 
Baltimore Sun <http://www.baltimoresun.com/>, whose London correspondent worked 
from the Guardian's London offices. With Patterson's help there would be the 
possibility to continue the Guardian from America. As Ayerst notes, despite the 
lengths Scott went to to secure the Guardian's future, he sent the trust deed 
to Patterson for safekeeping in an ordinary envelope with a half penny stamp.

Crozier and Scott thought they could be targeted if the Germans invaded and 
that they might have to flee. In order to finance this Scott purchased a 
valuable emerald necklace from Hatton Garden. It was not deposited in a bank, 
as they would not be able to access it if emergency arose. Scott and W J Haley 
(managing director and trustee) took turns in carrying it on them. Once the 
risk of invasion receded, as the war progressed, the emeralds were sold back to 
the Hatton Garden dealer.
 WP Crozier, W J Haley, John Scott and James Bone (London editor) c1940 GNM 
Archive 
Paper rationing 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rationing_in_the_United_Kingdom#Non-food_rations> 
conversely made life easier for the short-staffed editorial team. It was 
introduced in February 1940. As the newspaper noted at the time, along with 
others it had started to reduce paper usage from the beginning of the war. 
Newspapers were now restricted to about 50-60 percent of their pre–war size. 
Rather than produce many editions with few pages, the Manchester Guardian 
produced fewer editions with as many pages as it could. This meant the paper 
shrank in size from an average of 16 to between six to eight pages. Although 
the reduced size meant the paper had less space for advertising, revenue was 
compensated by increased sales. By 1941 circulation was 60,000, an increase of 
10,000 from 1939. Ayerst notes that in July 1941 the newspaper had a waiting 
list of 3,000 subscribers. As many Manchester Guardians were sold as could be 
printed. Subscribers also no longer received a discount - some had been given 
in the 1930s as part of a readership drive. Despite the reduction in pages, the 
price remained the same – two pence.

An analysis of two newspapers from Friday 1 September 1939, two days before 
war was declared and Monday 8 December, the day after the Japanese attack on
Pearl Harbour 
<http://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/from-the-archive-blog/2011/dec/07/pearl-harbor-attack-remembered-japan>
, shows the effects of paper rationing.

The 1939 paper is 16 pages and the one from 1941 just six. Both newspapers have
adverts on the front page 
<http://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/archive-educational-resource-august-2011>
, as was the case up to 1952 but after that they differ in structure. Pages 2 
and 3 in the 1939 edition have further classified adverts, wireless programme 
listings and sports. Page 4 covers some UK news about building air raid 
shelters, other war preparations and announcements. Page 5 is devoted to books 
of the day and a feature of the Manchester sky in September, with some European 
news towards the foot of the page. Page 6 features fashion and the crossword. 
You can download a copy of pages 5 and 6 below. Page 7 is a full picture page 
of preparations for the expected war and page 8 contains the leader column and 
London news. Further international news covering Hitler'sinvasion of Poland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2009/sep/01/secondworldwar-poland1>, 
the situation in Europe as well as local news in Manchester run through pages 9 
to 12 interspersed with adverts. Business news, share prices and more 
advertising run through pages 13-15 and on page 16 are the letters to the 
editor, the weather forecast and births, deaths and marriage announcements.


Manchester Guardian, Friday 1 September 1939, page 5 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1377154683998/Manchester-Guardian-1-Septe.pdf>
Manchester Guardian, Friday 1 September 1939, page 6 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1377154749642/Manchester-Guardian-1-Septe.pdf> 

The 8 December 1941 edition shows how Crozier and his editors were able to 
cover in depth the breaking news of the Pearl Harbour attack, the war in Europe 
and the home front with limited space. There is far less Manchester focused 
news. Wireless listings, announcements, business news, sport and the crossword 
are all covered on page 2. A whole range of domestic news items are on page 3 
along with articles on the campaign in North Africa. The leader and letters to 
the editor cover only half of page 4 along with further news on the European 
theatres of war. Page 5 is totally devoted to the attack on Pearl Harbour and 
has a large map to illustrate the reports and page 6, the final page, has more 
reaction to the Japanese attack, the front inFinland 
<http://teachers.guardian.co.uk/Guardian_RootRepository/Saras/ContentPackaging/UploadRepository/learnpremium/Lesson/learnpremium/histor~00/keysta~00/secondworldwar/lesson2/article6.htm>
, theEastern front 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/sep/08/hitler-germany-campaign-collapsed>
 andTobruk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/picture/2013/jan/22/allied-forces-tobruk-1941>
. Births, deaths and marriage announcements are squeezed into half of the final 
column. You can download a copy of pages 5 and 6 below.

Manchester Guardian, Monday 8 December 1941, page 5 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1377154842722/Manchester-Guardian-8-Decem.pdf>
Manchester Guardian, Monday 8 December 1941, page 6 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1377154888298/Manchester-Guardian-8-Decem.pdf>

The rapid rise in growth continued after the war and by 1952 circulation stood 
at 130,000. You can find out more about circulation figures in a recentresource 
of the month 
<http://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/resource-of-the-month-gnm-archive-january-2013>
.

Past teaching resources of the month from the GNM Archive 
<http://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/series/resource-of-the-month>
More teaching resources can be found on our resources for teachers 
<http://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/resources-for-teachers> page.
