
Microsoft Innovative Educator Expert (MIEE) <http://aka.ms/mieeflyer> (pdf) is 
an exclusive programme created to recognise global teacher visionaries who are 
paving the way for their peers in the effective use of technology for better 
learning and student outcomes.

MIE Experts work closely with Microsoft to lead innovation in education. They 
advocate and share their thoughts on the effective use of technology in 
education with peers and policy makers. They provide insight for Microsoft on 
new products and tools for education, and they exchange best practices as they 
work together to promote innovation in teaching and learning.

Taken from Daily Edventures 
<http://dailyedventures.com/index.php/2015/09/23/natalie-lochhead/>, UK MIEE’s 
share their journey with vice-president of Microsoft Worldwide Education, 
Anthony Salcito.

“We have the chance to sculpt such a bright future for the next generation.” – 
Jose Kingsley, UK
 Photograph: Microsoft 
Jose Kingsley <https://education.microsoft.com/Status/Public?token=XNkgjUIS> 
grew up dreaming of being a teacher. So it’s no surprise that he’s now 
tirelessly committed not only to ensuring successful outcomes for his young 
students from diverse cultures, but to helping his fellow teachers discover the 
value of teaching with technology.


 To fulfil those commitments, Kingsley takes full advantage of the resources 
and opportunities that come with being a MIEE – from participating in the
Microsoft E2 Educator Exchange 
<https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/education/e2/default.aspx?__0591c250=_0591c250&__01e52f88=_01e52f88>
 (E2) in Budapest to being an active member of the Microsoft Educator Community 
(MEC).

 “I believe that Microsoft allows us as MIEE’s to work through challenges we 
face, making it personalised, Kingsley says. “[Attending E2] was almost like 
being back in school myself. It was on returning to school the week after and 
drawing up an action plan that I realised just how much I had taken away. I 
felt like I had enough to write a whole new curriculum, I kid you not.”

 That new curriculum had a lot to do with putting the power of learning in the 
hands of his students – an approach Kingsley brings to life using programs like
Skype in the Classroom <https://education.microsoft.com/skypeintheclassroom> 
(Kingsley started the #SkypeMeet series) andSway <https://sway.com/>.

 “Giving children ownership of their learning empowers meaningful learning,” 
he says. “Using the MEC, as MIEE’s we have the opportunity to create a 
continuing professional development (CPD) programme that entirely suits the 
learner’s need. I adopted this attitude within my classroom, giving children 
the power to make decisions about what they wanted to learn. The motivation and 
confidence of my children have increased massively and they feel prepared to 
take risks and learn from mistakes.”

 Kingsley’s passion for teaching is palpable, especially when he reflects on 
his students’ future.

 “I teach five- to six-year-old children,” he tells us, “and it is makes me 
immensely proud to see their excitement about using technology within their 
everyday learning. They often enjoy telling me that if they presented their 
learning using Office 365, the outcome would be enhanced. Always in the back of 
my mind is that question: What impact will this have on their future? This is a 
question that I cannot answer, but I can prepare them for.”

 Read the full interview here 
<http://dailyedventures.com/index.php/2016/04/27/jose-kingsley/>.

“OneNote has enabled us to work with different people, different cultures, and 
just collaborate and share with students what’s going on outside the 
classroom.” – Lee Whitmarsh, UK
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzac%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzac%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd056b1a0dc83d2252c8911ba2ad79bc3d5cdadb0%2F143_0_787_787%2F787.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20schools%20use%20technology%20effectively%20in%20the%20classroom&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzac%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+schools+use+technology+effectively+in+the+classroom&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzac%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd056b1a0dc83d2252c8911ba2ad79bc3d5cdadb0%2F143_0_787_787%2F787.jpg>
 Photograph: Microsoft 
 For art educator and new Microsoft Innovative Educator Expert (#MIEExpert) 
Lee Whitmarsh <https://education.microsoft.com/Status/Public?token=Ci790EyB>, 
technology is a means to an important end: helping his students experience art 
as fully as possible, and in a global context.

 I was excited to chat with Whitmarsh at the recent E2 
<https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/education/e2/default.aspx?__0591c250=_0591c250&__01e52f88=_01e52f88>
event, after I’d looked at his project using OneNote to support creative 
collaboration. (Here’s a greatOffice Mix 
<https://mix.office.com/watch/1fku00uppbl1x> detailing the project, “Creating a 
photography A-level teaching and learning hub.”)

 “OneNote,” he says, “has enabled us to work with different people, different 
cultures, and just collaborate and share with students what’s going on outside 
the classroom.”

 But how does it work in the realm of art education?

 “Through photography – it’s such a visual medium, that students are getting 
to see visual literacy from different areas and [it changes] how all the 
students see their environment. They’re able to take [what they’ve seen] on 
board, and then apply it to what they’re doing in their environment.”

 And it’s all happening inside OneNote.

 “We first set it up and thought about not what the technology can do, but 
what it needs to do for the students,” Whitmarsh says.

 When it came to setting up the collaboration space, his students were 
thinking big.

 “The students – innocently – said, ‘Why do we have to [only] collaborate with 
each other? Why can’t we go wider?’” says Whitmarsh. “So we just tried it, and 
we have a wonderful IT department that found a way to actually get students in 
Seattle (Lynnwood high school <http://www.edmonds.wednet.edu/LHS>) within our 
OneNote. We do cross-collaboration links, we do peer review, self-review, and 
we’re going to set up a Skype session to put names with faces.”

 Whitmarsh wasn’t at E2 just to share his project, he was also focused on 
collecting new ideas, some that he might share on hisblog 
<https://lwhitmarshblog.wordpress.com/>.

 “It’s been beyond what I thought it would be,” he told me. “It’s been 
inspirational. To see all the educators from across the world so passionate, so 
open to ideas, and talking to you about what they’re doing - sharing and 
listening. It’s just been revolutionary.”

 Here’s to revolution, and to teachers like Lee Whitmarsh who are leading the 
way.

Enjoy the full interview here 
<http://dailyedventures.com/index.php/2016/04/04/lee-whitmarsh/>.

Computational thinking takes hold – even in the youngest of students – Henry 
Penfold, UK
 Photograph: Microsoft 
 Kodu, Minecraft and Skype-a-thons: just three of the many ways that MIEE 
Henry Penfold <https://twitter.com/penfoldno1> uses technology with his primary 
school students. Penfold is an enthusiastic proponent of these technologies in 
his classroom, and he’s not shy about sharing why.

 “Their growth mindset and their attitude towards it is fantastic,” he says. 
“With Kodu particularly, they go, ‘right, I’m going to solve this,’ because 
it’s quite manageable. With the blocks, they can drag and really see it 
visually.”

 Penfold is passionate about getting students involved in computer science, 
and he has seen some big changes after just a few short years of bringing ICT 
into his classroom.

 “Computing is so important in society,” he says. “Children have their tablets 
at home, so they are constantly revolved around computers. Digital literacy is 
so important for giving them the tools for later on when they’re learning, and 
later on in life. It’s amazing how much they use that technology. I see, 
particularly, the practical side.”

 And with the computer science now mandated as part of the UK curriculum, 
Penfold has also noticed a difference in how his students speak on a daily 
basis. “I hear, ‘Right, I’ve just done some de-bugging … I’m going to tinker 
with this to make it better.’ It’s almost become its own language,” he notes.

 As veterans of the recent Skype-a-thon 
<https://education.microsoft.com/skypeathon> – which was a huge hit in his 
classroom – trying new technologies is now de rigueur in Penfold’s classroom.

 “My children absolutely love being able to talk with other people,” he says. 
And while their Skype was also in the UK, that didn’t matter. “Just the 
differences between what Southampton was like and what Wales was like … it’s 
like a field trip for children that don’t get out as much.”

 Next up? “We are hopefully going to Skype someone from Pixar,” says Penfold. 
“[Skype] makes that thousand miles seem like no distance at all.”

Watch the full interview here 
<http://dailyedventures.com/index.php/2016/02/01/henry-penfold/>.

Turning the tables on technology training in Scotland – Natalie Lochhead, 
Scotland
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzac%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzac%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8d63a5968865d108cff041464c0e4eb1eb1f38a%2F265_0_787_787%2F787.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20schools%20use%20technology%20effectively%20in%20the%20classroom&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzac%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+schools+use+technology+effectively+in+the+classroom&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzac%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8d63a5968865d108cff041464c0e4eb1eb1f38a%2F265_0_787_787%2F787.jpg>
 Photograph: Microsoft 
 It’s not unusual for teachers to train other teachers to leverage – and make 
the most of – technology. In fact, we know it’s one of the most effective ways 
to scale knowledge. But Natalie Lochhead has taken the concept to the next 
level by using the expertise of her young students (primary 4-7) to turn that 
tradition on its head.

 As part of the Digital Leaders programme 
<https://blogs.glowscotland.org.uk/glowblogs/ndlf/2015/02/22/digital-leaders-at-kirklandneuk-primary-school-monday-2nd-march-at-3-30-pm/>
 , a wide network of schools throughout the UK that train teachers and students 
in ICT, Lochhead’s students teach full-class lessons to fellow students, and 
support teachers as they work to adopt 1 to 1 approaches in the classroom. All 
of this is made possible by Glow, Scotland’s national digital learning 
environment.

 “My proudest moment in my career has been watching my digital leaders grow 
into amazing, confident and skilled young people,” Lochhead tells us. “I know 
that no matter that they do when they leave school, they will have success.” 
She goes on to say: “[I love] watching them training their teachers, connecting 
online with other educators via Glow and generally being awesome. They have 
made such an impact on our school becoming genuine leaders in technology. I am 
so proud of every one of them.”

 Lochhead’s Digital Leaders are trained each Wednesday at lunch time, and then 
train other classes and teachers on that particular skill. To date, they’ve 
taught Windows 365, the basics of using a tablet and Kodu. They’ve participated 
inScotland’s Kodu Cup 
<http://kpsdigitalleaders.blogspot.co.uk/2014/06/kodu-kup-scotland.html> and 
Hour of Code <https://hourofcode.com/uk>, and have even been featured in the 
Chamber of CommerceBusiness Matters Magazine. To keep track of all their 
activities, Lochhead maintains aclass blog 
<http://kpsdigitalleaders.blogspot.co.uk/>.

 This impressive educator’s students aren’t the only ones transferring 
technology knowledge. As a MIEE, Lochhead shares her approach through the MEC 
and participates in events like last December’smeeting of UK Showcase Schools 
and MIEEs 
<http://blogs.msdn.com/b/ukschools/archive/2015/01/07/microsoft-innovative-educator-expert-december-5th-event.aspx>
. She also publishes helpful tutorials, likethis one 
<https://www.tes.com/us/teacher-lessons/creating-animations-in-the-classroom-7201738>
 on creating animations in the classroom.

 Natalie Lochhead isn’t the first teacher to recognize students’ capacity to 
teach, but in building a formal program to support this potential, she’s making 
a big difference.

Read the full interview here 
<http://dailyedventures.com/index.php/2015/09/23/natalie-lochhead/>.

Want to be a MIE Expert?

Read more about the Microsoft Innovative Educator Expert programme 
<http://aka.ms/aboutmie>.

Self-nominations for 2016-2017 are now open! <http://aka.ms/mienomination>

Before you fill out and submit the self-nomination form, you will need to 
complete two tasks:

 * Join the Microsoft  <https://education.microsoft.com/>Educator community 
<https://education.microsoft.com/> and complete your profile. You will need to 
submit the URL to your public profile as a part of the nomination process. You 
can find your URL by going into edit pskypatrofile and looking under “basic 
information”. 
 * Create a two minute Office Mix <https://mix.office.com/>, video or Sway 
<https://sway.com/education/?WT.mc_id=WEDUNAVSEDU_WEB_Persistent> that answers 
the following questions in a manner that creatively expresses what makes you a 
MIEE. To share the Mix/video/Sway in your nomination, you will need to post it 
somewhere that allows you to create a URL to share it. 
 * Why do you consider yourself to be a Microsoft Innovative Educator Expert?

 *  Describe how you have incorporated Microsoft technologies in innovative 
ways in your classroom. Include artifacts that demonstrate your innovation. 
 *  If you become a MIE-Expert, how do you hope it will impact your current 
role? 
Once you have completed those two tasks, complete the self-nomination form. 
<http://aka.ms/mienomination> This form will be open until July 15, 2016. 

Content on this page has been provided and funded by Microsoft 
<https://education.microsoft.com/>. Find out more here 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
