
Some of the UK’s most infamous cases are among the hundreds of convictions 
that could be challenged after the supreme court ruled thatjoint enterprise 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/feb/18/joint-enterprise-law-what-why-controversial>
 laws have been misinterpreted for over 30 years.

Related: Joint enterprise law wrongly interpreted for 30 years, court rules 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/feb/18/joint-enterprise-law-wrongly-interpreted-for-30-years-court-rules>

Prosecutors, judges and jurors will now have to take a different approach when 
dealing with defendants accused of being involved in joint enterprise crimes. 
Campaign groupJengba <http://jointenterprise.co/> (Joint Enterprise Not Guilty 
by Association) said the ruling was a major turning point in British justice.

Here are five examples of when joint enterprise laws have been used to secure 
a conviction, some of which could be affected by Thursday’s ruling:

Derek Bentley (Sidney Miles)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gpdc%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gpdc%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc69a0abf23fcb4be2e2d153bcaf4a4b11ef7a49%2F0_1521_2912_1750%2F2912.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Historic%20cases%20could%20be%20challenged%20after%20joint%20enterprise%20ruling&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gpdc%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Historic+cases+could+be+challenged+after+joint+enterprise+ruling&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gpdc%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc69a0abf23fcb4be2e2d153bcaf4a4b11ef7a49%2F0_1521_2912_1750%2F2912.jpg>
 Derek Bentley aged 17 in 1950. Photograph: Collect / Graham Turner for the 
Guardian 
The 1952 case of Derek Bentley 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2008/jul/12/familyandrelationships.family4>
 is perhaps the most famous use of joint enterprise law in the UK, although it 
is unaffected by Thursday’s supreme court finding as it only applies to cases 
from 1984 onwards. Bentley, then 18, and Christopher Craig, then 16, were 
caught on 2 November 1952 as they attempted to burgle a confectionery warehouse 
in Croydon in south London.

Craig shot dead a policeman, Sidney Miles, but Bentley was also convicted of 
murder and hanged. Craig escaped hanging because of his age. The police officer 
is said to have asked Craig to “hand over the gun” and Bentley responded by 
shouting the notoriously ambiguous phrase “let him have it”. These words formed 
the vital evidence of joint enterprise at his trial.

On 30 July 1998, the court of appeal quashed Bentley’s conviction for murder. 
Craig welcomed the ruling. Since Bentley was tried before the 1984 change to 
joint enterprise rules, the supreme court ruling will not lead to any further 
judicial revisions.

Jordan Cunliffe, Stephen Sorton and Adam Swellings (Garry Newlove)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gpdc%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gpdc%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8d0768c1ba964b9712bd57606fa937a265b307e%2F0_0_3482_1503%2F3482.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Historic%20cases%20could%20be%20challenged%20after%20joint%20enterprise%20ruling&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gpdc%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Historic+cases+could+be+challenged+after+joint+enterprise+ruling&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gpdc%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8d0768c1ba964b9712bd57606fa937a265b307e%2F0_0_3482_1503%2F3482.jpg>
 (Left to right) Stephen Sorton, Jordan Cunlifffe and Adam Swellings. 
Photograph: Cheshire Constabulary/PA 
Joint enterprise was used to convict and jail three teenagers for the 2007 
murder of Garry Newlove <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/2008/feb/11/ukcrime>, 
who was kicked to death after confronting a group of drunk people outside his 
house in Warrington. Cunliffe’s mother hascampaigned against joint enterprise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2010/aug/04/joint-enterprise-law-garry-newlove>
, arguing that although her son was at the scene, he did not take part in the 
murder. At the time, he had severe keratoconus, a degenerative eye condition, 
and Jordan’s visual impairment meant he qualified for registration as a blind 
person. Cunliffe’s case inspired screenwriter Jimmy McGovern to writeCommon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2012/oct/03/jimmy-mcgovern-common-drama-bbc>
, a drama surrounding a case in which the defendants are charged with murder 
involving joint enterprise.

David Norris and Gary Dobson (Stephen Lawrence)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gpdc%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gpdc%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53d4f5d5c3edcd2b6fa404ce3be04e32e4746e66%2F0_86_2891_1737%2F2891.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Historic%20cases%20could%20be%20challenged%20after%20joint%20enterprise%20ruling&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gpdc%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Historic+cases+could+be+challenged+after+joint+enterprise+ruling&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gpdc%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53d4f5d5c3edcd2b6fa404ce3be04e32e4746e66%2F0_86_2891_1737%2F2891.jpg>
 Gary Dobson (left) and David Norris. Photograph: CPS/PA 
The eventual conviction of the killers of black teenager Stephen Lawrence 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/lawrence> was secured using joint enterprise 
legislation. In 1993, the 18-year-old was murdered in a racially motivated 
attack in south-east London. In 2011, the case reopened in the light of new 
evidence and, even though it was impossible to say who had inflicted the fatal 
wound, Gary Dobson and David Norris wereconvicted for the joint enterprise of 
the murder 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/jan/04/dobson-norris-murder-stephen-lawrence>
.

The prosecution argued that it did not matter whether the pair had carried out 
the actual stabbing – rather, it was important that they were part of an attack 
that could end in serious harm. Since Norris and Dobson were not convicted 
under foresight provisions and there was clear evidence recorded of racist 
intent, the supreme court ruling will not affect their case.

Shauna Hoare (Becky Watts)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gpdc%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gpdc%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbbb2ee2f125704bffae0b30e06b1c1082af0ad94%2F0_0_5160_3100%2F5160.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Historic%20cases%20could%20be%20challenged%20after%20joint%20enterprise%20ruling&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gpdc%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Historic+cases+could+be+challenged+after+joint+enterprise+ruling&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gpdc%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbbb2ee2f125704bffae0b30e06b1c1082af0ad94%2F0_0_5160_3100%2F5160.jpg>
 Nathan Matthews and Shauna Hoare. Photograph: Avon and Somerset police 
The case of Shauna Hoare, who was convicted of killing Bristol teenager Becky 
Watts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/11/nathan-matthews-shauna-hoare-becky-watts-dark-fantasies-reality>
, could be affected by Thursday’s supreme court ruling. During the trial of 
Hoare and her partner, Nathan Matthews, the judge and legal teams were open to 
the idea that if the supreme court judgment came before the jury reached its 
verdicts it could have a dramatic impact on the case.

The trial judge, Mr Justice Dingemans, specifically asked barristers to keep 
abreast of developments at the supreme court. Matthews was accused of 
physically killing Watts and was eventually found guilty of murder. The 
prosecution case was that Hoare was in the house at the time and was involved 
in a plot to kidnap Becky, 16, to fulfil her and Matthews’s fantasy of having 
sex with a petite teenage girl. Even ahead of the supreme court judgment, 
Matthews and Hoare had launched appeals against their convictions and sentences.

Kujtim Spahiu (Prel Marku)

Prel Marku was shot on 14 October 2006 in an Albanian/Kosovan club in Park 
Royal, north-west London. The man who fired the fatal shots was Herland Bilali. 
He is serving life for murder. But another young man, Kujtim “Timi” Spahiu, who 
had accompanied Bilali into the club was alsosentenced for life 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2012/sep/25/timi-spahiu-joint-enterprise>. His 
supporters have claimed that he was a victim of joint enterprise laws. It is 
understood his case is likely to be one of those that stands to benefit from 
the supreme court ruling.

Joseph Appiah and Edward Conteh

Appiah and Conteh were among seven teenagers detained for killing 16-year-old 
schoolboy Nicholas Pearton. Pearton was chased, beaten and stabbed in Home Park 
recreation ground in Sydenham in May 2011. Appiah was given a life term for 
murder, along with Dale Green, then 17, and Lamarr Gordon, then 17. But only 
Green was found to have stabbed Pearton. Meanwhile, Conteh was convicted with 
three other boys of manslaughter. Campaigners believe Conteh and Appiah may 
benefit from Thursday’s ruling.
