
It’s late morning and the children in Maria Woolley’s class at the Iona school 
in Nottingham are busy kneading dough. The dough is made from flour they saw 
ground at the local windmill using grains harvested from a nearby farm they had 
visited. During the morning lesson the children have sung songs, recited poetry 
and done rhythmic clapping and stomping.

There is no uniform here, and no headteacher – the school is run by staff and 
friends – and, unlike thevast majority 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-30216408> of primary schools these days, 
here the students don’t work on tablets or computers. At the front of the class 
is an old-fashioned blackboard.

Related: This academies plan doesn’t address schools’ real problems | Laura 
McInerney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/16/academies-schools-problems-george-osborne>

The methods at the school, which are based on the controversial teachings of 
Austrian 19th century philosopher Rudolf Steiner, may be different from those 
employed in mainstream state schools, but the Iona was recently declared 
outstanding by the School Inspection Service – the independent equivalent of 
Ofsted. The report noted that “pupils do not use computers or the internet when 
in school but staff have ensured that they have learned about internet safety”. 
It went on: “Teaching is inspirational and highly effective … teachers are very 
well trained and highly skilled.”

Any school would be grateful to be described in such glowing terms but the 
staff here are particularly proud that they achieved their outstanding status 
without technology. In addition to the ban on computers in school, parents are 
discouraged from letting their children watch television, play computer games 
or use smartphones at home.

The Iona school was set up in 1985 by Richard Moore, who had worked for 10 
years as a state primary teacher. “Mainstream education was becoming 
prescriptive even then,” he says, “so what appealed to me about Steiner was 
that it stressed that the work of children was play.” Today the school – one of 
33 schools that follow the Steiner curriculum – has 87 children aged between 
three and 12 and costs £5,402 a year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzzp%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzzp%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d10bbd2a154f4ceef31c4ecc739eb7bb0862548%2F0_163_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Could%20Steiner%20schools%20have%20a%20point%20on%20children%2C%20tablets%20and%20tech%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzzp%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Could+Steiner+schools+have+a+point+on+children%2C+tablets+and+tech%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzzp%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d10bbd2a154f4ceef31c4ecc739eb7bb0862548%2F0_163_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
 There is no whiteboard at Iona School, Nottingham; instead it is back to the 
blackboard. 
Under the government’s free schools and academies programme, four Steiner 
schools are now state funded. The schools, based on the spiritual movement of “
anthroposophy <http://www.waldorfanswers.com/Anthroposophy.htm>”, are 
controversial 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/jun/17/trojan-horse-some-extremists-more-acceptable>
 because Steiner’s views on, for example, race have been discredited. But even 
some who question the philosophy or ideology may wonder whether these schools 
have a point about resisting the blanket use of technology.

“Rudolph Steiner and many other childhood thinkers through the 19th and 20th 
centuries emphasised the importance of understanding how young children 
naturally learn to learn, and of providing educational experiences which build 
on their natural interests and curiosity,” explains David Whitebread, director 
of the Centre for Research on Play in Education, Development and Learning at 
Cambridge University. “Early childhood and primary education in the UK has 
moved a long way from this to a top-down, state-imposed curriculum model.”

Critics suggest that in not allowing children to use screens as part of its 
ideology Steiner schools are putting them at a disadvantage. “The needs of our 
young people are that when they leave school, they become part of a world that 
is highly likely to include technology,” says Mark Chambers, the chief 
executive of NAACE, a professional association for those concerned with 
advancing education using technology. “We should be doing all we can to help 
them be prepared for that world, just as we would for the physical world that 
is around them.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzzp%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzzp%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F558d0002d9071a3d3d5ae98deb03afc40f604df5%2F0_97_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Could%20Steiner%20schools%20have%20a%20point%20on%20children%2C%20tablets%20and%20tech%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzzp%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Could+Steiner+schools+have+a+point+on+children%2C+tablets+and+tech%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzzp%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F558d0002d9071a3d3d5ae98deb03afc40f604df5%2F0_97_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
 Pupils at the Iona school outdoors. Photograph: David Sillitoe for the Guardian
David Andrews, who was a primary teacher in Hull for 10 years, now runs a 
website <http://www.mrandrewsonline.com> on how to use technology to support 
learning in the classroom. “In some schools, technology is used poorly and it 
can have a damaging impact on education,” he says. But when used creatively, 
“technology can engage the children because of their experience of what they 
are doing at home, where they may be watching television or gaming”.

Research into the effects of technology on learning has yet to demonstrate 
much in the way of positive results, though. A recentstudy 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/11/students-who-use-digital-devices-in-class-perform-worse-in-exams>
 published by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology found that students 
barred from using laptops or digital devices in lectures and seminars did 
better in exams than those allowed to use computers and access the internet. 
And research last year from theLondon School of Economics 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/may/15/mobile-phone-bans-improve-school-exam-results-research-shows>
 found schools that banned pupils from carrying mobile phones showed a 
sustained improvement in exam results, with the biggest advances coming from 
struggling students.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzzp%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzzp%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F548d72fb18af6d40ea8e55c367c2498f77ce2b32%2F507_146_1142_1142%2F1142.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Could%20Steiner%20schools%20have%20a%20point%20on%20children%2C%20tablets%20and%20tech%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzzp%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Could+Steiner+schools+have+a+point+on+children%2C+tablets+and+tech%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzzp%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F548d72fb18af6d40ea8e55c367c2498f77ce2b32%2F507_146_1142_1142%2F1142.jpg>
 Teacher José Picardo from Surrey believes that children need computers in 
school. Photograph: None 
A Cambridge University study <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-34139196> 
found that spending an extra hour a day of TV, internet or gaming time in year 
10 saw a fall in GCSE results equivalent to two grades overall. Its co-author, 
Esther van Sluijs, says reducing screen time could have important benefits and 
adds that “limiting the amount of time spent in front of screens and 
introducing children to a variety of activities is likely to have the most 
beneficial long-term impacts on a child’s health”.

Andreas Schleicher 
<http://www.smh.com.au/national/education/the-reality-is-that-technology-is-doing-more-harm-than-good-in-our-schools-says-education-chief-20160330-gnu370.html>
, head of education at the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development (OECD), said recently: “The reality is that technology is doing 
more harm than good in our schools today.” Areport by the OECD in 2015 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-34174796> found that countries that had 
invested heavily in technology had shown no signs of improvement in reading, 
maths or science.

Despite the evidence from such studies there is still, according to Moore, “an 
anxiety that children aren’t going to be ready to fit into the economy because 
they don’t do computers at the age of four – whereas if you give them a healthy 
education and childhood, they can catch up very easily”.

Steiner schools attract parents and teachers who tend to share similar 
thoughts on screen time and who try to ensure their students are better able to 
resist the lure of technology. Sean Cummins, who has had three children at the 
Iona school, says for him the appeal of a Steiner education was that it showed 
you “could structure a child’s education in a way different from just preparing 
them for an employer’s requirements when they were 18”.

Asma Al-Deraa has a seven-year-old son at the Iona school and a 10-year-old 
daughter in mainstream state education. “My daughter is being taught inside the 
box with lots of testing,” she says. “But with my son – he is more creative and 
trying to dig for the things that are beyond.” When her daughter returns from 
school she will reach for the iPad, but her son “is not asking for that or the 
PlayStation – he just wants to draw and play”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzzp%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzzp%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F617a5e0607f7aaf3a4b11d79bcf32ffffea5b53e%2F0_163_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Could%20Steiner%20schools%20have%20a%20point%20on%20children%2C%20tablets%20and%20tech%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzzp%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Could+Steiner+schools+have+a+point+on+children%2C+tablets+and+tech%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzzp%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F617a5e0607f7aaf3a4b11d79bcf32ffffea5b53e%2F0_163_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
 Crafts replace screen time at Iona school. 
Even some who support the use of computers in the classroom share the concern 
about the negative impact of technology. “The role of technology at home is 
potentially damaging children’s communication skills with their parents who are 
using it as an electronic babysitter,” says Andrews. “More and more children 
are coming into primary school with their spoken language as an issue so we are 
using technology in the classroom to record their language as a way of getting 
them talking to their parents.”

However, teacher José Picardo argues that the aversion to technology in 
Steiner schools is rooted in a “pseudo-intellectualism which believes the 
things we are familiar with are better than the things our children are 
familiar with”. Picardo teaches at Surbiton High School in Surrey, where every 
pupil from the age of seven or eight is given a tablet. “I think my children 
are going to end up being better prepared for the world in which they live,” he 
says, because his school does not subscribe to the idea that “playing with 
something physical is better and therefore children shouldn’t be allowed 
technology”.

In Kirsty Thompson’s classroom at the Iona school, the children don’t even 
have any ready-made toys in the room. They have to use their imagination to 
make what they want. Here boys and girls are playing together, rather than 
self-segregating, to make towers from wooden blocks and to play dressing up 
with cotton and woollen sheets.

Thompson, who joined the Iona last September, says for her the school offers a 
daily affirmation of why she wanted to be a teacher. “In the state schools I 
worked in, the focus was primarily on number crunching,” she says. “I was sat 
in meetings and it was all about statistics. Here we talk about the children 
as people.”
