
It’s at once evocative, delicious and reassuring: the taste of my mother’s 
homemade Iraqi pastries. Folded circles of aromatic, buttery dough that are 
popular across the Middle East, these bite-sized treats can be stuffed with 
dates or with crushed sugary nuts; there are fried savoury versions filled with 
spiced chickpeas or meats. But my favourite was always the cheese variety – 
served hot out of the oven, so that the filling is wonderfully gooey, the 
pastry still soft and fragrant, a small piece of Iraq giving comfort and 
sustenance throughout my childhood and beyond.

Now aged 82 and dealing with some of the physical hindrances of later age, my 
Iraq-born mother, Maureen, recently told me that she could no longer bake the 
pastries – rolling and shaping them was too unwieldy. She has been making 
sambusak, along with various other Middle Eastern pastries, for some six 
decades, and so this information marked another closing, another limitation, 
another tear at one of many small things that all together make up a person, a 
personality, a life.

It later occurred to me that bound up in my mother’s statement was another 
one: that the family responsibility for pastries was being passed on to me, the 
only one of her three children with an abiding interest in making (as opposed 
to just eating) these fiddly, labour-intensive snacks.

In truth, our shared interest in food more generally, and these pastries in 
particular, is a welcome pathway between my mother and me, something that 
narrows what might otherwise be a yawning gap. She grew up in Kirkuk, in 
northern Iraq, left for Israel in 1951, just after that nation’s creation, and 
then moved again to the UK, where I was raised in the 1970s.

All the differences contained in our divergent life experiences have at many 
times felt unbridgeable, in that way that is so often the case for migrant kids 
who end up as “third culture” children: not culturally like their parents, nor 
like the country in which they now reside, but some new amalgam in between.

Iraqi pastries are not the only subject to connect my mother and me, but there 
is something about the immediacy of this bond that is surprising in its warmth 
and durability. Perhaps that’s why we both like to dwell there – how else to 
explain our capacity to talk endlessly, between us, on this same subject? We 
might focus a particular discussion on the Iraqi sambusak, discussing 
variations on the recipe or running through which carefully tested combination 
of the cheeses available in the UK are the best approximation of the ones used 
in Iraq. Then there’s the matter of the hawayij spice mix that goes into the 
pastry, shop-bought in Iraq and in Israel (with its large population of Iraqi 
Jews), but mixed at home ever since. It’s a combination of ground fennel seeds, 
fenugreek, mastic and mahlab – a fragrant spice obtained from the ground stone 
of the St Lucie cherry tree, cultivated for this purpose, and often used in 
Middle Eastern baking.
 Rachel and her mother Maureen, in 1973. 
Sometimes my mum and I roam into other treasured recipes that have passed from 
her kitchen to my own: baklava, malfouf – puff pastry fingers stuffed with 
almonds – or baba b’tamar – date-filled pastries round garnished with sesame 
seeds. On other occasions, we might ponder the variations of Iraqi kleicha, 
dough biscuits often filled or rolled with a sweet date paste.

I’m very much a novice and so often check in on the particulars of any given 
recipe with my mother who, to my delight, seems happy to tap into her vast 
hinterland of pastry experience and offer advice. My pastry shortcomings, 
described over the phone or when I visit her, are met with thorough 
investigations to provide possible remedies: what kind of flour are you using? 
What type of oil? Are you kneading for long enough? Once these essential 
components are taken care of, she might then review the pastry aesthetics: how 
am I turning the edges? Am I folding them over twice, to create a piped edge?

When I speak to Middle East food expert and writer Anissa Helou 
<http://www.anissas.com/> about these sweets and pastries, she explains why the 
experience goes beyond the culinary: “It’s very much a part of the hospitality 
and a part of the culture,” she says. “It’s about bringing people together to 
celebrate or to commemorate. They take a lot of effort and carry a lot of 
memories. If your mother left Iraq during the days when she made sambusak, she 
will have all those memories bound up with the pastries.”

That is true, she does: my mum can easily recollect, for instance, making 
mounds of date, cheese, walnut or almond-filled sambusak as a teenager in 
Kirkuk, for the Jewish festival of Purim, when those pastries are traditionally 
served. She recalls a lull in pastry activity, when she first moved to Israel, 
aged 17, into the transit camps that awaited so many of the different Jewish 
communities arriving from across the Middle East during the early 1950s. And 
she recalls another pause in the pastries in the UK, during a period when work 
opportunities moved our family to the south-west of England, where some of the 
ingredients used to flavour the dough were impossible to source.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j988%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j988%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0349c100644819a1b1108fcdf30fa5e76c2bd23%2F936_0_3744_3744%2F3744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pastry%20parcels%20of%20love%20and%20heritage&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j988%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pastry+parcels+of+love+and+heritage&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j988%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0349c100644819a1b1108fcdf30fa5e76c2bd23%2F936_0_3744_3744%2F3744.jpg>
 A plate of sambusak made by Rachel. Photograph: Alicia Canter for the Guardian 
Often, in the midst of one of our discussions about a particular type of 
Middle Eastern baking, it seems clear to me that something more than just the 
food is being passed between us, along with the pastries.Claudia Roden 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/mar/18/claudia-roden-spanish-food-interview>
, a cookbook writer and cultural anthropologist, prefaces her recipe for 
sambusak in A New Book of Middle Eastern Food with a poem celebrating the 
pastries by Ishaq ibn Ibrahim of Mosul, which, she notes, was recited at a 
10th-century banquet held by the Caliph Mustakfi of Baghdad.

Researching her books and asking people for family recipes, Roden says she 
found that people were making particular foods as a way of remembering parents 
or grandparents. “In some cases they were making extraordinarily 
labour-intensive things,” she says. “But they enjoyed making and eating those 
dishes because they meant so much.”

As cuisine is a carrier for identity, family, heritage and culture, Roden says 
that migrants often cling to recipes and dishes. “For people who are immigrants 
or who are wandering, it is about continuity, a way of keeping something of who 
you are, wherever you are.”

So for my mother, the diminishing capacity to make these pastries – a constant 
pursuit for her during many moves, through a string of homes and across several 
countries – may be tinged with a particular loss, a break in the chain that she 
resourcefully managed to maintain throughout.

Mine don’t taste as delicious as hers – how could they? – but perhaps these 
days, when I take my own home-baked Iraqi pastries to my mother, they might 
provide her with the reassurance and comfort with which her sambusak nourished 
me over so many years.
