
How does an idea banished to the tundra of irrelevance make its way back to 
the mainstream? First, a moment of recognition – and ignition – is required. 
Someone must dare to make the initial leap, to retrieve the frozen thesis from 
its glacial prison.

In the case of Brexit, it was Norman Lamont, the former chancellor of the 
exchequer, who dragged the idea back from the snowy wastes. Since the1975 
referendum on Common Market 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/25/britains-1975-europe-referendum-what-was-it-like-last-time>
 membership – in which British voters opted to stay in by 67% to 33% – the 
notion that Britain might be better off outside the European Community had lost 
traction, apart from on the political fringes. Yes, withdrawal remained 
official Labour policy for much of the 1980s; but this was one of many reasons 
why the party was still unelectable.

So Lamont’s decision to grant the idea mainstream credibility was a 
significant moment – more so even than it seemed at the time. Most of the 
memoirs and histories cite his speech at a fringe meeting at the 1994 
Conservative conference in Bournemouth, in which he railed against the tide of 
EU integration: “One day it may mean contemplating withdrawal. It has recently 
been said that the option of leaving the Community was ‘unthinkable’. I believe 
this attitude is rather simplistic.”

For a senior politician, recently sacked as chancellor, to make such a 
statement was an occasion of high drama. But it was not the first time that 
Lamont had road-tested the idea. I was present earlier that year at a private 
meeting of the Conservative Philosophy Group, at which Lamont had urged his 
audience – fellow politicians, academics, journalists – to bring Brexit (as it 
was not yet known) down from the naughty step of political discourse and 
restore it to the range of serious possibilities available to governments.

The meetings of the group, in Jonathan Aitken’s house in Lord North Street in 
Westminster, were invariably interesting: a reflection of the shared belief 
that Conservatism amounted to more than the electoral face of self-interest and 
that Conservative ideas, seriously under-represented in British universities, 
drew upon a rich and vibrant intellectual tradition. (I remember Sir James 
Goldsmith, the billionaire founder of the Referendum party, bringing along his 
young son Zac to hear the debates.) But the night of Lamont’s speech – the gist 
of which had been leaked to the media – was the only gathering that attracted 
television crews and photographers, who waited on the pavement for reaction. 
The atmosphere within crackled with excitement, Lamont’s features twitching 
like a mischievous badger.

This was the twilight of the John Major era, the long goodbye to a generation 
of Tory government. Then, as now, Europe was dividing the Conservative party 
and a terrible reckoning lay ahead in the 1997 election. In practice,Black 
Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/sep/13/black-wednesday-20-years-pound-erm>
 in 1992 (the day when the pound fell out of the European Exchange Rate 
Mechanism) and the election of Tony Blair to the Labour leadership in 1994 had 
already done for the Tories. But they still had little collective sense of the 
electoral calamity in store.

By the time his party returned to office in 2010, Lamont’s former special 
adviser David Cameron had been its leader for more than four years. In the 
interests of electability, he had urged his fellowConservatives 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> to stop “banging on” about 
Europe – a plea that they had respected, up to a point. But only up to a point. 
Thanks originally to Lamont – Cameron’s former mentor – the possibility that 
Britain might leave the EU was now emphatically back in play. It was only a 
matter of time before it would rock his government to its very foundations.

It has taken 22 years for this simple idea – that we should withdraw from the 
EU – to grow to its present scale: we areeight days from a vote 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/13/eu-referendum-leave-campaign-takes-six-point-lead-in-guardianicm-polls>
 that could make real what Lamont made thinkable. The leave campaign has 
focused to a depressing extent uponimmigration 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/14/immigration-could-overwhelm-britain-says-pro-brexit-minister-andrea-leadsom>
. But the case for departure has deeper intellectual roots that cannot be 
dismissed as mere nostalgia, xenophobia or reactionary reflex.

The idea of Brexit has become part of the warp and weft of contemporary 
politics. The question, surprisingly unexplored, is: how?

Long before it was so, Tony Blair believed that the true intention of the Tory 
Eurosceptics, whatever they claimed to the contrary, was always to get out of 
Europe. Though most of them insisted that their ambitions were confined to 
“renegotiation” of Britain’s membership terms or the partial “repatriation” of 
UK sovereignty, Blair was sure that this was a ruse: the Tories’ true objective 
was to liberate the nation from the EU’s clammy grip.

When Blair took office in 1997, this was definitely not yet the case. His own 
enthusiasm for the EU, and impatience with whatever “forces of conservatism” 
stood in his way, clouded his judgment. In practice, his management of the 
“European question” was a petri dish that created the environment for hostility 
to the EU to flourish among Tories. By the time he left office in 2007, a great 
many Conservatives had concluded that the European project was irredeemable and 
that exit was the only sensible option.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y44y%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y44y%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9d27e6daa2d7668988d0a6b49920729031a4a01%2F0_145_1326_1859%2F1326.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%3A%20how%20a%20fringe%20idea%20took%20hold%20of%20the%20Tory%20party%20%7C%20Matthew%20d%E2%80%99Ancona&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y44y%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brexit%3A+how+a+fringe+idea+took+hold+of+the+Tory+party+%7C+Matthew+d%E2%80%99Ancona&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y44y%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9d27e6daa2d7668988d0a6b49920729031a4a01%2F0_145_1326_1859%2F1326.jpg>
 Chancellor of the exchequer Norman Lamont arriving at the Treasury on Black 
Wednesday. Photograph: Adam Butler/PA Archive/PA Photos 
It is easy to forget that Blair’s unambiguous intention when he became prime 
minister was to take Britain into the very heart of the EU, not least by 
joining the single currency. In 2002, he told the Labour conference: “The euro 
is not just about our economy, but our destiny.”

Gordon Brown, of course, did not share this dream, and successfully thwarted 
Blair’s ambition to take Britain into the single currency. Where Blair saw 
poetry in the European project, Brown saw only prose. But, for a decade, the 
occupant of No 10 was a fervently committed EU-phile. This was bound to have 
dramatic consequences for the politics of the opposition and the emerging shape 
of conservatism in the early 21st century. The more passionate he became about 
Britain’s role in the EU, the more convinced Eurosceptics became that the 
process of integration was spinning out of control and must be halted – by 
exit, if necessary.

A cohort of young Conservatives began to argue, with an intellectual coherence 
that could not be ignored, that Britain would be better off outside the EU. The 
two most prominent representatives of this tendency within the Tory movement 
were Daniel Hannan, an MEP since 1999, and Douglas Carswell, who has been an MP 
for Harwich and then Clacton since 2005. Carswell became Ukip’s first member of 
parliament in 2014, after his defection from the Conservatives forced a 
byelection in his constituency.

Rather than objecting to the EU on reactionary grounds, Hannan and Carswell 
argued that it was not modern enough. In the 21st century, as technology 
tranformed the way we live, they asserted that voters would demand devolution 
and decentralisation, accountability and transparency. Against this political 
and cultural backdrop, the EU was hopelessly out of date.

This was the beginning of the Vote Leave movement (both Hannan and Carswell 
now sit on its campaign committee). What is under-appreciated is the extent to 
which it was a response to the Blair years, an intellectual counter-revolution.

Much of its energy was generated by Blair’s conspicuous refusal to consult the 
electorate on the ratification of EU agreements. The treaties of Amsterdam 
(1997) and of Nice (2001) were significant steps along the integrationist path, 
but did not trigger plebiscites in this country. By the time the EU 
constitutional treaty was signed in Rome in 2004, the pressure for a referendum 
was immense – and not confined to the Tory benches. Here, after all, was an 
international pact that dramatically changed the rules on qualified majority 
voting (as opposed to the system where a single nation could veto a proposal), 
gave legal force to the EU’s charter of fundamental rights and extended the 
EU’s power into areas such as energy and space policy.

At first, Blair resisted the idea of a referendum, but in April 2004, he 
dramatically changed his mind. “It is time to decide whether our destiny lies 
as a leading partner and ally in Europe or on its margins,” he said. “Let the 
issue be put and let the battle be joined.” Blair believed that he could take 
on the Eurosceptics and secure Britain’s position in Europe once and for all. 
Alas for him, the plan was scuppered by referendums in France and the 
Netherlands, both of which rejected the treaty and sent the EU’s draftsmen 
scurrying back to their drawing boards.

By the end of his premiership, Blair, one of his closest allies told me at the 
time, felt a true “sense of loss” over Europe, close to a bereavement. I recall 
attending a speech he gave at St Antony’s College, Oxford, in 2006 as part of 
his unofficial extended farewell tour. By now, there was no talk of “destiny”; 
only an admission that the political class had “locked [itself] in a room at 
the top of the tower”, fretting over rules when it should have been busily 
winning hearts and minds.

That speech, a decade ago, was an elegy to a dream. It was part-cheerful, 
part-rueful, Blair’s way of saying adieu to his European vision. What he did 
not sense was that the subterranean forces unleashed during his long 
premiership would coalesce in the next decade and bring Britain to the brink of 
leaving the EU.

Each of the parliamentary Brexiteers has his or her own story. Sometimes, it 
involves a slow, incremental disenchantment. In other cases, the moment of 
rejection was clear and identifiable. In spite of his long association with the 
case for withdrawal, Douglas Carswell falls into the latter category.

“I remember quite vividly,” he told me earlier this year. “For me it was the 
failure of Blair. I was at the time working for a pan-European fund-management 
group. Everyone around me said that the euro was a good thing, the Lisbon 
agenda [devised in 2000 for economic reform of the EU] looked like it was 
really going to finally change Europe, and make it flexible. They talked about 
it being the most dynamic part of the world economy by 2010. Blair had so much 
political capital, not just domestically but internationally.” His inability to 
translate that cachet into hard reform tipped Carswell into a firm commitment 
to Brexit.

Theresa Villiers, the Northern Ireland secretary, described a more gradual 
process of disillusionment. “When I was selected as a candidate for European 
elections back in 1998, I was certainly sceptical about the European project. 
But at that stage I wouldn’t have thought seriously about leaving the EU – it 
just didn’t seem to be on the agenda. My thinking was: we just have to make the 
situation work, get the reforms we need, and try to push the EU in the 
direction which focused on trade and business, and away from grand political 
projects.”

Experience of the European parliament and commission gradually convinced 
Villiers that the EU’s institutions and culture were beyond repair. “Whatever 
the question, whatever the problem, whatever the crisis, the answer was more 
Europe, more EU, more political integration,” she recalled. “For decades we’ve 
had people in the Foreign Office saying Europe is coming our way, we’ve changed 
its direction, we’ve got opt-outs. And it just became abundantly clear to me 
that we were never going to win that argument in Europe.”

Slowly, steadily – mostly as individuals rather than as groups or factions – 
Tory MPs were drawing the same conclusions, deciding that the EU was beyond 
redemption. Ken Clarke, the former chancellor, and Michael Heseltine, remained 
stubborn evangelists for the EU ideal. But they had not persuaded a younger 
phalanx of Tories to follow their path. Conservative opinion reflected a 
spectrum of opinion from diffident Euroscepticism to full-throated champions of 
Brexit.

When he became Tory leader in December 2005, David Cameron perceived the issue 
as entirely managerial. The eurozone crisis had ended any prospect of Britain 
joining the single currency, so it was not hard for him to assert that sterling 
was safe as long as he was in charge.

Among senior Tories the overriding fear, however, was more prosaic: namely 
that the next Conservative prime minister would face the same problems as John 
Major, beholden in the Commons to a group of hardline Eurosceptics who 
exploited the parliamentary arithmetic to push the prime minister further than 
he wanted to go on European matters or in other areas of policy. Daniel 
Finkelstein – then an adviser to William Hague, now a Times columnist and life 
peer – used to joke that the Tory Eurosceptics “wouldn’t take ‘Yes’ for an 
answer.”

Cameron certainly didn’t want his premiership to be hobbled in that way. He 
also didn’t want to entrench voters’ fears that Tories were idiosyncratic, 
sectarian, and fixated by oddball priorities rather than those of the 
electorate. When Cameron told his party to stop “banging on about Europe” in 
2006, he was issuing a warning about discipline and collective priority rather 
than unveiling a policy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y44y%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y44y%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7cf3856cfa5640a77f4620d6bf8446edc6c213ac%2F0_218_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%3A%20how%20a%20fringe%20idea%20took%20hold%20of%20the%20Tory%20party%20%7C%20Matthew%20d%E2%80%99Ancona&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y44y%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brexit%3A+how+a+fringe+idea+took+hold+of+the+Tory+party+%7C+Matthew+d%E2%80%99Ancona&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y44y%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7cf3856cfa5640a77f4620d6bf8446edc6c213ac%2F0_218_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Douglas Carswell, the UKip MP for Clacton and leading Brexit campaigner. 
Photograph: Richard Saker for the Observer 
In this respect, the hung parliament delivered by the 2010 general election 
spared him the fate that Major had suffered. As a governing partnership with 
the Liberal Democrats became a realistic prospect, Cameron was heard to remark 
that coalition with Nick Clegg was probably preferable to being in “coalition 
with Bill Cash”, the passionately sceptical MP for Stone, Staffordshire, and 
chair of the Commons European scrutiny committee.

As the Cameron-Clegg government found its bearings, the number of Brexiteers 
on the Tory benches was not immediately apparent. The new PM had already kept 
his promise to withdraw his party from the centre-right grouping in the 
European parliament, the European People’s party. In June 2009, Hague, back in 
the frontline as one of Cameron’s closest lieutenants, had announced the 
formation of the European Conservatives and Reformists (ECR), an explicitly 
“anti-federalist” bloc initially composed of 55 MEPs.

Naturally, this was welcomed by sceptical Tories. But it did not really 
compensate for a much greater grievance – specifically, the failure to hold a 
referendum on the treaty of Lisbon. This pact, signed in 2007, was essentially 
a reheated version of the constitutional treaty, presented with less pageantry 
and pomp. You did not have to be a Euro-anorak to spot that any country that 
had promised a referendum on the constitutional treaty should offer one now. 
Yet, as prime minister, Gordon Brown decided not to make such an offer.

In September 2007, Cameron had written an article for the Sun, offering the 
punters “this cast-iron guarantee: if I become PM a Conservative government 
will hold a referendum on any EU treaty that emerges from these negotiations.”

In November 2009, it became clear that the treaty of Lisbon was going to be 
ratified by all 27 member states, entering EU law, and Cameron concluded that 
his pledge was no longer binding. For a while, Hague had offered a new promise 
– still opaque – that he and Cameron would not “let matters rest there” if the 
treaty was thus ratified.

The strategy was both ambitious and perilous. First, there would be a 
referendum lock on significant transfers of sovereignty to Brussels in the 
future – an objective achieved in theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> Act 2011. Second, there would be an 
audit of the balance of power between Britain and the EU. Third, on the basis 
of that audit, the prime minister would renegotiate Britain’s terms of 
membership. And, fourth, there would be an in-out referendum on the deal he had 
struck in Brussels.

Immense thought and energy were expended upon this plan, which was announced 
in its entirety in January 2013 at Bloomberg’s London HQ. As the leave cause 
has improved its position in the polls, I have been struck by the number of 
people who now claim – or let it be known that they claim – that they tried to 
talk the prime minister out of embarking upon this rocky and potentially 
self-destructive path.

As so often, George Osborne was the person in the room who articulated the 
truth, palatable or not. “The referendum genie is out of the bottle,” he said 
in private around the time of the Bloomberg speech. What he meant was that the 
cycle of agitation for such a vote, followed by the government of the day’s 
refusal to oblige, could not go on indefinitely.

Nor could Cameron afford to be seen as untrustworthy – by the voters, or by 
his backbenchers, many of whom were antagonistic towards the coalition. The 
unapologetic Europhilia of Nick Clegg nurtured the Euroscepticism of the 
average Tory MP. So what if Lisbon was already written into EU law? Couldn’t 
its content be removed if the British people were given their say and rejected 
the treaty? And why was Clegg allowed a nationwide referendum in 2011 on the 
marginal issue of the alternative vote, while Tories were denied a vote on a 
sweeping EU deal?

If the Blair years had spawned an intellectual counter-revolution, the 
coalition helped it spread. In October 2011, a motion submitted by David 
Nuttall, the Tory MP for Bury North, came before the Commons, thanks to a new 
system that granted parliamentary time to online petitions that had secured 
more than 100,000 signatures and then been chosen by the backbench business 
committee. The Nuttall motion called for a referendum on Britain’s membership 
of the EU.

What followed was a hint of the disciplinary breakdown that has engulfed the 
Conservative party at every level during the current campaign. The motion was 
not binding and might have been an opportunity to allow backbenchers, 
frustrated by the constraints of coalition, to let off steam in a free vote. 
Instead, Cameron imposed a three-line whip. The mayhem that followed did the 
prime minister and his EU strategy no favours at all, and revealed that, where 
Europe was concerned, MPs’ loyalties were very unclear.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y44y%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y44y%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37c6c9480e11b842a458928080ce24a7ace4f830%2F0_173_3582_2150%2F3582.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%3A%20how%20a%20fringe%20idea%20took%20hold%20of%20the%20Tory%20party%20%7C%20Matthew%20d%E2%80%99Ancona&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y44y%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brexit%3A+how+a+fringe+idea+took+hold+of+the+Tory+party+%7C+Matthew+d%E2%80%99Ancona&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y44y%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37c6c9480e11b842a458928080ce24a7ace4f830%2F0_173_3582_2150%2F3582.jpg>
 Leading Brexiteers Iain Duncan Smith and Theresa Villiers. Photograph: Reuters 
It was at this point, for instance, that George Eustice, formerly Cameron’s 
press secretary, emerged as leader of the Fresh Start group of Eurosceptic MPs. 
These Tories were mostly young and, in almost every respect, faithful to 
Cameron’s cause. But they took a different view of the EU and Britain’s role in 
it. Behind the scenes, Steve Hilton, one of Cameron’s closest advisers and 
friends, had concluded that Britain needed to get out of the EU as soon as 
possible, lest our spirit of enterprise and creativity be strangled by red tape.

At this stage, Cameron remained confident that his renegotiation of Britain’s 
membership would bring around such allies. In this respect, he gravely 
underestimated the commitment to Brexit that was spreading in his tribe. On the 
lookout for political mischief, Cameron was paying insufficient attention to 
the genuine dilemmas facing those who wanted to be loyal to him.

The intellectual ancestry of leave has much more intellectually coherent roots 
than Farage’s pound-shop Anglo-Trumpery

In recent months, we have grown used to speculation about what will happen to 
Cameron if he loses. A favourite parlour game in the Westminster village right 
now is to name Boris Johnson’s first cabinet, and to ponder which role Michael 
Gove might occupy. But the experience of those Brexiteer Tories who have no 
ulterior political motive, such as Villiers and Hilton, is more compelling than 
of those who are using the campaign as a lever to displace Cameron. Villiers 
manifestly abhors the reduction of government to light entertainment and hates 
opposing her boss. Yet she and thousands of Tories like her believe that they 
cannot support their prime minister when he needs them most.

In a party that still notionally venerates loyalty and takes seriously the 
claim of the incumbent leader to his or her party’s support, the pursuit of an 
outcome that may destroy a premiership is a huge deal. How have they reached 
this point?

If leave wins on 23 June, it will be a victory for Nigel Farage. As the 
referendum has approached, the closing argument of the Brexiteers has been 
shockingly focused upon the supposed ill effects of immigration, and the 
misleading argument that leaving the EU will resolve those problems at a 
stroke. That is the high-carb political junk food on which the leavers have 
been feeding the nation. It is the old Ukip trick – xenophobia disguised as 
constitutionalism – and at the time of writing, it is gaining ground.

Yet the intellectual ancestry of the leave cause has much more interesting and 
coherent roots than Farage’s pound-shop Anglo-Trumpery. The argument of the 
more thoughtful Brexiteers is that postwar, post-Thatcher Britain has reached a 
point of economic strength, cultural maturity and confidence that enables it to 
be weaned from the unreformable EU.

“We are very keen to put a positive case,” Villiers told me. “In many ways 
joining the EU in the 70s was an admission of defeat based on the assumption 
that we were destined in this country for perennial decline. Now you look at 
our economic performance compared to Europe and we are performing much better 
than the bulk of eurozone countries.”

Carswell goes further: “I’d say Euroscepticism is a product of modernity. It’s 
a rational response to a changing world and it’s born of hope that actually 
things can be better. So if the vote goes leave’s way on the 23rd we’ll look 
back on the period between 1973 [the year the UK joined the EU] and 2016 as a 
sort of exceptional period.”

The irrepressibly optimistic MP for Clacton sees the yearning to leave the EU 
not as a foetal cringe by old-fashioned voters but precisely the opposite. “It 
is absolutelynot English exceptionalism, this is not John Bull nationalism. On 
the contrary, I would say that modernity makes those ideas look more ridiculous 
than ever … The European project is based on the idea, ‘Restrict your freedoms 
and your liberties and your sovereignties and leave it to us, we’ll manage.’”

Why has the idea of Brexit suddenly gathered pace? Farage would probably 
attribute the success of his party and its central argument to “mass 
immigration”, as if the EU were the sole agency that determines this most 
complex of policy questions. Carswell – notionally in the same party as Farage, 
though you would never know it – suggests that a convergence of forces has 
suddenly conspired to make leaving the EU seem, to many, like the best course 
of action.

This is how radical change happens, according to Carswell. “I remember working 
on an archaeological dig in Europe in the late 80s, and a German woman my age 
telling me that East Germany would never be free. Within five years, it was. I 
remember growing up in Uganda [where his parents were doctors] and people 
telling me that apartheid would take at least 30 years to crumble – it was gone 
within a decade. When something very significant happens – which Brexit will be 
– the forces animating change conspire very fast.”

As he makes his case that Britain could do better if it were free, the 
unexpected exhibit is the 2012 Olympic Games. “I was slightly curmudgeonly [at 
the start],” he told me. “I’d just been elected as an MP when we put in the bid 
for the Olympic Games and like lots of people I thought, ‘Oh gosh, it’s going 
to make London crowded and it’s a lot of money’. And then it started and I 
thought, how wrong I was – wow, we can celebrate what a great country we are. 
It really lifted and I think that’s the atmosphere and the vibe that will come 
out of 23 June.”

For those engaged in the struggle to free Britain from the EU, this is more 
than another campaign. If they lose on 23 June, the battle will go on, in 
guerrilla form and in referendums on specific EU treaties.

When I visited Matthew Elliott, the CEO of Vote Leave, he was planning Take 
Control Day for 12 March. There was a time when Eurosceptics agonised about 
“sovereignty”, sounding like the jurists and lawyers that many of them were. 
Their objective was the “repatriation of powers” – a menacing phrase that meant 
little to voters. The new generation of Brexiteers has settled upon the 
friendlier notion of “control” – a word that deftly links the geopolitical with 
the personal.

As much as anyone, Elliott, who is 38, has been the figure giving the case for 
departure organisational and intellectual coherence. His partner in crime is 
the brilliantly contentiousDominic Cummings 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/oct/11/dominic-cummings-genius-menace-michael-gove>
, a former special adviser to Michael Gove. Elliott’s job has been to maintain 
discipline on the leave side, and to ensure that the campaign nurtures 
optimism, not anxiety – though the politicians fighting the battle on the 
frontline have not always obeyed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y44y%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y44y%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8daf7035477f831758a5c5be9d693a063b139fa%2F0_24_3963_2624%2F3963.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%3A%20how%20a%20fringe%20idea%20took%20hold%20of%20the%20Tory%20party%20%7C%20Matthew%20d%E2%80%99Ancona&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y44y%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brexit%3A+how+a+fringe+idea+took+hold+of+the+Tory+party+%7C+Matthew+d%E2%80%99Ancona&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y44y%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8daf7035477f831758a5c5be9d693a063b139fa%2F0_24_3963_2624%2F3963.jpg>
 Matthew Elliott, the head of Vote Leave Photograph: Peter Nicholls / 
Reuters/Reuters 
The HQ of Vote Leave, where, at this point, 35 of its 55 staff were based, is 
in a modern building on Albert Embankment. Bespectacled, rangy and calm, 
Elliott comes across as the very opposite of a flame-eyed ideologue – more as a 
prosperous investment banker who has not let his mews house in Chelsea go to 
his head. In fact, he is one of the most experienced – and successful – 
single-issue campaigners in the UK. It was largely Elliott’s strategising that 
secured such a decisive victory for the campaign to reject the adoption of the 
alternative vote system in 2011 – only the second nationwide referendum to be 
held in the UK. His specific insight was to grasp early in that campaign that 
Labour voters would decide the result, which proved to be the case, Since then, 
he has been intermittently preparing for the third such plebiscite.

The establishment of the group Business for Britain – a coalition of sceptic 
businessmen founded in April 2013 – reflected an early recognition by the 
Brexiteers that they had to be in a position to deny from the start remain’s 
inevitable claim that business was foursquare behind continued membership of 
the EU. Without Business for Britain, said Elliott, “we’d be in a situation 
where people would still be saying that business is basically united behind 
remain and we’d [only] be able to get out a few business folk. The media story 
would be ‘Businesses for remain.’”

It was equally important that the leave campaign not resemble a committee of 
the fringe. Its claims needed to sound like common sense, not the fist-waving 
slogans of peripheral ideologues. In 1975, the out campaign attracted figures 
who were regarded as extreme: Enoch Powell, Tony Benn, the leaders of the 
National Front. “We’ve managed to set up a platform which has attracted some 
serious people,” said Elliott. “Had it not been for Michael [Gove] and Boris 
[Johnson] you might have expected, for argument’s sake, 50 to 70 Tory MPs to be 
on the leave side.” According to the BBC website, at the time of writing 150 
MPs had declared in favour of the leave campaign.

Related: Brexit will hurt your city, Labour tells core voters – but no one's 
listening 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/14/brexit-will-hurt-your-city-labour-tells-core-voters-but-no-ones-listening>

To stand a chance of winning, Vote Leave has had to transform – or at least 
try to transform – the way in which Brexiteers are perceived by the public. The 
campaign cannot look like a heritage organisation, preserving an endangered 
version of Britain from extinction or vandalism. It must reverse the usual 
polarities of this debate, making the remain camp look old-fashioned and 
sentimentally attached to an idea of Britain’s place in the world that is 
hopelessly out of date and quite unsuited to the 21st century.

Like Carswell, Elliott believes that Britain’s role in the EU could have been 
salvaged had Brussels itself recognised how it is being changed by the 
headwinds of history. “I think naturally the EU is breaking up into being the 
more centralised eurozone versus the non-eurozone member states. So to have 
non-eurozone member states with a looser trade-based relationship was feasible 
– and is actually where I think the EU is generally going.” But instead of 
pushing for a genuinely two-tier Europe, says Elliott, Cameron accepted crumbs 
from the Brussels table and called it a “special status”. This transaction 
dramatised the leave message at the perfect moment, argues Elliott. It made the 
voters wonder what they were getting for their £350m a week (or £136m as the 
Guardian’s referendum reality check calculated).

Related: Why Vote Leave's £350m weekly EU cost claim is wrong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/reality-check/2016/may/23/does-the-eu-really-cost-the-uk-350m-a-week>

It is striking that Elliott does not deploy the familiar argument that we were 
duped or misled in 1975. His argument is more sophisticated, and concedes 
something to the other side. Back in the 1970s, when Britain was weakened by 
industrial decline, inflation and union strife, it needed the protection of the 
EEC and membership of the club. According to this view, the electorate was 
right to vote for “in”, and decisively so. But, 41 years later, different 
conditions prevail, and Britain no longer requires the crutch of this costly 
alliance. If there is such as thing as the spirit of the age, it is at odds 
with the idea that unelected bureaucrats in Brussels and judges in Luxembourg 
have aggregated so much power over our lives. The EU was founded in an age when 
the idea of taking power from elected demagogues and fiery orators and giving 
it to dull bureaucrats had much obvious appeal. But now, in 2016, the children 
and grandchildren of the generation that fought in the second world war expect 
accountability, transparency and the ability to sack those in government who 
let them down.

On the day that I saw Elliott, the papers were full of allegations – later 
convincingly denied 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/01/pro-brexit-ministers-will-have-access-to-papers-says-cabinet-secretary>
 – that Sir Jeremy Heywood, the cabinet secretary, has been denying key papers 
to senior ministers who support Brexit. Elliott was in no doubt: “If this turns 
into a referendum between the establishment and the people, we will win. By 
miles.”

In the history of ideas, context is all. In the last days of this contest, the 
leave campaign is concentrating remorselessly upon immigration – its prime 
doorstep issue. But there is a broader setting, too: the embrace of Brexit by a 
significant tranche of the political class reflects despair with the EU, 
matched, more interestingly, by a faith in Britain’s ability to go it alone and 
a conviction that the 21st century will favour nimble states over cumbersome 
bureaucratic blocs.

Those who seek such a role for this country no longer define Britain’s place 
in the world by its presence at all its top tables, from the UN security 
council to the G8 to the EU itself. They envisage the millennial UK as 
something closer to a buccaneering galleon, unrestrained and versatile. 
Whatever else may be said about this declaration of independence, it has little 
in common with the calls for parliamentary sovereignty to be restored that 
defined the case for withdrawal in 1975. Even if leave loses on 23 June, the 
aspiration it reflects will survive, and live to fight another day.

Even in his most grandiose moments, I doubt that Norman Lamont can ever have 
imagined that the idea he pulled out of the deep freeze would flourish as it 
has. In his memoirs, the former chancellor recalls how he was shunned at the 
1994 conference after his speech questioning Britain’s membership of the EU – 
and by whom. “The next person I saw,” he writes, “was David Cameron, my former 
special adviser at the Treasury, who cut me dead.”

Revenge takes many forms.

• Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread, or sign up to the long read 
weekly emailhere 
<http://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/jul/20/sign-up-to-the-long-read-email>
