
Reader, the very fact that you are asking me how to get a table at the Ivy 
suggests that you are not as up to speed with your fashionable London 
restaurants as you might be. Tsk, tsk. Although still a desirable place to 
dine, even the Ivy themselves would probably admit that their reign as the 
hottest spot in the capital is long over. That accolade now belongs to Scott's, 
the revamped Mayfair fish restaurant, which is so deliciously courant that even 
Nigella admits she spends 'half my life' on the pavement outside it keeping her 
husband company as he has a crafty fag. Divine, no? Especially as those keen to 
make a social impact need now only loiter near Scott's front door, pretending 
to have nipped out for a gasper between courses. This could, at the very least, 
get your picture in Hello! and you will certainly impress any passing friends 
with your fashionable restaurant-going skills.

By fashionable restaurant, I mean the kind of place where power, money and 
glamour break bread with celebrity, notoriety and fame; where the paparazzi on 
the pavement are as much a fixture as the 12 per cent service charge, and where 
there is a good chance you might bump into Kate Moss, some bloke who's been on 
Friday Night With Jonathan Ross and a very expensive fishcake. It's as simple 
as that. Except it isn't. London is a tribal city, where different social 
groups are clannish about the restaurants they support and use, much in the 
manner of football supporters. Eurotrash love the Cipriani and La Petite 
Maison, hedgefunders and the new Russians prefer stratospheric Japanese fusion 
at Zuma, while every frisky, carb- conscious heiress west of Park Lane goes to 
Tom's Kitchen at least once a week for a burger, please, and hold the lovely 
buns. She usually means her own, not the ones on the plate, but that is not our 
concern here.

Now that we have established the cultural landscape and made at least one 
inappropriate joke, let's move on to practicalities. So how do you get a table 
at the Ivy, or any other hotspot? Obviously, the easiest way is to become 
famous, and preferably not by chopping everyone in your street to pieces with 
an axe because you don't like Tuesdays or have snagged your new Fogal tights. 
Yet if you can get onto the front pages in a semi-wholesome way before 8pm on 
Thursday night - London's most desirable and consequently most unattainable 
booking slot - you will be in like Flynn, and I mean Lara Flynn Boyle, not 
Errol. Like it or not, when it comes to restaurants, celebrity is the 
Soviet-style Zil lane that leads straight to the best table in the house.

Some get annoyed when restaurants give preferential treatment to famous 
people, but I have come to realise that it is their prerogative to run their 
businesses exactly as they see fit. No one has to buy into the whole crazy 
nonsense, or put their name on a waiting list if they don't approve, or 
appreciate that celebrities are good for trade. You know that section at the 
front of this magazine? Where someone from OFM rings up a restaurant pretending 
to be a celebrity and tries to get a table? It drives me nuts. If there ever 
was a point to prove, OFM proved it on day one, when the A-list celebrity got 
the table and the poor old deadhead Z-person did not. My point is, is it fair 
to clog up booking lines pretending to be Kylie, when the real Kylie might be 
trying to get through to fix her lunch? That is the kind of thing I worry about.

Before you ask how can I get a table at the Ivy, you might want to ask another 
question; why do you want a table at the Ivy in the first place? Why struggle 
to gain ingress to any restaurant that may make it plain that it does not want 
your custom? There will certainly be another restaurant in the vicinity that 
will quite possibly serve better food at a cheaper price, and have a more 
egalitarian approach to its customer base. If, however, you have your heart set 
on gourmet glitz and the fashionable restaurant at all costs, then I offer the 
following. In the short term, be flexible about booking times. Steer clear of 
peak dining traffic. Accept after-theatre. Call the restaurant on the day to 
see if any slots have opened up; you might be surprised at how effective this 
can be. If you are particularly charming and attractive, go and have a chat in 
person about future bookings. Never telephone during service. If your ego can 
take the possible refusal, turn up early and smartly, and request a quick-ish 
dinner. In the long term, the best method of securing a table anywhere is to 
become a regular. It might even put you ahead of Nigella in the pecking order. 
But don't count on it.

Â· Read Jan Moir's restaurant reviews at areyoureadytoorder.co.uk 
<http://www.areyoureadytoorder.co.uk>.
