
The government is “not winning the argument on academies” and has no answers 
for critics of plans to force local authority schools into multi-academy 
trusts, according to the new president of the National Association of Head 
Teachers.

Kim Johnson, a headteacher of an academy in Kent, will ask the NAHT’s annual 
conference on Friday: “What is wrong with being a ‘good’ or ‘outstanding’ 
school within the local authority system?”

The NAHT is the latest teaching union to express dismay at the government’s 
education white paper published last month, which would see schoolscurrently 
maintained by local authorities transferred to become academies 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/04/teachers-heckle-schools-minister-over-academy-plans>
 by 2022, with many taken over by a multi-academy trust.

The issue is particularly fraught for the NAHT, whose members mostly run 
primary schools – of which around only one in five in England has become an 
academy, compared with around 60% of secondary schools.

Related: Academies plan turns schools into businesses, says union chief 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/05/academies-plan-turns-schools-businesses-union-mary-bousted-atl>

“Academies: to be or not to be, that is the question,” Johnson will tell the 
conference delegates. “A question you must be free to answer for yourself. No 
school should be compelled to convert.”

He claims that the Conservative party is divided 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/26/academy-schools-plan-cross-party-opposition-councillors-anger>
 over the issue, at council level and among the Conservative-led Local 
Government Association, because of issues such as who will provide school 
places once councils lose sway over schools in their regions.

“There is so much going on in good and outstanding schools that works without 
being an academy that this rush doesn’t seem to recognise,” Johnson is to say, 
according to remarks distributed by the union ahead of the conference.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4typ4%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4typ4%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d31d5c970c048bc8f1025cf778211a6ba047f54%2F672_690_4931_2958%2F4931.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Headteachers'%20union%20chief%20slams%20government%20over%20academisation%20policy&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4typ4%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Headteachers%27+union+chief+slams+government+over+academisation+policy&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4typ4%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d31d5c970c048bc8f1025cf778211a6ba047f54%2F672_690_4931_2958%2F4931.jpg>
 Education secretary Nicky Morgan has previously told teaching unions there 
would be no U-turn on the academies policy. Photograph: Teri Pengilley for the 
Guardian 
“On a political note it is interesting that the philosophy of a free market 
and diversity in services – so often at the core of Tory policy – does not 
seemingly apply at this time to education.”

He is also “very concerned that the cost of conversion will draw money away 
from frontline classroom services” at a time of steep cuts to school budgets.

“The government has no answers to these questions,” he is to tell delegates in 
Birmingham. “It is not winning the argument on academies.”

The new president will be highly critical of the Department for Education’s 
changes to assessments for primary school pupils, with controversial new 
assessments introduced and in some cases withdrawn through departmental error, 
such as the new key stage one spelling, punctuation and grammar (Spag) 
assessment 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/22/dfe-withdraws-spelling-test-after-it-accidentally-appeared-online>
.

“Do we now have the hokey cokey of assessment?” Johnson will ask. “You put the 
Spag test in, you put the Spag test out, you put it all online and wait for the 
children to shout: “I know the answer – what was the question?

Related: West Sussex council opposes government’s academies plan 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/21/west-sussex-council-academies-louise-goldsmith-nicky-morgan-state-schools>

“Schools and parents cannot face another year of assessment chaos. Now is the 
time to call for a better system of assessment – one that works for parents, 
pupils and teachers, rather than one that just ticks boxes for bureaucrats and 
politicians.”

Russell Hobby, the NAHT’s general secretary, said serious mistakes had been 
made in the implementation of primary school assessments this year, including 
frequent changes as well as contradictory guidelines.

“Testing has a role to play in the assessment of children but the poorly 
designed tests and last minute changes we have seen this year do not add value 
to teaching,” Hobby said.

“Increasingly, parents and teachers agree that high-stakes statutory tests can 
actually make it harder to find out what children are really learning and to 
improve their education.”
