
Henry Lloyd-Hughes <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm1631222/>, actor

When people meet me in the flesh, they often seem disappointed that I don’t 
resemble Mark Donovan, the character I played inThe Inbetweeners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-inbetweeners>, a bit more 
closely. “Where is the French crop, where is the sportswear?” they think. 
Instead they find someone with a lifelong enthusiasm for dressing snappily – for
men’s tailoring, militaria and exotic vintage 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/tvandradioblog/2015/feb/16/how-to-do-vintage-when-youre-a-man>
. But sports casual not so much.


In fact my all-time fashion inspiration goes a bit like this: West Indies 
cricket teams of the 70s-80s.David Niven 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/23/david-niven-interview-hollywood-1965>
.David Hockney <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/hockney>. Joe Strummer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/joestrummer>. Jack Nicholson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/sep/09/jack-nicholson>. Chet 
Baker <http://www.allmusic.com/artist/chet-baker-mn0000094210>.

My clothes mean a lot to me; they have history. The more long-lived the item, 
the greater its ranking in the wardrobe. I’m thinking of a shabby Italian tweed 
jacket of my mum’s that I poached when I was 15. I remember being told I was 
dressed like a “young fogey”; I took it as a compliment, and never looked back.

Not that I don’t rock shiny new sportswear. I do – but normally sticking to a 
singular theme. I might be doing my best impression of a West Indian cricketer 
from the 70s, with bucket hat and wide collars, orJamel Shabazz 
<http://www.jamelshabazz.com/>-era hip-hop style, high-tops and bomber jackets. 
Or more recently, travelling long haul, I might go full Nike Tech Fleece. What 
I don’t often do is cross the streams. I always want an outfit to feel complete.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gde7%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gde7%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F92a560f0c69a614817e8a7b439173f64719ead64%2F475_695_2779_4172%2F2779.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Smart%20v%20casual%3A%20the%20ultimate%20menswear%20style%20swap&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gde7%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Smart+v+casual%3A+the+ultimate+menswear+style+swap&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gde7%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F92a560f0c69a614817e8a7b439173f64719ead64%2F475_695_2779_4172%2F2779.jpg>
 Henry wears jacket by Baracuta, shirt by Fred Perry, sweatshirt by Sunspel, 
jeans by APC and trainers by Nike. Photograph: Suki Dhanda for the Guardian 
Perhaps it doesn’t help that I’m colourblind and often wear strongly 
contrasting colours, as they don’t confuse my eyes as much as blended tones. 
But in aiming to never be underdressed, I occasionally end up overdressed. 
Maybe swapping clothes with Elgar for a day or two will teach me to find the in 
between spaces, the levels between levels of dressing, like that hidden floor in
Being John Malkovich <https://www.theguardian.com/film/being-john-malkovich>.

When the outfits Elgar has chosen for me arrive, I get a warm sense of 
nostalgia; the brands and style feel familiar. The first outfit is APC jeans 
and a red tartan Fred Perry shirt, which fit very well, as does the navyBaracuta
 
<http://www.baracuta.com/on/demandware.store/Sites-WPBAWO-EU-Site/default/Home-Show>
 jacket with bright red lining. I have a flashback to owning two Baracuta 
jackets myself, but in lurid pink and neon yellow. In this incarnation I feel 
very blokey, and a little muted. My Air Force 1 trainers are a lone beacon of 
white in a sea of navy and grey.

The whole ensemble is not unflattering; I feel well put together, but a bit 
anonymous, as if I’m dressing to blend into a crowd, like an undercover cop.

Young fogey? I take that as a compliment

At lunch, my friend Jemima points out the almost matching shades of plaid on 
my Fred Perry shirt and my jacket lining. “I like the coordination between the 
collar and the jacket.” “Thanks,” I reply, grateful for a bit of early 
reassurance. But as always I’ve underestimated her French sarcasm. “I mean it’s 
too obvious,” she says. Ouch. “Your casualwear is more stylish,” she offers by 
way of comfort. “Is this normcore?” I ask the table. “You look more like the 
slick guy in a movie about football hooligans,” my friend Nikesh muses. I’ll 
take that… I think.

The one thing I hadn’t bargained for is the cold. My winter wardrobe is full 
of layers, shirts and cardigans tucked under thick coats and blazers. I feel 
very exposed in my lightweight jacket. I resolve to dig out an old fishtail 
parka for the rest of the day. It’s kind of sports casual, so I hope it’s not 
cheating.

On day two I wear my second outfit – a blue-grey Adidas Spezial Beckenbauer 
tracksuit – to the football. It’s a warmer affair, thanks to the Stone Island x 
Nike coat that comes with it. To my surprise, the outfit gets a rapturous 
response. Unlike the first ensemble, which seemed to remind people of something 
I might wear, albeit with the brightness dialled down, this full-on casual look 
is enough of a departure for people to really take notice.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gde7%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gde7%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1f6e2e02619e72f155306548e813ce2295649a0%2F446_498_2861_4296%2F2861.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Smart%20v%20casual%3A%20the%20ultimate%20menswear%20style%20swap&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gde7%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Smart+v+casual%3A+the+ultimate+menswear+style+swap&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gde7%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1f6e2e02619e72f155306548e813ce2295649a0%2F446_498_2861_4296%2F2861.jpg>
 Henry wears jacket by NikeLab x Stone Island, tracksuit by Adidas Spezial 
Beckembauer and trainers by Nike. Photograph: Suki Dhanda for the Guardian 
“You look perfect,” my dad chirps as I meet him outside the Loftus Road 
stadium. One of the football regulars, Ben, takes a shine to it, too. “You 
should keep this as your look,” he says. My wife has given it her stamp of 
approval – she says it’s “very attractive” – and I start to wonder what all of 
this positive feedback says about my usual clothes. I think my mates enjoyed 
seeing a laddier side to my personality; they appreciated my style without the 
flamboyant edge. As I leave, I ask my friend Alex why people prefer me in this 
outfit. He gives it some thought. “You look like it’s 1997,” he says, “but 
you’re pulling it off.”

It feels good to have had so many compliments in a single day, though 
afterwards I relish the return of the sense of expression my own style gives 
me. Elgar’s style is unfussy and practical, and there’s something comforting in 
that for both the wearer and those around them. Looking at my own colourful 
wardrobe, perhaps I’ve learned that, sartorially, sometimes less really is more 
– for a trip to the football at least.

Henry Lloyd-Hughes played Roger in Harry Potter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/harrypotter> and Ralph in C4’s Indian Summers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/indian-summers>, but earned cult 
status for his role as bullyboy Mark in The Inbetweeners.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gde7%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gde7%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0cb341d7c82e278d67fcd058b3a535e61c07d02%2F0_564_3678_4340%2F3678.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Smart%20v%20casual%3A%20the%20ultimate%20menswear%20style%20swap&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gde7%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Smart+v+casual%3A+the+ultimate+menswear+style+swap&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gde7%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0cb341d7c82e278d67fcd058b3a535e61c07d02%2F0_564_3678_4340%2F3678.jpg>
 Henry wears clothes as before. Elgar wears blazer by Hackett, roll-neck by 
John Smedley, trousers by Oliver Spencer and loafers by Russell & Bromley. 
Photograph: Suki Dhanda for the Guardian 
Elgar Johnson <https://www.instagram.com/elgarjohnson/?hl=en>, fashion 
director at GQ Style


Ever since I was old enough to know what trainers were, I’ve been obsessed 
with sportswear and streetwear. Nike Air Max. Adidas Spezial tracksuits. Levi’s 
jeans. Stone Island, Timberland and Supreme.

For me sportswear isn’t a trend – it’s a way of life. I love sports and I 
still dress the same way as the friends I grew up with in Peterborough and 
Liverpool. I take as much pride in choosing the right trainers as someone else 
would in a three-piece suit. Not that everyone understands that; some people 
look at my clothes and seem to think I’m about to rob them. That’s definitely 
not the case – I’m just a normal guy who doesn’t wear super-fabulous outfits.

I think my look reflects my personality. I’m easy-going, 33, not ready to be 
too grown-up quite yet. My clothes are a uniform, really. I’m a fashion 
director of GQ Style, a huge men’s magazine, working on many different 
projects, so the last thing I want is a dilemma getting dressed in the morning.

I’d put on a suit if the occasion demanded it – I wouldn’t wear a tracksuit to 
a wedding – but there are some things I would never wear. Like trilbies or 
anything too polished that deliberately turns heads. I prefer to blend in; my 
look is kind of muted. And I always wear socks – I don’t think that cropped 
trousers, naked ankle thing looks attractive. Not with my ankles, anyway.

For me, sportswear isn’t a trend – it’s a way of life

At first, when I heard I would be dressing like Henry Lloyd-Hughes for the 
day, I didn’t think it would be too difficult. I knew of him from his role as 
the school bully in The Inbetweeners, a character who dresses as if he’s 
straight from the football terraces. But the real Henry is nothing like that. 
He looks great – he has a very clear sense of his own style – but his clothes 
are totally unlike mine. He’s dapper and precise; suited and booted. It’s more 
formal than the way I dress, a look with the feeling of a bygone era.

Henry often has a proper Victorian strongman moustache, so I decided that, to 
embrace the challenge fully, I’d shave off my beard up to my moustache. That 
was fun. Actually the clothes affected me more. As soon as I pulled them on – a 
roll-neck jumper, suit jacket and grey tailored trousers – I felt a bitMarvin 
Gaye 
<http://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/from-the-archive-blog/2014/apr/01/marvin-gaye-death-30-years-anniversary>
, very smooth. I can recognise that as a great look, but I’m much moreOasis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/oasis> and the Streets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/thestreets> myself, and my behaviour changed.

Going to work, I didn’t sprint up and down the escalator in a mad panic to be 
on time, like I usually would. In my smart, more restrictive clothes, I walked 
down instead. In my head, I thought there was more chance of me getting away 
with being late; I could just lie and say I had been to a bank meeting. It felt 
as if I was acting, like I was dressed as an older, more authoritative figure. 
I carried myself differently; felt more grown-up, more sensible.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gde7%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gde7%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcb6327c09f966f77952828dafabe807036f4b58%2F578_556_2896_4348%2F2896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Smart%20v%20casual%3A%20the%20ultimate%20menswear%20style%20swap&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gde7%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Smart+v+casual%3A+the+ultimate+menswear+style+swap&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gde7%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcb6327c09f966f77952828dafabe807036f4b58%2F578_556_2896_4348%2F2896.jpg>
 Elgar wears coat by Club Monaco, trousers by Oliver Spencer, waistcoat and 
shirt by Drakes, and tie by Hackett. Photograph: Suki Dhanda for the Guardian 
The most marked response came when I was shopping. Sometimes when you wear 
casualwear, you feel as if sales assistants or security guards are judging you. 
Now they eyed me up very differently – as though I might buy the entire shop. 
It was amazing to see how much strangers judge you on your clothes.

In the GQ office I’m surrounded by very opinionated, well-dressed men, from 
Dylan Jones 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/may/31/dylan-jones-interview-gq>, who 
always looks slick, toLuke Day <https://twitter.com/ljday> and Gary Armstrong 
<https://twitter.com/gary_gary_gary> who explore fashion brilliantly, and one 
of the coolest men in Condé Nast, the always effortlessBill Prince 
<http://www.gq-magazine.co.uk/profile/bill-prince>. The majority seemed to 
really like it – I suppose it’s a men’s fashion and lifestyle magazine, so 
they’re pretty open-minded about trying new looks. Our creative director,Paul 
Solomons <https://www.instagram.com/gqcreative/>, greeted me with, “What’s 
wrong with you and what are you wearing that for?” but then went right back to 
his computer. The attention felt weird – I’m usually happier for someone else 
to be the star of the show.

I felt a bit Marvin Gaye. Smooth

After work, at the football, my friends’ reaction was pretty positive, too. At 
first they assumed I was going on to a work party. “You look good. Though not 
really like yourself,” said one as I stood awkwardly in my tailored trousers in 
a pub after the match. “You look like a 1980s footballer. Or a blackMagnum PI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2012/mar/20/tv-detectives-magnum-pi>
.”

The one person who really was not convinced was me. In truth, I felt uneasy. 
Save for some kind of big lifestyle change when I get older, I can’t imagine 
dressing like this again. It just doesn’t reflect my personality. The 
experience also made me realise we still live in a judgmental society; it’s 
bizarre how foolish some people are for judging others on their clothes when 
they clearly don’t know their stuff.

The next day, back in my own clothes, I went and watched the football down the 
pub and felt like myself again, with one little grown-up addition: I’ve still 
got the tash.

Elgar Johnson started started out as a model before moving into magazines. 
After cutting his teeth at i-D, then Man About Town, he is now fashion director 
at GQ Style.

Grooming throughout: Mike Harding using Kevin Murphy
