
With around 90% of initial patient interaction being with primary care 
services, ensuring those working in the sector maintain the correct competences 
and skills is crucial. Yet releasing professionals during their busy, and 
sometimes unpredictable schedules, can be a struggle. Therefore, it is not a 
coincidence that online learning is becoming very popular among this group.

The need for high quality training resources

As Candace Miller from the National Skills Academy for Health 
<http://www.nsahealth.org.uk/> says: “Our primary care workforce has a major 
role to play within transformed health and care services. So it is vital that 
they have access to high quality training resources that are relevant to the 
contexts in which primary care is delivered. And, with a busy workload, having 
ready access to those resources at times that fit in with service pressures is 
really important. It is no surprise therefore that elearning is becoming an 
increasingly popular means of developing primary care staff, ensuring they have 
the knowledge and expertise to deliver great care.”

In order to ensure we meet the needs of our clients, Skills for Health, in 
partnership with the National Skills Academy for Health – which works with more 
than 340 small and medium sized employers – has recently developed asuite of 
statutory and mandatory elearning 
<http://landing.skillsplatform.org/elearningprimarycare/> specifically for the 
primary care sector. The courses were developed by primary care experts to 
allow staff to undertake training anywhere they have an internet connection, 
thereby reducing the need for day releases. The courses comply with all the 
latest relevant legislation and guidance and are based on the core skills 
training framework learning outcomes.

 Roland Gude, strategic director at Sentinel Healthcare Southwest CiC who was 
involved in the development of the courses, says: “The relevance of the courses 
and their ability to be completed in remote locations in the GP’s own time is 
definitely a unique offering.”

Primary care courses:

 * Conflict resolution

 *  Equality, diversity and human rights 
 *  Fire safety 
 *  Infection, prevention and control (clinical) 
 *  Infection, prevention and control (non-clinical) 
 *  Health, safety and welfare 
 *  Moving and handling 
 *  Patient moving and handling 
 You can access all of these new contextualised programmes here Skills for 
Health primary care courses 
<http://landing.skillsplatform.org/elearningprimarycare/>.

 Elearning is an alternative to traditional training methods and has become a 
vital tool to continued education for primary care professionals. With 
elearning, users can take their time learning the information. Farzana Hussain, 
a GP principal, who took part in a trial of the elearning service, says: “I 
don’t usually respond well to elearning and find it a bit dry but with the 
videos and interactive topics the learning was brought to life and the 
information was really easy to digest.”

Coming soon …

 As the number one provider of elearning to the NHS, Skills for Health is 
avidly working with and listening to experts to bring the latest elearning to 
you. A new look elearning platform and an immunisation update module will be 
launching soon. If you would like to speak with someone regarding your 
elearning needs, pleaseclick here 
<mailto:contactus@skillsforhealth.org.uk?subject=Elearning_Guardian>.

Want to find out more?

Skills for Health <http://www.skillsforhealth.org.uk>, is a not-for-profit 
organisation committed to the development of an improved and sustainable 
healthcare workforce across the UK. Established in 2002 as the sector skills 
council for health for the UK health sector, Skills for Health helps to inform 
policy and standards focusing on health, education and improving the wider 
wellbeing of public health. Get in touch:contactus@skillsforhealth.org.uk 
<mailto:contactus@skillsforhealth.org.uk>


Content on this page is produced and paid for by Skills for Health 
<http://www.skillsforhealth.org.uk/>
