
Readers of the the Daily Telegraph 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/dailytelegraph> must be baffled by their 
newspaper’s stance on the EU referendum. Some days the paper appears to be 
sitting on the fence. On others, it unashamedly wears its Brexit heart on its 
sleeve.

Monday was definitely a Brexit day, with a leading article berating the 
government’s remain tactics and two of its leading columnists - Boris Johnson 
and Charles Moore - making clear, yet again, their hostility towards the
European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> and all its works.

The Telegraph splashed on a preview of a treasury report, to be published by 
by the chancellor, George Osborne, which will state thatthe economic impact of 
Brexit would leave Britain worse off “for decades to come”. 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/04/17/nhs-and-schools-will-face-billions-in-cuts-if-britain-votes-to-l/>

But the paper’s leading article considered it to be an example of “Project 
Fear” going into overdrive 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion/2016/04/17/project-fear-goes-into-overdrive/>
, arguing: “There is no longer any pretence at balance and rational debate.”

Leavers, it said, will view both the treasury’s prediction and the government 
leaflet sent to every British home as “unduly alarmist”. It concluded:

“The risk for remain is that the more outlandish its claims about the 
post-Brexit landscape, the less people will be inclined to believe them.”

Moore, in a column headlined “The EU oligarchs will despise us even more if we 
leave 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/04/17/the-eu-oligarchs-will-despise-us-even-more-if-we-leave-thats-rea/>
”, also made a prediction. If the nation votes to stay in the EU it will 
engender “a wave of remorse.” He also treated his readers to a sentence so 
lengthy it reminded me of Bernard Levin:

“We are supposed, in the 20th century, to have put aside deference voting, 
yet, in the 21st, we will have voted Remain out of deference - not because we 
really wanted to, but because David Cameron,George Osborne 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne>, Jeremy Corbyn, Peter 
Mandelson, Tony Blair, Gordon Brown, the CBI, the big trade unions, the 
university vice chancellors, famous scientists in receipt of EU grants, the 
governor of the Bank of England, the IMF, Angela Merkel, François Hollande, 
Jean-Claude Juncker, most top-rate taxpayers, quite possibly Pope Francis and - 
this week - the President of the United States of America told us we must.”

Johnson, in a piece attacking Angela Merkel for allowing the prosecution of a 
German satirist for lampooning Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, 
claimed it as proof thatthe process of EU integration would mean the wholesale 
erosion of democracy and the erosion of free speech. 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/04/17/angela-merkel-is-now-silencing-german-satirists-to-please-erdoga/>

He accused Germany’s chancellor of kowtowing to Erdogan’s demands because he 
could cause another migration crisis originally exacerbated by her own 
open-door policy.

How should that affect Britain’s referendum vote? If you want to waste 10 
minutes reading Johnson’s column, you can wrestle with his twisted logic.

The Times gave Osborne top billing, on the front page 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/news/osborne-brexit-will-cost-us-4-300-per-household-w8rkrsxff>
 and in a bylined article inside, headlined “Vote for lower prices, better jobs 
and higher standards of living 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/decision-to-leave-eu-comes-at-a-price-it-is-4-300-per-family-zfs372lf3>
.”

The chancellor’s intervention didn’t impress the Daily Mail, as its news page 
headline made clear, “Osborne’s new scare: Brexit will ruin UK for decades 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3544987/Osborne-s-new-scare-Brexit-ruin-UK-decades-cost-family-4-300-mean-Britain-billions-spend-public-services.html>
.”

It preferred a statement by Ian Botham, a former cricketer: “Britain should 
strike out on her own, says Beefy 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3544161/Now-Beefy-goes-bat-Brexit-Botham-enters-referendum-struggle-minister-warns-leaving-EU-cause-economic-rupture.html>
.” And it also headlined Boris Johnson’s claim that “77m Turks are coming here 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3544294/B-s-Boris-Johnson-dismisses-fears-trade-hit-Brexit-warns-t-restrain-immigration.html>
.”

The Mail’s editorial picked up on Johnson’s allegation, urging readers to vote 
leave in order to prevent a Turkish influx. Its main point was about Britain’s 
education system“buckling under the sheer weight of numbers” because of 
immigration. 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3544991/DAILY-MAIL-COMMENT-Children-betrayed-migration-boom.html>
 It argued:

“While we remain in the EU, we don’t have the power to control the numbers 
coming in. David Cameron has tried to reduce them but, despite his promises, 
net migration has shot up to 330,000 a year. Such relentless population growth 
is simply unsustainable.”

Similar points were made by the Daily Express, on its front page (“Britain 
‘has too many migrants’ 
<http://www.express.co.uk/news/uk/661872/Poll-migration-EU-referendum-Boris-Cameron-Brexit>
”), an inside spread (“If we vote to quit EU we can control our borders”) and 
in an op-ed piece by Leo McKinstry (“Mass immigration is stretching our nation 
to the limit 
<http://www.express.co.uk/comment/columnists/leo-mckinstry/661961/Leo-Mckinstry-column-mass-immigration>
”). The message? Vote Brexit.

The Express articles were built around a YouGov poll which found that 71% of 
Britons believe net migration has been too high over the last decade.

The Sun also referred to the poll and to Osborne’s treasury paper, tying both 
togetherin its editorial. 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/sun_says/6500866/Sun-Says.html> 
While the chancellor was trying “to scare us with tales of financial Armageddon 
if Britain leaves, he should consider this: Voters would trust him more if the 
government had made any effort to regain control of our borders in their 
renegotiation.”

Columnist Trevor Kavanagh took up the immigration point: 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/suncolumnists/trevorkavanagh/7083054/Trevor-Kavanagh-says-Brexit-catastrophe-is-a-Hitler-style-Big-Lie.html>

“The prospect that scares the pants off voters is mass Muslim immigration, now 
running at well over a million each year intoEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> from Pakistan, Afghanistan, 
Africa and the Arab world.”

But what about the anti-Brexit viewpoint? Are pro-EU newspapers pressing their 
argument with the same intensity as the Brexiteers?
 The Daily Mirror’s ‘coverage’ of the treasury forecast. Photograph: Clipshare 
The evidence suggests not. The Daily Mirror carried a page 2 lead, “Labour 
voters key to staying in 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/labour-voters-hold-key-britains-7777733>
”, based on a preview of a statement by the shadow chief treasury secretary 
Seema Malhotra.

Oddly, its only reference to the treasury prediction that British families 
would be £4,300 a year worse off if the UK leaves the EU was a little red box, 
as shown on the left. Clearly, the Mirror’s heart is not in this battle for the 
hearts and minds of the nation.

The Guardian did cover the treasury report, in a page 4 lead 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/17/brexit-uk-treasury-leave-eu-referendum>
 plusa column by Matthew d’Ancona  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/17/obama-brexit-boris-johnson-ian-botham-vote-leave-declinist>
in which, among other things, he argued “it is hard to be passionate about 
‘stable infra’; hard, but not impossible.” He wrote:

“To those on the remain side of the fence, the notion of leaving the EU is 
authentically frightening... They are anxious about the likely economic 
consequences. They are fretful about the probable diminution of Britain’s 
global status.

They are fearful that Brexit would embroil this country in a decade of 
mind-bendingly complex intergovernmental negotiations. They do not share the 
touching faith of the leavers that Britain, released from the Euro-yoke, will 
sail off like an Elizabethan galleon to sovereign glory.”

His column was sensible and thoughtful and, yes, also passionate. But, seen in 
the context of the Brexit blitz, it amounted to a mere rifle shot.

The undeniable fact is that the leave campaigners are setting the agenda with 
their noisy propaganda across the majority of the national press.
