
The “de-crowning” and subsequent departure of Miss Great Britain, Zara 
Holland, from ITV2’s Love Island after she had sex with another contestant 
provided a ratings boost for the reality show, beating Channel 5’s Big Brother 
for the first time.


Holland left the ITV2 <http://www.theguardian.com/media/itv2> show at the 
weekend because of a family illness.

The beauty queen was stripped of her title by the organisers of Miss Great 
Britain after scenes showing the 20-year-old having sex were broadcast last 
week.

Related: Miss Great Britain loses title after having sex on ITV2's Love Island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/17/miss-great-britain-title-sex-itv2-love-island-zara-holland-alex-bowen>

Holland decided to stay in the show, filmed in Majorca, but subsequently 
departed after being told her mother had fallen ill.

Sunday night’s edition of the show was its most popular yet, with 1.13 million 
viewers, a 5.1% share of the audience at 9pm on ITV2.

It beat Channel 5’s Big Brother, which had 1.07 million viewers (4.8%), also 
at 9pm. It is the first time Love Island has taken a ratings lead over the 
Channel 5 show.

ITV said in a statement: “Owing to an illness in the family, Zara Holland has 
left the Love Island villa to return to the UK. Our thoughts are with her and 
her family and we send all of our best wishes.”

Holland said of her departure: “I’m so sad to leave the villa but it’s 
important for me to get home and spend time with my mum while she gets better. 
I’ve had the time of my life on Love Island and would like to thank all of my 
fellow Islanders and the production team for all their support.”

ITV further added that she would be able to return to the show at a later 
stage if she wanted to and “depending on circumstances in the villa”.

Holland had previously expressed regret over getting intimate with 24-year-old 
scaffolder Alex Bowen. He is the former boyfriend of Loose Women star Vicky 
Pattison, the winner of I’m A Celebrity in 2015.

Following the incident, she said: “You know when you’re in the moment and it 
just happens. That’s really not like me at all. Why couldn’t we have just gone 
to sleep?”

Explaining their decision to remove her title, the Miss Great Britain 
organisation said the move was taken with “deep regret”.
— Miss Great Britain ® (@Official_MissGB) June 16, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Official_MissGB/status/743545345989296128> 
To be clear we have no problem at all with sex-it is perfectly natural.We 
simply can't condone what happened on national tv
 <https://twitter.com/Official_MissGB/status/743545345989296128> 
The statement added: “We pride ourselves on promoting the positivity of 
pageants in modern society and this includes the promotion of a strong, 
positive female role model in our winners.

“The feedback we have received from pageant insiders and members of the 
general public is such that we cannot promote Zara as a positive role model 
moving forward.

“We wholly understand that everyone makes mistakes, but Zara, as an ambassador 
for Miss Great Britain, simply did not uphold the responsibility expected of 
the title.”

Holland will be replaced for the remainder of the year by runner-up Deone 
Robertson, who had been crowned Miss North Lanarkshire.

Love Island presenter Caroline Flack criticised the decision to strip Holland 
of her title.

— caroline flack (@carolineflack1) June 16, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/carolineflack1/status/743549263171428352> 
Feel even more sorry for Zara now she's been de-crowned. She's a very sweet 
girl . What even is 'miss GB' ? Are we living in the dark ages ?
 <https://twitter.com/carolineflack1/status/743549263171428352> 
Fans have started a petition calling for her to be given back the title. The 
petition has just over 3,000 signatures and has been shared on social media by 
celebrities and fans, including former Blue Peter presenter Anthea Turner.

