
Parental choice is in a fragile state. Almost 30 years on from the “great” 
Education Reform Act, which ushered in the idea that choice would raise 
standards and satisfy all, barely a day goes by without a reminder of what a 
flimsy notion this is.

Most shocking was the story 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/29/academy-trust-accused-of-discrimination-over-moving-disabled-pupils-dean-trust>
 about the academy trust that decided to bus pupils with special needs or 
disabilities from the high-achieving school at which they had been given a 
place, to a less illustrious one in the same chain. Although the pupils would 
apparently still be on the original school’s roll this wasn’t quite what the 
parents had chosen.

Then there was the entertaining spat between Lord Waldegrave 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/30/eton-provost-threatens-quit-tories-over-social-engineering-agenda-lord-waldegrave>
, the provost (and former pupil) of Eton college, and the cabinet office 
minister, Matt Hancock, over the government’s “social mobility” agenda.

I am not sure why Lord Waldegrave, who has threatened to leave the 
Conservative party, is so unhappy with the idea that the civil service, and 
possibly other employers, should be allowed to ask applicants about their 
schooling. Given the tendency of the establishment to recruit in its own image, 
it might only reinforce the supremacy of the privately educated graduates.

Related: Grammar schools: a Tory rightwinger’s dream; everyone else’s 
nightmare | Fiona Millar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/may/11/grammar-schools-tory-rightwinger-selection>

But the row exposes two things. The fact that the government feels obliged to 
act means that, after almost three decades, the market in schools has done 
nothing to promote equality. Parents with knowhow and money still win. And 
there is logic in Waldegrave’s position. What is the point of offering choice 
and then getting angry if parents exercise it to secure their own children a 
competitive advantage? That was the whole point surely?

Finally there are the ongoing contortions in Kent 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/sep/08/grammar-school-expansion-kent-selective-education>
, where the county council is expanding selection while wringing its hands over 
the fact that so few children from poor backgrounds get into grammar schools.

It own recent investigation [pdf] 
<https://democracy.kent.gov.uk/documents/s66421/DRAFT%20Grammar%20School%20Select%20Committee%20Report%2027.05.16.pdf>
 into the gross inequalities that selection produces makes fascinating reading. 
Everything in this county, whose education system is a throwback to the 50s, 
conspires against poorer children: the test, the pricey tutoring, the expense 
of transport to get to selective schools, and the high cost of uniform and 
school trips as the grammars jostle to emulate private schools – which are just 
above them in the pecking order.

However, instead of scrapping the 11-plus (the obvious way to maximise choice 
and limit inequality) tinkering around the edges is proposed. A few more 
children eligible for the pupil premium will be shoehorned into the grammars 
while the council gets on with opening a new selective school without even 
running alegal consultation 
<http://schoolsweek.co.uk/weald-of-kent-grammar-school-flouted-consultation-rules-over-expansion-bid/>
.

So no choice at all for the parents who may not want a secondary modern 
education for their children, and another illustration of the vein running 
through all these stories. In our type of market-driven system the poorest and 
most marginalised children inevitably lose out.

There is nothing wrong with the idea of choice, or of its twin sister, 
diversity. I like the idea of a range of local schools with different ethos and 
culture that parents can choose between – but only if access is fair to all.

Related: Is this campaign the kiss of death for grammar schools? | Fiona Millar
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/dec/09/death-grammar-schools-tory-selection>

Even before the 1988 act, England had one of the most diverse school systems 
in the world. In the urban area where I grew up we had the choice of 
comprehensive, grammar, secondary modern, faith, non-faith, council, voluntary 
aided, uniform, non-uniform, single sex and co-educational schools.

Unfortunately this diversity was organised as a hierarchy. The poorest 
children ended up in the sink schools, and little has changed.

That is partly because choice and diversity post 1988 was never allied to 
radical reform of school admissions, but also because the tools of the market – 
league table and Ofsted – mean that what former Tory minister David Willetts 
once memorably described as the “parental arms race” has inevitably collided 
with each school’s need to maximise its own performance.

We now have the worst of all worlds: the hierarchy is steeper than ever but 
diversity that did exist within the non-selective system is being ironed out as 
schools are forced into chains and obliged to conform on everything from 
curriculum, qualifications and culture, to the dress codes of pupils andstaff 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/education/educationnews/10690386/Teachers-condemned-for-being-too-scruffy-report.html>
.

In a few years someone will have to come along and announce the revolutionary 
idea of getting rid of the “bog standard” academy and offering the choice of 
something new and different.

What that new and different should be is probably the subject matter for a 
much longer piece. But the fast approaching 30th birthday of the 1988 act could 
– and should – be a trigger for us all to start thinking now.
