
Thousands of couples who have settled their divorces in the last 20 months may 
have to re-open negotiations because a critical fault has been found in 
software used to calculate financial terms.

The Ministry of Justice was urgently investigating the extent of the errors of 
“Form E” on its website, which have the potential to inflate the financial 
worth of a wife or husband. It has published an email address –
formE@hmcts.gsi.gov.uk <mailto:formE@hmcts.gsi.gov.uk> – asking anyone who 
believes they have been affected to contact the department.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f6mj%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f6mj%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F879506f98439b85222f8c64f9631c7e9efa59f57%2F0_0_2299_3420%2F2299.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Revealed%3A%20divorce%20software%20error%20hits%20thousands%20of%20settlements&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f6mj%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Revealed%3A+divorce+software+error+hits+thousands+of+settlements&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f6mj%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F879506f98439b85222f8c64f9631c7e9efa59f57%2F0_0_2299_3420%2F2299.jpg>
 Opening page of Form E. Photograph: Ministry of Justice 
The fact the software had been miscalculating assets since April 2014 was only 
spotted earlier this month by a family law specialist, Nicola Matheson-Durrant 
of theFamily Law Clinic <http://www.familylawclinic.co.uk/contact-us.html> in 
Ascot, Berkshire. The MoJ only publicly admitted the problem on Thursday.


It is understood that over the period when the form was producing inaccurate 
calculations just under 20,000 forms were downloaded. Not all of them would 
necessarily have been used to work out a division of assets between divorcing 
couples.

Matheson-Durrant told the Guardian: “Having discovered the fault and advised 
the MoJ, it became apparent that not a single solicitor, barrister or judge in 
the whole of the UK had noticed this error. It is such a critical fault. This 
form has been used in training so it will also have been seen by paralegals, 
university law departments and the Law Society.”

Matheson-Durrant is not a legally qualified solicitor or barrister, but is a 
McKenzie Friend, a lay expert who helps litigants.


When she reported the mistake to Her Majesty’s Courts and Tribunal Service, 
part of the MoJ, earlier this month it admitted to her that Form E was at fault 
and eventually, after repeated promptings, rectified the software. It made no 
public announcement about the error.

The HMCTS email did not thank her for spotting the problem but explained, in a 
defensive tone: “It is not our policy to change dates for technical errors, but 
to show that a change has happened we have added an additional code.”

One particular paragraph, numbered 2.20, which is suposed to produce totals, 
fails to reflect the minus figure of final liabilities entered earlier on, 
producing a simple mathematical error. If a party had significant debts or 
liabilities, they were not recognised or recorded on the electronic form, 
potentially inflating their true worth. Distorted net figures of applicants’ 
assets were therefore being produced.

Not all divorcing or separating couples use the online form – some prefer pen 
and paper calculations – but the impact of the errors could be widespread.

Matheson-Durrant said she began noticing unexpected reckonings earlier this 
year and initially thought the fault might be to do with her or her clients’ 
computers. She eventually concluded that the fault lay with the MoJ’s software.


Judgments and payment orders handed down by the family courts – even the 
highest appeal courts – may have been founded on faulty information.


The discovery comes at a time when the senior judiciary and the justice 
secretary, Michael Gove, are encouraging the development of online justice as a 
means of improving courtroom efficiency and making further economies.


 Earlier this year an official report backed by the Master of the Rolls, John 
Dyson, recommended that the UK civil justice system undergoa radical overhaul 
for the digital age 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/feb/16/online-court-proposed-to-resolve-claims-of-up-to-25000>
, with the creation of an online court to expand access to justice and resolve 
claims of up to £25,000.

Matheson-Durrant also pointed out that financial remedy proceedings were 
currently being farmed out to courts far from couples’ homes in south-east 
England because the HMCTS divorce unit could not find capacity forFamily 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/family> Hearing Centres closer to home.


Software glitches are not unusual in major government IT projects. Electronic 
forms have been used by HMCTS for some time but such a mistake is relatively 
new for the justice system, which is only belatedly moving from paper to 
computer.


It is extraordinary that such a crucial fault in settling financial disputes 
in the context of divorce proceedings had gone unnoticed for so long. It could 
take months to work out the extent and impact of the miscalculations.


Unravelling the damage could take even longer, potentially spurring 
dissatisfied clients to launch legal action against their own lawyers or the 
MoJ. There were 114,720 divorces in England and Wales in 2013.

London has been dubbed the divorce capital of the world because of the 
relatively high awards given to spouses under British divorce laws. It is 
possible that some of the recent high-figure settlements obtained by foreign 
claimants may also have been affected.

An HMCTS spokesperson said: “We are urgently investigating this issue. 
Officials are taking steps to identify rapidly cases where this regrettable 
error may have had an impact, and we will be writing to anyone affected as soon 
as possible. Anyone concerned about their own court proceedings should contact
formE@hmcts.gsi.gov.uk <mailto:formE@hmcts.gsi.gov.uk>.”

 * If you wish to tell us about your experience using Form E during your 
divorce, please fill out the form below.















