
Now that TV is the new cinema, is Peggy from Mad Men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/mad-men-tv-series> having the same 
impact on wardrobes that, say, Grace Kelly once did?
Name withheld, email

Truly, we live in – what’s the cliche I’m reaching for? Oh yes – a golden age 
of TV. What blessed times! We were once humble neanderthals, warming our hairy 
paws over TV shows like (in Britain)Noel’s House Party 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SRDKeUdriMo>, a show that made you feel like 
you were on really bad acid every week, or (in America)Small Wonder 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=48WCJ84z7vw>, a sitcom in which a child actor 
had to pretend to be a robot for four years. Now, look at the art at the tips 
of our perfectly manicured hands! Last week alone saw the start of the last 
series ofMad Men <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/mad-men-tv-series>, 
that amazing show about men who drink and do stuff, the end of Better Call 
Saul, a show about a man called Saul whom you’d better call, and the beginning 
of the new series ofGame of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/game-of-thrones>, a very popular TV 
series featuring lots of hairy wizard sex.

OK – fine! I admit it. I have managed to not watch any of these shows. And not 
only those: The West Wing, The Sopranos,Breaking Bad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/breaking-bad>, Lost – missed ’em all. 
I only watched two series of The Wire, which is pretty much a sackable offence 
at the Guardian. I’m honestly not proud of any of this and I certainly don’t 
see my cultural ignorance as a virtue. I just genuinely don’t understand how so 
many people have hundreds of spare hours to watch these shows that last 
precisely FOR EVER.

I have a pretty easy life: I work from home, my only dependent is a small dog 
who doesn’t need that much exercise and I have a close relationship with Ocado. 
And yet, even I don’t have the time to commit to these shows. Honestly, what 
were all of you doing with all your spare hours before box sets came along – 
trying to find the cure for cancer? A friend recently suggested that these 
shows are watched by new parents in the evening who are simply too tired to 
talk to one another, which might be true, but I don’t think that captures their 
entire audience. For the rest of us, we sad, uncultured souls who know it’s now 
way too late for us to try to catch up, we can only sit at home, alone, 
ignored, uninvited to crucial dinner parties, and watch whatever else there is 
on TV. Some channel, somewhere, must be re-running Small Wonder.

Anyway, leaving this appalling gap in my cultural knowledge aside, our 
questioner has a point: movies, so the consensus seems to go, are fairly dire 
these days,made by idiots in Hollywood for teenagers in China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/11/hollywood-zooms-in-on-china-film-market>
, while TV is where the true art lies. Michael Bay versus Mad Men – those are 
your options, folks. Goodness, no wonder movies are in such terrible shape.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F47eqb%2Fsfb%23img-1&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F47eqb%2Fsfb%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F13%2F1428933824577%2Fdd3c062f-d559-4e74-b761-11bcfc1afeb2-2060x1545.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=If%20this%20is%20a%20golden%20age%20of%20TV%2C%20why%20don%E2%80%99t%20we%20dress%20like%20it%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F47eqb%2Fstw%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=If+this+is+a+golden+age+of+TV%2C+why+don%E2%80%99t+we+dress+like+it%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F47eqb%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F13%2F1428933824577%2Fdd3c062f-d559-4e74-b761-11bcfc1afeb2-2060x1545.jpeg>
 Breaking Bad chic: it’s not going to catch on. Photograph: Frank Ockenfels/AMC 
And it is certainly true that prestige TV programmes now attract the kind of 
media coverage that movies would give their CGI specialist for. Even those of 
us who have somehow avoided these shows are utterly au fait with them, because 
they are pored over by fans as though they were reading the runes: the meaning 
of colour in Breaking Bad 
<http://www.gq-magazine.co.uk/entertainment/articles/2013-08/21/vince-gilligan-breaking-bad-final-season-interview>
! Therole of music in Mad Men 
<http://www.npr.org/blogs/therecord/2015/04/07/398036767/a-nearly-comprehensive-guide-to-the-music-of-mad-men] 
and books [http://www.nypl.org/blog/2012/02/27/mad-men-reading-list>! The 
meaning of red in Better Call Saul 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/robinedds/one-thing-you-probably-didnt-notice-in-better-call-saul#.plMV9b0rw>
! And this is all sweet and pleasingly geeky to observe from a distance, but it 
is also an undeniable truth that none of these shows have had the offscreen 
impact that films in the past did. Movies spanning the quality spectrum from 
Risky Business to Annie Hall to Roman Holiday all famously affected people’s 
actual wardrobes (respectively, Ray-Bans, men’s tailoring on women and full 
skirts and head scarves.) But Breaking Bad? Well, maybe for Halloween costumes, 
but otherwise, not really.

Not even Mad Men, with its much-vaunted gorgeous wardrobe and much-interviewed 
costume designerJanie Bryant <http://janiebryant.com/>, has had any effect on 
how people actually dress. Banana Republic hoped it would, with its briefly 
livedMad Men collection from 2013 
<http://nymag.com/thecut/2013/02/backlash-against-banana-republics-mad-men-line.html>
, but no. I suspect there are two reasons for this: first, audiences are 
perhaps a little more cynical about this kind of direct marketing than they 
once were. Second, and mainly, these shows – Mad Men, primarily – are so 
hyper-designed that they’re really costume dramas, and no one wants to look 
like they’re wearing a costume in their daily life.

This is no slur against these shows – which are all terrific! (So I hear.) But 
I do find it interesting that they have impacted on people’s wardrobes less 
than, say, Flashdance did 30 years ago (leg warmers, ripped sweatshirts). Which 
is of some comfort to those of us who might not have any opinions on the final 
scene of The Sopranos but can genuinely recite Flashdance from memory. Who’s 
lacking in culture now?

Post your questions to Hadley Freeman, Ask Hadley, The Guardian, Kings Place, 
90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Emailask.hadley@theguardian.com 
<mailto:ask.hadley@theguardian.com>.
