
Are Bella, Tiddles and Ginger an endangered species? The companion animals of 
the once great pet-lovers of Britain appear to be falling out of favour.

Pet food sales are in decline and the pet food market is stagnating, according 
toMintel’s Lifestyle report 
<http://store.mintel.com/british-lifestyles-growing-tired-of-austerity-uk-april-2016>
 on consumer trends. Mintel pinpoints demographic changes: an increase in older 
people less likely to own a pet andGeneration Rent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/nov/17/generation-rent-young-adults-housing-ladder-2025>
, for whom pet ownership may be prohibited.

Queen Victoria popularised dog ownership and anointed the world’s first animal 
welfare charity, the RSPCA, but after decades ofthe number of dogs and cats in 
Britain increasing <http://www.pfma.org.uk/historical-pet-ownership-statistics> 
(from an estimated 4.7m dogs and 4.1m cats in 1965 to 9m dogs and 7.9m cats in 
2014),a Pet Food Manufacturers’ Association survey last year 
<http://www.pfma.org.uk/pet-population-2015> found a fall to 8.5m dogs and 7.4m 
cats last year.

These stats are based on a relatively small sample, but the trend is mirrored 
in other affluent, English-speaking countries: dog and catownership in the 
United States 
<https://www.avma.org/KB/Resources/Statistics/Pages/Market-research-statistics-US-pet-ownership.aspx>
,Canada 
<https://www.biv.com/article/2016/1/vet-industry-growing-despite-fall-pet-ownership/>
 and particularlyAustralia 
<http://www.smh.com.au/comment/we-are-losing-dogs-and-cats-and-it-is-a-great-loss-20160103-glyh67.html#ixzz4AzSi6hQI>
 all seem to be in decline.

But why is this? Urban living may be a factor. “Older people – more than a 
third of us will be over 55 in the next five years – don’t tend to have really 
high pet ownership,” says Ina Mitskavets, a senior analyst for Mintel. “The 
market is driven by families with kids, who tend to have the most pets per 
household.”

Peak Stuff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/01/goodbye-curtains-clutter-learned-to-buy-less-stuff-shopping>
 – the preference for experiences over possessions – may also be reducing the 
appeal of pets. “I’ve recently got a couple of kittens,” says Mitskavets, “and 
my life has completely changed. So I can understand it’s a huge commitment, and 
a lot of people shy away from commitments these days because the pace of life 
is so incredible.”

Commitment-phobia is also cited by Marc Abraham <http://www.marcthevet.com/>, 
the TV vet and animal welfare campaigner. “People are reluctant to commit to 
pet ownership, especially dogs, because they require walking twice a day and 
live to 15 years old. That’s a huge commitment, and we want to go on lots of 
holidays,” he says. “Maybe the human need for companionship is being delivered 
now more by social media than getting a pet.”

“I can’t bear it, it’s heartbreaking,” says the novelist Jilly Cooper of the 
decline in pet ownership. Cooper, who campaigned for theAnimals in War 
<http://www.animalsinwar.org.uk/> memorial in London and whose new novel, Mount!
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/08/jilly-coopers-mount-gets-groomed-for-bookshop-impact>
, has “dogs on every page”, believes that red tape is contributing to the 
reduction in the number of dog owners.

“It’s almost impossible to get a dog from a dogs’ home now,” she says. 
“Friends of mine fell in love with a greyhound [in a sanctuary] and after five 
meetings and walks and interviews were told they couldn’t have him because they 
were both out at work.” Many parks and landowners also demand that dogs are 
walked on a lead and, she says, “walking a dog on a lead is no fun for the dog 
or anybody”.

Cooper found her greyhound, Bluebell, “a huge comfort” after the death of her 
husband, Leo <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/dec/03/leo-cooper>, and 
believes dogs are particularly beneficial for grieving or lonely older people – 
a view supported by areview of scientific literature in the BMJ 
<http://www.bmj.com/content/331/7527/1252>. “The one panic for older people is 
that the dog might outlive them,” says Cooper, “but it’s worth the risk for the 
joy.”

Abraham agrees with Cooper. The apparent decline in pet ownership is tragic, 
he says, “not only for the clear health benefits that pets bring to us, but for 
what it teaches not just children but adults about empathy, compassion, 
commitment and looking after something more vulnerable than you”.

 * This article was amended on 13 June 2016. An earlier version said friends 
of Jilly Cooper were told they could not have a dog from a sanctuary because 
they were “out of work”. It should have said “out at work”.



