
Three newspapers will today be reported to the Independent Press Standards 
Organisation (Ipso) for running what are claimed to be innaccurate stories 
about theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> ahead of the 
referendum.

The complaint involves a series of articles published in recent months by the 
three pro-Brexit titles, theDaily Telegraph 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/dailytelegraph>, the Daily Mail (including 
Mail Online) and the Daily Express.

Eight “egregious examples” feature in a dossier compiled by InFacts 
<http://infacts.org/#>, a group campaigning to make “a fact-based case for 
Britain to remain in the European Union” <http://infacts.org/mission-statement/>
.

It cites each one as failing to adhere to the clause about accuracy in the 
editors’ code of practice <https://www.ipso.co.uk/IPSO/cop.html>. InFacts 
argues that the papers have breached the code by failing to “take care not to 
publish inaccurate, misleading or distorted information or images, including 
headlines not supported by the text.”

According to the group’s editor-in-chief, Hugo Dixon, if the papers had taken 
care, they would have known that they were contravening the code.

He is also calling on Ipso to fast-track the InFacts complaint because, if it 
is dealt with in the normal manner, there is a strong likelihood that any 
ruling would occur after the 23 JuneEU referendum 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> vote.

For example, it took two months before Ipso 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/ipso> announced its adjudication on the 
Buckingham Palace complaint about the Sun’s “Queen backs Brexit” front page.

An InFacts website article accompanying its dossier contends that “it is not 
just the Leave campaign that is pumping out falsehoods... The big guns of the 
eurosceptic press are going all in for out.” It continues:

“The Telegraph, Mail and Express have published a string of stories on 
migration, terrorism, crime and control of our borders that contain factual 
inaccuracies and/or distortions...

This comes on top of years of hostile EU coverage that have planted many myths 
in the minds of the electorate.”

Dixon said InFacts has previously contacted the papers about each of the 
articles. Two did not respond. The Mail did but failed to “satisfactorily 
address inaccuracies in the articles.”

The eight stories included in the InFacts dosssier are as follows:

1. “The gap between the official migrant figure and the truth is as wide as 
the Grand Canyon. We are owed an apology” (Telegraph front page, 13 May); 
“Britain’s 1.5 million hidden migrants” (Express front page, 13 May).

2. “Open borders let Isil into Britain, warns US spy chief” (Telegraph front 
page, 27 April); “Isis has taken advantage of Europe’s open borders to plant 
sleeper cells in the UK, Germany and Italy, head of American intelligence 
warns” (Mail Online, 27 April); “EU free movement has allowed ISIS sleeper 
cells into the UK, warns security chief” (Express, 27 April).

3. “Report shows the NHS is nearly at breaking point as massive influx of EU 
migrants forces doctors to take on 1.5 million extra patients in just three 
years.” (Mail Online, 3 April; Mail, 4 April).

4. “Britain could stop ten times more terror suspects from entering the 
country if it leaves the EU, justice minister says as he blasts EU rules for 
allowing terrorists to ‘waltz into Britain’” (Mail Online, 30 March);

5. “Now EU wants asylum control” (Express front page, 8 March).

6. “EU seeks control of our coasts” (Express, 7 March).

7. “More than 700 offences are being committed by EU migrants every week, 
official figures suggest” (Telegraph, 17 February); “Criminal convictions for 
EU migrants leap by 40% in five years: 700 found guilty every week in the UK 
but less than 20,000 foreign criminals have been deported” (Mail Online, 17 
February); “EU migrants convicted of 700 crimes each WEEK – but only thousands 
of them are deported” (Express, 17 February).

8. “The daughter-in-law of Abu Hamza cannot be deported from Britain despite a 
criminal past because of human rights laws, an EU law chief has ruled.” 
(Telegraph front page, 6 February).

The exact reasons for each of InFacts’ complaints can be found on its website 
under a headline about“the hateful eight” <http://infacts.org/hateful_eight/> 
and can also be foundhere on the Guardian website 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/19/inaccurate-pro-brexit-infacts-investigation-media-reports-eu-referendum>
.
