
Southern Italy is known for its fine food, wines and plentiful sunshine, but 
visitors might be shocked to learn that its famous countryside and farmland – 
in particular its citrus groves and tomato fields – are the setting for a 
modern-day story of exploitation and inequality.


Each year, thousands of migrant workers – predominantly from Africa, but also 
Eastern Europe and other parts of Italy (some legal, some illegal) – flock to 
the regionlooking for work  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2006/dec/19/italy.ethicalliving>in the 
seasonal fruit and vegetable harvests.

Official estimates of numbers are hard to come by but the Italian farmer group 
Coldiretti <http://www.coldiretti.it/> estimates around 120,000 migrants are 
working in the agricultural sector in southern Italy.
Map of Italy 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/maps/embed/feb/2016-02-16T10:51:31.html>  The 
town of Rosarno in southern Italy has long been home to migrants working in the 
orange sector. 
Some cash-strapped farmers, often working in conjunction with middlemen – or 
gangmasters – are only too happy to take advantage of this ready supply of 
cheap labour. And the farmers say that the prices they receive from buyers 
aren’t sufficient to sustain more permanent workers and regular wages.


Coca-Cola caught up in controversy 

In 2012, an investigation <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u9jTowyQ3B8> 
uncovered the plight of migrants employed in Southern Italy’s orange harvest, 
centred around the town of Rosarno. Many were found to be living in squalid 
conditions, some in shanty-style camps, with no running water or electricity, 
others in abandoned farmhouses or derelict factories; some were found to be 
sleeping in the open.

For a day’s work in the orange groves, migrants were found to receive around 
€25 (£19), with deductions by gangmasters for transport and lunch.

The revelations prompted an outcry across Italy and pledges from the Coca-Cola 
Company 
<http://www.theecologist.org/News/news_analysis/1261512/coca_cola_responds_to_orange_harvest_exploitation_controversy.html>
 – which was found to be using orange ingredients from the region in its 
European-sold Fanta drinks – to extend its auditing of suppliers and facilitate 
talks to improve conditions across the supply chain.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gee7%2Fsfb%23img-1&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gee7%2Fsfb%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3187b742334d44b774039157da4a5097e31b738%2F0_193_3872_2324%2F3872.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Italy's%20oranges%20are%20linked%20to%20a%20modern%20day%20story%20of%20exploitation&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gee7%2Fstw%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+Italy%27s+oranges+are+linked+to+a+modern+day+story+of+exploitation&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gee7%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3187b742334d44b774039157da4a5097e31b738%2F0_193_3872_2324%2F3872.jpg>
 Migrants in Rosarno, southern Italy, have in the past been found squatting in 
factories. Photograph: Christian Sinibaldi 
Four years on from the scandal, Coca-Cola says it has now upgraded how it 
assesses suppliers to check on the recruitment and employment of migrant 
workers, but with record numbers of refugees and migrants now entering the EU, 
the situation in Rosarno is still precarious.

More than 80% of the migrants 
<http://www.mediciperidirittiumani.org/en/plain-of-gioia-tauro-orange-picking-seasonlack-of-government-measures-in-calabria/>
 working in agriculture in the region don’t have an employment contract and 
more than half of them are sleeping on the ground, living without water, 
electricity and hygienic services, says Medici per i Diritti Umani (Doctors for 
Human Rights), a medical organisation that treats migrants in mobile clinics in 
the town.

When we go in a supermarket or market we don’t know anything about the oranges 
... which harvest, who picked them

“The more desperate workers are the more they can be blackmailed by 
gangmasters or the owners. If you are not happy with the working conditions 
there are hundreds like you around the corner,” says Celeste Logiacco from the 
FLAI CGIL Calabria (Union of Agricultural Workers).

 The authorities can now penalise companies employing gangmasters, but the NGO 
Terra!, which campaigns for greater transparancy in the sector, says that 
tackling the problem has proved difficult because of the complex nature of the 
orange supply chain, meaning it is easy for companies to avoid responsibility.

“The problem in the orange chain is the number of passages of the product,” 
says campaigner Fabio Ciconte. “The small producer sells the oranges either to 
an organisation of producers or to a buyer who sells to a big supermarket. When 
we go in a supermarket or market we don’t know anything about the oranges, 
where they come from, which harvest, who picked them.”


Coca-Cola says that all its suppliers are based in Sicily, but it could be 
sourcing oranges that had been harvested in the Rosarno region and shipped to 
Sicily. However, it said it had audited all its suppliers in Sicily and taken 
action to reduce the risk of it being linked to the exploitation of migrants.

Related: Bitter harvest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2006/dec/19/italy.ethicalliving> 

“All suppliers are required to meet our supplier guiding principles 
<http://www.coca-colacompany.com/our-company/supplier-guiding-principles/>. 
These highlight the expectations of suppliers and emphasise the importance of 
responsible workplace practices that respect human rights and comply, at a 
minimum, with applicable environmental and local labour laws and core 
international conventions,” said a spokesperson, who added that Coca-Cola had 
also been supporting projects in the Rosarno region that helped migrant workers.

Many farmers acknowledge the conditions of migrant workers, but say the root 
of the problem lies in the economic situation. “If you are a small producer you 
have two solutions: one, leave the oranges on the trees, or two, exploit 
[those] weaker than you,” says Nino Quaranta, a producer and founder of
SosRosarno <http://www.sosrosarno.org/>, a cooperative fighting the workers 
exploitation in orange harvesting.

The companies procuring juice and other orange products from the region say 
they are not responsible for fixing the prices paid for raw materials and to 
farmers. “Our associates don’t harvest oranges or have direct contacts with the 
producers. They buy juice from transformation industries that buy oranges from 
consortiums and producers,” says David Dabiankov Lorini, president of the soft 
drinks association Assobibe, which includes Coca-Cola among its members.

Although acknowledging the problems facing migrant workers in the region, 
Lorini points out that his sector is not the only destination for Rosarno’s 
orange harvest, with just 7% of Italian citrus production going into the juice 
and aromas industry.


