
I have just returned from Disneyland Paris, where everyone smiles whether or 
not they are having a good time. It was enough to make you think that smiling, 
like yawning, could be catching. And so it is. In1963 an “epidemic” of laughter 
among girls in a boarding school in Tanganyika (now Tanzania) 
<http://rltz.blogspot.co.uk/2007/05/from-central-african-medical-journal.html> 
forced it to close – although the outbreak was possibly due to mass hysteria 
rather than genuine mirth – whilea study on the effects of a “laugh box” 
<http://link.springer.com/article/10.3758/BF03330380> showed that most people 
laughed or smiled in response to canned guffaws.

Laughter is almost always social – occurring 30 times more often in company 
than in solitary situations.A study published this week in the Proceedings of 
the Royal Society 
<http://www.eurekalert.org/pub_releases/2015-08/uow-hsb081915.php> has taken 
the idea of contagious smiling one step further, by examining the effect on our 
own happiness of having friends who have a “healthy mood”. The researchers used 
American data from theNational Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health 
<http://www.cpc.unc.edu/projects/addhealth> to do complex mathematical 
modelling, which the study’s author, Ed Hill, did a good job of trying to 
explain to me.

Essentially, they had data on mood (self-assessed at specific points in time 
using a validated questionnaire) and on friendship networks, and they modelled 
the spread of moods among individuals using methods similar to those used to 
track the spread of infectious diseases. They found that adolescents with five 
or more mentally healthy friends had half the probability of developing – and 
double the likelihood of recovering from – depression over a six- to 12-month 
period. So if you can catch happiness from other people, shouldn’t you hang 
around them more?

The solution

Yes, you definitely should: there is other evidence that happiness spreads. A 
study published in the BMJ in 2008 of 4,739 members of the Framingham Heart 
Study <http://www.bmj.com/content/337/bmj.a2338#ref-18> social network found 
that the relationship between people’s happiness extends as far as three 
degrees of separation – to the friends of friends’ friends. The effects were 
stronger with geographical proximity – a happy nextdoor neighbour increases the 
likelihood that you will be happy by just over a third. Happy people, say the 
authors, may be nicer to others, share their good fortune by being more 
helpful, or just exude an emotion that makes other people feel better about 
life. However they do it, they make those around them happy, too.

Hill, an applied mathematician, believes we can help teenagers avoid 
depression by encouraging their friendships – and his study found no evidence 
for depression being contagious, so there is no risk from having a mate with a 
low mood. The BMJ study, too, found that misery did not spread through social 
networks as effectively as happiness. “When you’re smiling the Whole World 
Smiles With You,” as the old song has it, appears to be scientifically accurate.
