
“You’ve got to remember,” says Alastair Campbell 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/alastaircampbell>, studiedly lolling on 
his publicist’s tiny sofa in Pimlico, “I’m 57. So even though I only started 
working for Tony in ’94, I was very close to Neil [Kinnock]. I remember this 
period really well, and it was absolutely horrible. We kept losing. Ed Balls, 
Ed Miliband, Andy Burnham – they only started to come on the scene when we were 
already winning. They don’t have that same collective memory of what losing is 
like.”

Campbell insists that there’s nothing wrong with today’s Labour leadership. 
“Ed’s working his balls off!” he announces, feelingly. But he also says: 
“Particularly this close to the election, I’m not going to say anything that 
damages Labour, because I think this government is terrible and I really want a
Labour <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> government back.” And after 
that, one takes anything he says about the team with a pinch of salt. Which, I 
have to assume, is part of his strategy.

Campbell is, of course, a master strategist. In his incredibly long, weirdly 
compelling new book,Winners and How They Succeed 
<http://www.alastaircampbell.org>, he talks about it incessantly. And he argues 
that people who win all start from the same place: they hate losing. You’ve got 
to hate losing more than you love winning.

In person, such certainties are humanised by a peppery, fiery humour. 
Campbell’s affable manner takes the sting out of any skirmish. What sounds like 
mindless self-congratulation on the page – “When I crossed that finishing line 
in 3 hours, 53 minutes and 1 second [in his first marathon], I knew I had 
‘won’, and felt delirious and fulfilled” – is … well, he doesn’t seem to say 
that sort of thing out loud. He’s funny, across a whole range of comic 
conventions (a really caustic impression of David Cameron; a self-parodying 
analysis of the tactical clues he gathered from where his interviewer placed 
themselves, when there were only two other chairs, unless you sat on his knee).

I disagree with him on almost everything. The more I read him on what 
politicians ought to learn from sport, the more I decided that everything that 
is wrong with politics stems from people who think it ought to be more like 
sport. He didn’t try to persuade me, so much as best me: it was a bit of a 
broadcast strategy for a print game, but we’ll let that go.

Related: Alastair Campbell advises Ed Miliband to take election tips from 
Albania 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/oct/25/alastair-campbell-ed-miliband-election-tips-albania>

What else do winners all have? An objective (often, “to win”). They have a 
strategy, and they know the difference between that and tactics. They never get 
confused, or diverted. They make their own weather, they don’t just react to 
other people’s strategies. It sounds easy, but when he lists the people who 
can’t do it, or simply aren’t doing it – Nato, the Conservative party, Barack 
Obama – it becomes plain that it isn’t.

Strategy is point one; it is joined, to make a “holy trinity” of winning, by 
“leadership” and “teamship”. Not every case study is from business or sport – 
sometimes, it is a country (The Winning Spirit of Australia); other times, it 
is the The Queen (A Very British Winner). José Mourinho is the strategist,Edi 
Rama <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edi_Rama>, the team-player, and Anna Wintour 
the leader. Some of it could have used some serious pruning – Wintour, for 
instance, is quoted: “This is not a job you only do at a desk. I really think 
you have to go out and see things, screenings, theatre, exhibitions, I travel a 
lot.” (Newsflash: rich, powerful person enjoys doing enjoyable things).

And yet the authorial voice calls you to attention, and holds you until it has 
quite finished. More than bouncy, cheerful aggression, he has authority; 
reassurance pours off him, the sense that not only is he believable, but if you 
were to let him get on with things, everything would be better. The journalist 
India Knight apparently told Campbell that he should be leading the Labour 
party. I know exactly what she means. Last month someone spat at him in the 
street, and I sort of know what that person meant as well.

“Every politician,” he writes, “would do well to delete the word ‘chess’ and 
insert the word ‘politics’ in the following telling remark: ‘In chess if you 
play without long-term goals your decisions will be purely reactive and you’ll 
be playing your opponent’s game, not your own.’” I raise this first, because it 
seems to define this interesting place we’re at in politics: “Well, Cameron is 
a case in point,” he says, but stops, I think because he knows that exactly the 
same could be said of Miliband. My question was: if politicians on neither side 
are making the weather, who is? I cannot believe it’s all coming from Nigel 
Farage and the Daily Mail; and yet, the agenda is being set somewhere, by 
someone. “Who makes their own weather?” he starts, discarding my question for 
one that interests him more. “I think Putin makes his own weather. Merkel does. 
Isis do, whether you like it or not.”

Ah, Putin: the book’s relationship with the Russian president is vexed. On the 
one hand, Campbell says simply that he is a bad man. On the other, he is full 
of admiration for his dealings with other major world leaders; specifically,at 
the G20 summit in Brisbane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/16/vladimir-putin-leaves-g20-after-leaders-line-up-to-browbeat-him-over-ukraine>
, when he “told other leaders he was the only one in the room with a strategy, 
and that they were all tactical, adding: ‘You think your tactics will bring me 
to my knees, but you will be on your knees first.’” (This gobbet is not in the 
public domain, as far as I know – in terms of contacts, the insiders’ 
confidence, he’s still got it.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F467fb%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F467fb%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F27%2F1425044105198%2F45740f84-feed-45e5-bfae-52c3094e85f3-2060x1745.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alastair%20Campbell%3A%20%E2%80%98Labour%20have%20a%20better%20story%20to%20tell%2C%20and%20it%E2%80%99s%20not%20being%20told%E2%80%99%0D%0A&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F467fb%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alastair+Campbell%3A+%E2%80%98Labour+have+a+better+story+to+tell%2C+and+it%E2%80%99s+not+being+told%E2%80%99%0D%0A&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F467fb%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F27%2F1425044105198%2F45740f84-feed-45e5-bfae-52c3094e85f3-2060x1745.jpeg>
 Vladimir Putin, Alastair Campbell and Tony Blair in Downing Street in 2003. 
Photograph: Grigory Dukor/Reuters 
Campbell talks about how difficult it is to stick to your strategy in an age 
of constant media scrutiny, which is why Putin “saw media control as a 
strategic priority, something that would, of course, rightly be impossible in a 
fully fledged democracy”. So, here’s the question: what if the fact that Putin 
is a bad man, and the fact that he has a clear strategy from which he cannot be 
swerved, isn’t a coincidence? What if these are two sides of the same coin – he 
cannot be challenged because he brooks no challenge – and the masterplan 
Campbell so admires is actually impossible (never mind undesirable) in a 
mature, pluralistic democracy?

“The point I’m making is that it’s too simplistic to say: ‘He’s a bad man.’ 
The fact that he has the guts to say, ‘I’m the only one who’s got a strategy’ – 
now that might be over-reach. That might be because something bad’s going on in 
his head. That might be because he’s turning into a classic Russian 
totalitarian. But there is a lot of truth in it. That’s the point I’m making.”

Fair enough – it is rather absurd, the western fascination with Russian 
divergence from the social democratic norms, when they are only more overt and 
probably no more transgressive than, say,Guantánamo Bay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/guantanamo-files> or GCHQ 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/gchq> surveillance. But my question remains 
unanswered: can you even be a strategist in the sporting or business model when 
you are bound to listen to others? A lot of these winning traits are 
essentially authoritarian: beat to one drum, don’t change the drum, for God’s 
sake don’t change or question the drummer. They might add up to a successful 
electioneering policy, but what they don’t add up to is a participatory 
politics, which I’d venture is part of the reason people no longer care about 
elections.

He shrugs. He doesn’t think this is a very relevant line of inquiry. 
“Politicians should worry about what their strategy is for what they believe, 
for the power they have, for the time they have it, for the world they live in, 
and what they are trying to achieve. To be fair to old TB, I always knew what 
he was about. I always knew what he was trying to do.”

Sometimes I don’t know if I’m even allowed to mention Blair to his former 
coterie, as if it’s like mentioning an ex-husband. But Campbell loves talking 
about him. I floated my theory that it won’t be possible to have a proper 
conversation about what Blair achieved until we find some way of talking about 
him that isn’t about Iraq (I’ve said this before, and been accused of 
supporting the murder of children; mainly on Twitter, but also by my mother).

“Even with Iraq,” he says. “You still get people saying, even though they have 
no voice in the media, ‘He was right about Iraq.’” “Really?” I say, tilting my 
head. Because that isn’t true. There is no hoard of people, wishing their 
support of the war could be heard, locked out of the public domain by a hostile 
media: not unless pollsters are controlled by the same fundamentalist 
pacifists. By 2007,83% of people opposed that war 
<https://www.ipsos-mori.com/researchpublications/researcharchive/3146/Iraq-war-damaged-Britains-reputation-in-the-world.aspx>
; so he’s either setting a lot of store by the remaining 17% (some of whom were 
“don’t knows”) or he’s merely summoning a “silent” (also “invisible”) 
groundswell of his own imagination.

Here, again, I think he would do well to remember the difference between 
politics and sport. In politics, you can, through bare assertion, insist that 
you won when you didn’t. José Mourinho couldn’t do that. As the poem goes, you 
can’t fake ballet. That extra room for manoeuvre – for spin, for presentation, 
for whatever you want to call it – makes it far more important, for 
politicians, to listen to others than simply to assert themselves more.

Related: Alastair Campbell: Gordon Brown was brilliant but a nightmare to work 
with 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/dec/02/alastair-campbell-gordon-brown>

Campbell won’t have it. “I’m not pretending the debate has not swung a very 
long way in the wrong direction from where Tony was,” he says. Then he shrugs. 
OK, maybe people do feel that they were deceived and that lives were lost that 
needn’t have been. It’s just unfortunate that they’re all wrong.

Adamant though he is that he won’t criticise Miliband, it is noticeable that 
he doesn’t crop up once in the book — which, given the title, is unfortunate. 
Campbell would obviously love to roll up his sleeves and dispense some advice. 
“There’s a tendency in politics to put a blanket over talented people. We live 
in a more presidential system now, so a lot of it’s about Cameron and Miliband. 
But at shadow cabinet level we have a better story to tell, and it’s not being 
told.”

I agree on paper – I’d like to hear ministers say what they think, rather than 
reading a party line eight times into a camera 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jlTggc0uBA8>, but I don’t think that’s what 
Campbell means. I think he means teamship in a more sporting sense, in which 
everyone unleashes their talent in the service of one person’s ideas. He talks 
approvingly in the book of many such scenarios:Alex Ferguson forced Roy Keane 
out of Man United 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/sport1/hi/football/teams/m/man_utd/4449396.stm> because 
he was undermining the team, and no one person, however talented, could be 
allowed to broadcast disunity to the spectators.

But if we’re to see this as a political parable, the “team” is the politicians 
and the voters are the spectators. The unity of the team must be preserved if 
they’re to beat the other team; all that remains for us is to watch (and 
cheer). What kind of politics is that? How is that ever going to work? “That’s 
a fair point,” he says, “but a different point.” (I would translate that 
loosely as: “I can see that you are alive. I don’t accept what’s coming out of 
your mouth.”)

There is – not in the book, but in the way he tells a story – a love affair 
with people “going mad”. Mourinho goes mad when someone takes an unauthorised 
strike,Philip Gould 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/apr/19/when-die-philip-gould-review> 
used to “go mad”; Campbell himself famously used to yell his head off at 
journalists who had failed to obey him – so I wonder whether he has some 
fondness for fireworks.

“When did I say that?” he says, abruptly.

A minute ago: “‘Mourinho went mad.’”

“And your point is?”

Well, is that fair? Do you love histrionics?

“Sport is often about that,” he says, ruminatively. “I was literally there 
when Chris Froome broke away from the pack on Mont Ventoux and that was the 
moment he won the Tour. I love the big moments, yes.” A lovely answer to a 
totally different question. That’s how you win at conversation, I guess. I am 
no wiser as to why you’d want to.

Winners and How They Succeed is published by Hutchinson at £20. Buy it for £16 
atbookshop.theguardian.com <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/winning-251963.html>
