
Parenting really did a number on us. Before our baby came along, my wife and I 
were a pair of relatively healthy, relatively normal-shaped human beings. But 
raising a child made us doughy and exhausted. Exercise became a distant memory 
and, coupled with the fact that mealtimes became an opportunity to one-handedly 
cram as much sugar into our mouths as possible in a demented bid to stay awake, 
we ended up bloated, listless and riddled with acid reflux.

We needed an intervention, and that’s precisely what we found in Manoir La 
Croix de La Jugie’s week-long postnatal retreat. In a sprawling house, deep in 
the French countryside near Limoges, the retreat promised a tempting 
combination of exercise, healthy eating and total relaxation. It would be a 
kick up the bum for us, a fresh start, a hacked-clear pathway back to a 
semblance of normality.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gcvh%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gcvh%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac07eb3b64cd10f2fc6ca720d081a0b09fb373ec%2F0_0_3865_2299%2F3865.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20baby%2C%20crying%2C%20no%20sleep%20%E2%80%A6%20retreat%20to%20France!&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gcvh%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New+baby%2C+crying%2C+no+sleep+%E2%80%A6+retreat+to+France%21&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gcvh%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac07eb3b64cd10f2fc6ca720d081a0b09fb373ec%2F0_0_3865_2299%2F3865.jpg>
 Manoir La Croix de La Jugie 
We didn’t go without some small measure of trepidation, though. For a whole 
week, we’d be sharing the house with three other families – four if you counted 
owners Clio and Bryn, who run the retreat, and their 13-month-old daughter. If 
you’ve ever spent any time around new parents, you’ll know how terrifying that 
sounds.

Related: And relax … an Ibiza yoga retreat for new mums 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/jan/09/yoga-moma-ibiza-mother-baby-holiday>

New parents are awful. They’re self-absorbed and judgmental. They all think 
the way they bring up their baby is correct and should be applied to every baby 
in the world. Plus they only ever talk about their babies. Who cry constantly. 
On the train to Limoges from Paris, the prospect of spending seven days being 
sneered at by swishy-ponytailed yummy mummies and and daddies in a roomful of 
bawling kids sounded quite a lot like actual hell.


Luckily, my fears were unfounded. Clio and Bryn couldn’t have been more 
welcoming and the atmosphere couldn’t have been more relaxed. All the parents 
shared the same community spirit and were ready to pitch in at the drop of a 
hat. What amazed me most was that our son – seven months old at the time – was 
the oldest baby there. The other kids were four, three and two months 
respectively. Considering that we barely managed to get dressed for the first 
six months of our son’s life, being organised enough to get to rural France 
seemed like an almost superhuman feat on the part of everyone else.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gcvh%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gcvh%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3450159a5740ab591508ea26e1cd392cc722e21a%2F0_96_3872_2325%2F3872.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20baby%2C%20crying%2C%20no%20sleep%20%E2%80%A6%20retreat%20to%20France!&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gcvh%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New+baby%2C+crying%2C+no+sleep+%E2%80%A6+retreat+to+France%21&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gcvh%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3450159a5740ab591508ea26e1cd392cc722e21a%2F0_96_3872_2325%2F3872.jpg>
 The pool 
The week had a structure, but guests were free to stick to it as much or as 
little as they wanted. Each day there’d be breakfast, then a workout for the 
mums, then lunch, then a free afternoon, another workout for the mums, and 
finally dinner, served from steaming communal pots at the kitchen table.

If that all sounds a little dad-light, it’s meant to. While the mothers were 
out working up a sweat, the fathers got to be primary caregiver. This worked 
out great for me – I enjoy hanging out with my son much more than I enjoy 
exercise – but it went down even better with the other dads, who all had very 
important-sounding jobs and didn’t get to see as much of their offspring as 
they’d like.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gcvh%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gcvh%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fceca2410009eaac6a240d884a7d0c21aee950fce%2F0_0_2592_3872%2F2592.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20baby%2C%20crying%2C%20no%20sleep%20%E2%80%A6%20retreat%20to%20France!&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gcvh%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New+baby%2C+crying%2C+no+sleep+%E2%80%A6+retreat+to+France%21&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gcvh%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fceca2410009eaac6a240d884a7d0c21aee950fce%2F0_0_2592_3872%2F2592.jpg>
 Baby Heritage puts his mum through her paces 
The fitness sessions, overseen by personal trainer Caroline Bragg, also seemed 
expertly judged. After the first class, my wife came bounding into our bedroom 
babbling about how energised she felt. It was a sentiment shared by all the 
mums – giving birth is so monumentally gruelling that even something as simple 
as a 45-minute workout helped them feel as if they were back in control of 
their bodies.

Then came Wednesday, where the roles were reversed and the dads got to 
exercise. This was less successful, although I attribute that solely to the 
fact that, at this point, I’m essentially just a quivering mass of cholesterol 
and furred arteries. But, again, Caroline was there at all stages, walking the 
line between flattery and discipline.

But by far the best thing to happen during the retreat was seeing the 
camaraderie slowly build up between all the parents. Every one of us had been 
through something huge this year – in all honesty, we were all probably still 
quite shellshocked by it – and I took quite a lot of solace in finding the 
common ground from all our experiences. Strangers form strong bonds when 
they’re flung together in a new situation, and that’s precisely what happened 
here.

I very rarely get sad as holidays end – I’m always eager to get back home, 
mainly to see whether we’ve been burgled or not – but this was an exception. 
The whole break was perfectly judged from beginning to end. If we wanted to 
explore the region, Bryn was quick to offer trips to the closest village or a 
nearby zoo. If we wanted time to ourselves, we could walk in the grounds or go 
for a swim or play pool or just hang out in one of the house’s many cosy nooks. 
We ate well, we exercised well and we relaxed. Plus, on top of that, I got to 
spend so much uninterrupted time with my son that my wife started complaining 
that I’d become his favourite parent. Frankly, I’d love the place just for that.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gcvh%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gcvh%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7adb41727a148cab214c4997a300742133635e8d%2F0_0_3872_2325%2F3872.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20baby%2C%20crying%2C%20no%20sleep%20%E2%80%A6%20retreat%20to%20France!&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gcvh%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New+baby%2C+crying%2C+no+sleep+%E2%80%A6+retreat+to+France%21&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gcvh%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7adb41727a148cab214c4997a300742133635e8d%2F0_0_3872_2325%2F3872.jpg>
 A bedroom at the retreat 
I could have happily stayed at Manoir La Croix de La Jugie for much longer 
than I did, soaking up the serenity and eating apples from the orchard with my 
son. But as the week came to a close, we bade our sad farewells, made plans to 
visit again as soon as possible and prepared to start our new lives afresh as 
healthy, clean-eating citizens.

Admittedly we did this last bit over a massive burger at Gare du Nord on the 
way home but, look, one step at a time.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gcvh%2Fsfb%23img-6&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gcvh%2Fsfb%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01b5d4a0121482ce918efcc57c0f77921eeffa15%2F382_479_3490_2095%2F3490.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20baby%2C%20crying%2C%20no%20sleep%20%E2%80%A6%20retreat%20to%20France!&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gcvh%2Fstw%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New+baby%2C+crying%2C+no+sleep+%E2%80%A6+retreat+to+France%21&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gcvh%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01b5d4a0121482ce918efcc57c0f77921eeffa15%2F382_479_3490_2095%2F3490.jpg>
 Stuart’s fears over sharing the week with other new parents proved unfounded 
Way to go

The trip was provided by Manoir La Croix de La Jugie (andbreathepostnatal.com 
<http://www.andbreathepostnatal.com/classic/>) whose seven-night fitness 
retreat costs £1,500 for two adults and baby (siblings under five £200 each), 
including meals with wine, daily fitness classes for mum, one personal training 
session per adult, a dads’ fitness session, a massage for each adult, and four 
hours’ babysitting. The next courses are from 25 March, 25 June and 3 
September. Weekly rental of the Manoir (lajugie.co.uk 
<http://www.lajugie.co.uk/>) which sleeps 19, costs from £3,000. Train travel 
from London to Limoges via Paris (around six hours) was provided byVoyages SNCF,
 <https://uk.voyages-sncf.com/en/?redirect=yes#/>which has returns from £110pp.
