
Cycling has never felt better, I think to myself, as I pedal through southern 
Mauritius with the sun on my arms. To my left is a field of sugar cane, to my 
right the glossy Indian Ocean and behind, a friendly giant, pushing me gently 
along. At least that’s what it feels like. This is no ordinary hire bike, but 
an electric bike. At a touch of a button, it makes you bionic.

Related: Hiking in Mauritius: more than a walk in the (national) park 
<http://www.theguardian.com/ba-guide-to-mauritius-2016/2016/apr/29/hiking-in-mauritius-more-than-a-walk-in-the-national-park>

 I’m one of the first to try a new half-day nature, history and culture tour 
devised by Laurent Marrier d’Unienville, a sport-loving Mauritian who only 
discovered electric bikes last year. “In January 2015, my life changed 
completely,” he says. “I was diagnosed with cancer and had to travel to France 
for treatment. I was 36 years old and wrecked, but a Swiss friend suggested 
that an e-bike might help me regain my fitness. I hadn’t tried one before – 
we’ve never had them in Mauritius – but when I did I was like: ‘Wow! This 
works.’ It’s the perfect way to train.”

 The idea of tours came soon after, and Laurent’s new company, Electro-Bike 
Discovery <http://www.electrobikemauritius.com/?lang=en>, was born. “I realised 
I had a decision to make. If I was going to stay healthy, I needed to make my 
life less stressful and spend more time with my wife and kids. So I gave up my 
engineering job, bought 20 Swiss e-bikes and shipped them to Mauritius. I felt 
I had nothing to lose.”

 At first, his friends were sceptical. “Most Mauritians don’t cycle. There’s a 
barrier – people think it’s dangerous. So the tours we’ve created stick to the 
south, where it’s quiet and rural but the roads are smooth. I lead from the 
front, a support driver follows behind, and we do everything we can to keep 
everyone safe.”

If my tour is typical, he’s getting it right. Of the seven Mauritians in my 
10-strong group, only one is a regular cyclist, but everyone’s bowling along 
like pros. Halfway through the ride, one woman plucks up the courage to bump up 
her power and cruises past the lot of us, whooping with delight.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4taqg%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4taqg%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9210c654d85647e26bb37e1754d4b43f8516cadb%2F0_130_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Watts%20on%20in%20Mauritus%3A%20how%20e-bikes%20are%20expanding%20the%20must-see%20list&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4taqg%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Watts+on+in+Mauritus%3A+how+e-bikes+are+expanding+the+must-see+list&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4taqg%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9210c654d85647e26bb37e1754d4b43f8516cadb%2F0_130_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
 Stopping to admire the coastal scenery at Gris-Gris beach. Photograph: Emma 
Gregg 
 With our bikes doing as much work as we choose, we’re free to enjoy our 
surroundings – the green of the fields, cooking smells in villages, the soft 
sound of the waves. As we pedal through shady groves of filao trees to the 
shore, we’re serenaded by bulbuls, mynahs and doves.

 One by one, we discover the coast’s low-key beauty spots – Jacotet Bay with 
its rumours of pirate treasure, Gris-Gris where green turtles used to nest, and 
a little park named after the benevolent Irish botanist Charles Telfair, dotted 
with banyan and almond trees. Even the 18th-century cemetery has ocean views, 
one might say, to die for. It’s the resting place of the island’s first 
settlers, and we spot the name Marrier d’Unienville on several of its grander 
tombs.

 Lunch is a feast of classic Mauritian rotis, curry and gajaks, prepared for 
us by Laurent’s friend Madame Mala in her cosy family home.

“I love bringing visitors here,” says Laurent. “It’s great to just chat about 
the simple details of life – what time kids go to school, what people eat, how 
families get along together. In villages like this, Indians, Creoles, Tamils, 
Europeans, south-east Asians and Chinese live peacefully, in nature, side by 
side. Is there any other country where every city, town and village – even the 
tiniest – is so multicultural? This is the essence of Mauritius, and a glimpse 
of its heart and soul.”

British Airways flies direct three times a week from Gatwick to Mauritius. For 
more information and to book, visitbritishairways.com/mauritius 
<https://ad.doubleclick.net/ddm/clk/302966546;130080452;z>
