
Local government 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/local-government> is 
entering a new stage in the journey to a low-carbon future. The low-hanging 
fruit of providing energy efficiency measures within the council estate and 
facilitating access to information and incentives for the public to reduce its 
carbon footprint have been delivered.


For the past decade Oxford city council’s team has excelled in such project 
delivery. It has achieved a 5% reduction in its own footprint each year from 
installing everything from solar panels and battery storage at a community 
centre to LED chandelier fittings in the town hall.

Establishing the most effective roles and responsibilities for a change 
process is easier said than done.

But incremental benefits on this scale can no longer be achieved through 
measures that pay back in less than 10 years. What is needed are fundamental 
changes across all operations. This will need ambitious and fully coordinated 
low-carbon programmes with a remit well beyond the boundary of a council’s own 
estate. In Oxford we have a target to reduce city-wide emissions, not just the 
council’s own emissions, by 40% by 2020. The clock is ticking.

We understand that reducing the emissions of a whole city requires partnership 
working and we’re learning that not shying away from difficult conversations is 
a key element of this. What is not yet widely enough acknowledged is the need 
for a wholesale cultural and operational change and a corresponding shift in 
the manner in which a council’s sustainability team functions. Without such a 
core change to a council’s own perspective, its ability to persuade any partner 
to take the same steps towards a low-carbon future will be severely curtailed.

The challenges raised by, say, a proposal to enforce loading restrictions in 
the town centre, to ease congestion, reduce carbon emissions and improve air 
quality, are met with objections from all directions. The postroom team has no 
incentive to consolidate deliveries on-site and has other pressures on staffing 
and storage space higher up their priority list. The council-run waste 
collection service will consider changing its schedule but the result will be 
that it infringes the city centre team’s request for early pick-ups to avoid 
rubbish on the streets during shopping hours.

The issue here is as clear as day. Those of us in the sustainability team 
cannot deliver such proposals on our own but we can play a vital role in 
prioritising and facilitating them by leading and supporting the various other 
teams involved. It is from these teams that ownership of the solutions needed 
must come and consistent senior-level leadership for them will be essential.


In a world of budget cuts and restructuring, establishing the most effective 
roles and responsibilities for a change process is easier said than done. This 
is the difference between leadership and management: a good leader will need to 
facilitate the development of management practices to both move out of siloed 
technical project delivery and to maximise the benefits that can be realised by 
changing our operational model.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yxtx%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yxtx%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e29b4231333b63397a36eb0bb92eda829b3a390%2F268_171_726_796%2F726.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paving%20the%20way%20in%20local%20government%20for%20a%20low-carbon%20future&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yxtx%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paving+the+way+in+local+government+for+a+low-carbon+future&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yxtx%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e29b4231333b63397a36eb0bb92eda829b3a390%2F268_171_726_796%2F726.jpg>
 Brookes: scholarship winner Photograph: Henley Business School 
Mairi Brookes, sustainable city team manager at Oxford city council, is the 
winner of the 2016 scholarship for a fully-funded, part-time place, worth up to 
£17,900, on thenew MA course 
<http://www.henley.ac.uk/news/news-item/ma-leadership-scholarship-competition/> 
at Henley Business School. The scholarship has been designed to offer practical 
support for aspiring leaders, in employment, looking to develop modern 
leadership skills and the competition was run in conjunction with the 
Guardian’s professional networks. This is Brookes’s winning essay on the 
challenges for sustainability in local government.


Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.

