
An ice cream company is to air the first Cornish language TV ad, weeks after 
the government sparked anger by cutting all funding for the threatened language.

The family-run Kelly’s of Cornwall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/cornwall>, which says it has been in 
business in the region for over 100 years, has taken the bold move to launch 
the Cornish language ad nationally in prime time on channels including ITV and 
Channel 4.


The 30-second ad, which features a Cornish ice cream seller speaking the 
ancient Kernewek language while he sells his product, launches on Monday and 
will run for six weeks in programmes including Channel 4’s Food Unwrapped and 
ITV’s Britain’s Got Talent.

Bodmin-based Kelly’s, which uses the tagline Kelly’s is Cornish for ice cream, 
has created the ad with support from the Cornish Language Partnership.

“Although they’re fun and entertaining [ads] there’s also a serious point 
being made about the important role of language in celebrating culture and 
heritage,” said Mark Trevethan, from the Cornish Language Partnership. “We’re 
looking forward to hearing Cornish spoken on national television in an advert 
for the first time, thanks to Kelly’s.”

Part of the campaign, which has been created by ad agency Isobel, will also 
see a download-able tongue-in-cheek Cornish phrasebook launched.

The launch of the ad follows the government’s decision last month 
<http://www.itv.com/news/westcountry/update/2016-04-21/anger-as-government-cuts-all-funding-for-cornish-language/>
 to cut the £150,000 annual support for the Cornish language it has provided 
since it was recognised under the charter for regional and minority languages 
in 2003.

The cut in funding for Cornish lessons, speakers and teachers prompted 
criticism from MPs 
<http://www.westbriton.co.uk/MP-says-disappointed-Government-cut-Cornish/story-29193653-detail/story.html>
 and the launch of anonline petition  
<https://www.the-newshub.com/uk-politics/cuts-to-cornish-language-funding-result-result-in-online-petition>
calling for the government to reverse its decision.

“This new Cornish speaking advert shows off our fantastic new ice cream range 
with a strong link to its heritage while also supporting the movement to speak 
Cornish,” said Charlotte Hambling, head of marketing for the ice cream brand. 
“We hope our cheeky Cornish chap will make people smile while also driving home 
a more serious message.”
