
Sadiq Khan’s pledge to establish a municipal energy company, Energy for 
Londoners, is one of his most striking mayoral election commitments. London 
will not be the first authority to set up such a not-for-profit company –
Nottingham <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/nottingham> and Bristol got there 
first – but it will be the largest, and potentially the most ambitious.


The energy market is notoriously uncompetitive, dominated by the big six 
utility companies, whose pricing practices have led them to be investigated and
criticised by the competition watchdog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/15/big-energy-firms-overcharging-customers-says-ofgem-watchdog>
. Most consumers have little trust in these companies, but are reluctant to 
switch suppliers for a better deal.

At the IPPR, we’ve argued for local authorities 
<http://www.ippr.org/publications/city-energy-a-new-powerhouse-for-britain>, and
London in particular <http://www.ippr.org/publications/london-global-green-city>
, to set up municipally-owned energy companies that can supply electricity and 
gas at competitive prices and don’t have to distribute profits to private 
shareholders. By targeting those on low incomes, they can help tackle the 
problem of fuel poverty. With the big energy companies so widely distrusted, we 
believe the local authority “brand” can encourage otherwise reluctant 
low-income households to switch suppliers and save money.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k5d2%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k5d2%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7542269fbd8b96cddf1af29332afb3c72450e646%2F0_174_5594_3357%2F5594.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Energy%20companies%20are%20cheaper%20and%20cleaner%20when%20run%20by%20the%20council&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k5d2%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Energy+companies+are+cheaper+and+cleaner+when+run+by+the+council&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k5d2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7542269fbd8b96cddf1af29332afb3c72450e646%2F0_174_5594_3357%2F5594.jpg>
 Nottingham’s Robin Hood Energy has moved customers to cheaper tariffs and 
forced other companies to cut their prices. Photograph: Alamy 
Since Robin Hood Energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/07/robin-hood-energy-nottingham-council-launches-not-for-profit-energy-company>
 was launched by Nottingham city council in September 2015, it has become one 
of the cheapest suppliers in the East Midlands. By actively contacting 
customers and helping them move to the cheapest tariffs based on their energy 
use, Robin Hood confounds the logic of traditional suppliers with business 
models that rest on the inertia of their customers. This has not only benefited 
its own growing customer base, but has forced other companies to cut their 
prices to compete. Average tariffs are now approximately £87 cheaper in the 
East Midlands, and the region has moved from seventh to first place in terms of 
price competitiveness throughout England.

Bristol Energy has even wider goals. Fully open since earlier this year, the 
company aims not just to supply energy at competitive prices – it reckons its 
tariffs can save customers an average of £250 a year – but to invest in 
community-based renewable generation and ultimately in renewable heat supply as 
well.Bristol <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/bristol> Energy forecasts a 12% 
return on the council’s investment after five years, rising to 35% after 10, 
with money reinvested for social good.

In Scotland a slightly different model is being pioneered. Our Power is a 
community benefit society established and owned by a number of local 
authorities and housing associations. It too aims to tackle fuel poverty 
through the supply of affordable energy, focusing on social housing tenants, 
and seeks to buy a minimum of 30% of its energy from renewable sources.

Can these new companies succeed? 

Related: People love renewable energy, so why don't politicians get it? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2015/sep/10/renewable-energy-politicians-community-fracking>

In the short term, there seems little doubt that local energy companies with 
competitive prices, strong marketing plans, access to social housing customers 
and not-for-profit appeal will be able to gain a significant segment of local 
markets for gas and electricity. But two questions immediately arise.

How many such companies can the market sustain? Although each has a local 
base, all seek to be national players. There are already about 40 small 
companies in the energy market. For how many local authorities will this be a 
viable option? It is notable that Robin Hood is now offering its services to 
other councils under so-called “white labels”, where the company will use the 
local authority brand to market its energy products in their area. This may be 
a useful compromise.

And what happens when wholesale prices rise? Municipal and community-owned 
energy companies will have to raise their prices like anyone else. Will their 
customers understand the necessity of this, or do they then risk a sense of 
betrayal?

A new kind of energy system

If they can overcome these concerns, the potential for local companies to help 
build a new kind of energy system is significant. They could become genuine 
“energy services” companies. The demise of the government’sgreen deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/green-deal> has left a hole in the 
market for a scheme through which households can install energy efficiency 
measures and pay for them out of the long-term savings in their energy bills. 
Local energy companies could fill the gap.

Success could herald a dramatic change in the make-up of the UK’s energy market

They could also support investment in local renewables projects. The 
government’s slashing of wind and solar subsidies and removal of investment 
incentives has left many community energy projects struggling for profitability 
and finance. Local energy companies could offer long-term contracts and 
investment.

Such companies could also invest in demand-management technologies, such as 
smart grids and electricity storage. In the new energy world, it will often be 
cheaper and more efficient to flex demand than provide more power. And they 
could begin to change the heat sector: district heating systems based on 
renewable energy sources are likely to be required to meet more stringent 
carbon targets; backed by local authorities, the new companies could be the 
pioneers.

None of this will be either cheap or easy. No business is guaranteed to 
succeed, and it would only take one of these companies to fail to deal a blow 
to the new spirit of municipal enterprise. But success could herald a dramatic 
change in the make-up of the UK’s energy market.

Michael Jacobs is visiting fellow and acting associate director for energy, 
transport and climate at the Institute for Public Policy Research (IPPR), which 
has just released areport on c 
<http://www.ippr.org/publications/community-and-local-energy-challenges-and-opportunities>
ommunity and local energy 
<http://www.ippr.org/publications/community-and-local-energy-challenges-and-opportunities>
.


Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
