
The first allegations of labour rights abuses linked to Qatar’s unprecedented 
building binge for the Fifa World Cup in 2022 emerged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/25/revealed-qatars-world-cup-slaves>
 in September 2013. Since then, pressure on the governments of Qatar – over 
worker conditions on World Cup infrastructure – and in the UAE – over Abu 
Dhabi’sSaadiyat Island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/22/abu-dhabi-migrant-workers-conditions-shame-west>
 and the2020 World Expo in Dubai 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-emirates-labour-idUSBRE9540VE20130605> – has 
been mounting. 


 Until now the construction industry has managed to avoid being at the centre 
of reporting on this issue, but in the past few weeks there have been signs 
that this is changing, withallegations of mistreatment by migrant workers 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/13/balfour-beatty-interserve-accused-migrant-worker-labour-abuses-qatar>
 connected tomultinational firms running large-scale projects in the region. 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2015/05/mounting-risk-of-world-cup-built-on-abuse-as-qatar-fails-to-deliver-reforms/>


Is the construction sector ready for this closer scrutiny? An analysis of the 
Business and Human Rights Resource Centre’s <http://business-humanrights.org/> 
outreach work to construction companies across the Gulf strongly suggests that 
they are not.

The outreach programme 
<http://business-humanrights.org/en/modern-slavery/construction-in-qatar-and-the-uae-outreach-to-companies-on-working-conditions>
 was designed to try to understand what action companies are taking to protect 
vulnerable migrant workers. The centre reaches out to businesses in different 
sectors to spotlight emerging or urgent issues where workers or communities are 
at risk from business activities and find out what action companies are taking 
to mitigate their impacts, for exampleSyrian refugees in Turkish garment 
factories 
<http://business-humanrights.org/en/syrian-refugees-in-turkish-garment-supply-chains-an-analysis-of-company-action-to-address-serious-exploitation>
 andforeign investments in Myanmar 
<http://business-humanrights.org/en/myanmar-foreign-investment-tracking-project>
. We frequently ask companies to respond to specific allegations of human 
rights abuse.

Normally, we get a response from about 75% of companies. In contrast, our 
construction outreach saw a 24% response rate – our lowest feedback for a 
survey so far. Of the 53 companies we have contacted regarding working 
conditions for migrant workers, only 12 have submitted completed 
questionnaires. Nine declined to respond.

For us, this highlights a worrying reluctance in the construction industry to 
engage on human rights. This is particularly concerning because the 
construction labour pool in the region is made up almost entirely of migrant 
workers.

Companies who responded have taken a significant positive step for 
transparency and accountability on migrant worker welfare, but it means that 
the majority of companies have effectively fallen at the first hurdle, not even 
disclosing what measures they have in place to meet local labour laws.

This is despite a growing expectation from governments for companies to 
demonstrate the steps they are taking to eradicate modern slavery from their 
operations and supply chains, brought by legislation such as theUK Modern 
Slavery Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/28/uk-companies-proof-no-links-slave-labour-supply-chain>
. This week’s UN Asia regional forum on business and human rights in Doha will 
include sessions on the importance of human rights reporting and company 
disclosure.

 One reason for the silence from some in the construction industry might be 
that sub-contracting chains involved in large development projects are lengthy 
and complex. Between the main contractor and the worker on the site there are 
project owners and developers, project managers, consultants, joint ventures, 
sub-contractors, facilities managers, manpower firms and recruitment agencies.

This enables companies to pass the buck when it comes to the rights of migrant 
workers. This attitude shone through in the feedback we received – a 
UAE-headquartered developer declined to respond to us because they “do not deal 
in construction”. Even in the case of companies with direct responsibility for 
workers, a culture of non-disclosure exists, with companies citing contractual 
confidentiality or internal policies that prevent them from divulging 
information on their projects.

Despite the growing indignation surrounding the lack of real action to deal 
with the abuses faced by migrant workers at the bottom of the recruitment 
chain, there persists a blind belief in many boardrooms of large construction 
firms that a policy commitment, or only using approved recruitment providers, 
or contractually obliging business partners to respect labour rights, is enough 
to ensure abuses don’t occur. There is still little proactive monitoring done 
to ensure that these measures translate to action.

Regardless of the difficulties and cost involved, not undertaking basic due 
diligence to protect migrant workers in business relationships is unacceptable. 
There needs to be a recognition that accountability for the welfare of 
labourers extends beyond main contractors to all those profiting from a 
construction project.

The handful of companies who have taken the lead in publicly committing to and 
upholding migrant workers’ rights stand in good stead as countries introduce 
mandatory human rights reporting and assign projects to companies based on 
their human rights performance. Scrutiny of the construction industry in the 
Gulf is only going to increase, and it’s in companies’ interests to start 
talking or face the reputational and legal consequences.

 * Mariam Bhacker is a project manager for Gulf construction and migrant 
workers at the Business and Human Rights Resource Centre
