
With her tiny waist, stick thin legs and petite frame, the Barbie doll has 
been accused of promoting an unhealthy body image for over five decades. But 
now, in her biggest update since 1959, it’s out with the skeletal frame and 
thigh gap, and in with the curvy hips and thighs as the company has revealed 
three new body types for the dolls to reflect a “broader view of beauty”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g8cn%2Fsfb%23img-1&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g8cn%2Fsfb%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3adf08a5818edf1be6f41c3e9649b05b7ff49afa%2F0_0_1104_2900%2F1104.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barbie%20finally%20becomes%20a%20real%20woman%20%E2%80%93%20with%20a%20more%20realistic%20figure&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g8cn%2Fstw%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Barbie+finally+becomes+a+real+woman+%E2%80%93+with+a+more+realistic+figure&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g8cn%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3adf08a5818edf1be6f41c3e9649b05b7ff49afa%2F0_0_1104_2900%2F1104.jpg>
 Mattel says it has ‘a responsibility to girls and parents to reflect a broader 
view of beauty’. Photograph: Mattel 
Mattel, the creator of the toys, said the new range 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jan/28/curvy-barbie-is-it-the-end-of-the-road-for-the-thigh-gap>
 – which also boasts seven different skin tones – was designed to promote a 
healthy and realistic body image and would better reflect the diversity of 
those who play with the dolls.

Evelyn Mazzocco, senior vice-president and Barbie’s global general manager, 
said: “We are excited to literally be changing the face of the brand – these 
new dolls represent a line that is more reflective of the world girls see 
around them – the variety in body type, skin tones and style allows girls to 
find a doll that speaks to them. We believe we have a responsibility to girls 
and parents to reflect a broader view of beauty.”

Mattel are hoping that the new range, which features on the front cover of 
TIME magazine, will help boost sales of the world’s most popular doll. 
Estimates say three Barbies are sold every second but in OctoberMattel 
announced a 14% global drop in Barbie sales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jan/26/mattel-fires-boss-plummeting-profits-barbie>
, the eighth consecutive quarter in which profits fell.

The project for the dramatic reinvention of Barbie was kept top secret and 
referred to simply as “Project Dawn” by the company. The new dolls will also 
boast 24 new hairstyles, including an afro, curly red hair and even long blue 
hair, a long way from the bright blonde locks traditionally associated with 
Barbie.

Related: Curvy Barbie: is it the end of the road for the thigh gap? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jan/28/curvy-barbie-is-it-the-end-of-the-road-for-the-thigh-gap>

Richard Dickson, president and chief operating officer of Mattel, said: “For 
more than 55 years, Barbie has been a global, cultural icon and a source of 
inspiration and imagination to millions of girls around the world. Barbie 
reflects the world girls see around them. Her ability to evolve and grow with 
the times, while staying true to her spirit, is central to why Barbie is the 
number one fashion doll in the world.”

Since Barbie first came onto the market, the doll has attracted criticism for 
giving young and impressionable girls an unrealistic idea of what the female 
body should look like. In 1963, the doll came with a book entitled How to Lose 
Weight, with instructions to not eat. Research also found that, with her 36in 
chest and 18in waist, Barbie would lack the 17% body fat needed to menstruate.

The embracing of different body types was welcomed by several charities who 
champion healthy body image and assist those who struggle with eating 
disorders, which research shows are exacerbated by exposure to unrealistic body 
types. In July 2015, research found that children in the UK as young as eight 
were reporting body dissatisfaction and that almost 40% of 14-year-old girls 
were admitting to regular dieting.
— TIME.com (@TIME) January 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/TIME/status/692688598446018561> 
America’s biggest toy company is changing the most famous body in the world 
https://t.co/INuu3Zg0hB <https://t.co/INuu3Zg0hB> pic.twitter.com/yw3yH9zd5j 
<https://t.co/yw3yH9zd5j>
 <https://twitter.com/TIME/status/692688598446018561> 
Andrew Radford, the chief executive of eating disorder charity Beat, said he 
was delighted Mattel had introduced more diversity to the Barbie range. “For a 
long time Beat has campaigned against the constant portrayal of a very slender 
look as the only aspirational ideal for young people,” he said.

“If a generation is to grow up with a robust sense of their self worth we must 
challenge this. To more truly reflect the diversity of shapes, sizes and 
culture of mankind is a welcome initiative, especially in a range that 
generations of young girls have identified with since its inception.”

Liam Preston, spokesman for the YMCA’s Be Real campaign, which works with 
schools and corporations, said it was about time that companies accepted 
responsibility for the images that they projected onto young girls and 
teenagers.


“We know that children are affected from a young age by the images around 
them. We have research that says girls as young as five years old are worried 
about the way they look and their size. More so than ever, everywhere they go 
young people are bombarded with images of photoshopped women, who have shapes 
that are just not real and not healthy and that is a big issue for us.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g8cn%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g8cn%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15fbcefdd2b3ab2a17cf7199bb11878f6668dd98%2F0_56_3174_1905%2F3174.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barbie%20finally%20becomes%20a%20real%20woman%20%E2%80%93%20with%20a%20more%20realistic%20figure&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g8cn%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Barbie+finally+becomes+a+real+woman+%E2%80%93+with+a+more+realistic+figure&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g8cn%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15fbcefdd2b3ab2a17cf7199bb11878f6668dd98%2F0_56_3174_1905%2F3174.jpg>
 For decades Barbie dolls were criticised for making young girls obsess over 
unrealistic body dimensions. Photograph: John D Mchugh/AFP/Getty Images 
”It’s so important that young people embrace diversity and feel happy with who 
they are, and the dolls Mattel are looking to do could really help that. I hope 
this is the first step for a change in the children’s market overall.”

The company also hopes the new diverse range will appeal to “millenial mums”, 
who are more socially conscious and had a negative view of Barbie’s previously 
unrealistic proportions

Speaking to the Telegraph, Tania Missad, Mattel’s director of global brand 
insight, also said they were expecting some criticism that the new dolls 
“haven’t gone far enough, or people who ask what’s next, question our 
commitment to this”. She added: “Barbie is a lightning rod for conversation, 
and of course there will be a backlash.”
