
Labour has criticised the Department for Education’s move to drop feminism as 
a topic within its new politics A-level syllabus, saying the decision will harm 
the education of both male and female students.

In a letter to the education secretary and equalities minister, Nicky Morgan 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicky-morgan>, Labour accused the 
government of telling students to study “the ideas of 15 different male 
political thinkers and just one woman”, and called on Morgan to reconsider.

“Just this week you said that you were committed to ensuring equality of 
opportunity is at the core of this government’s agenda so that every woman and 
girl has every opportunity to reach their potential,” wrote Labour’s shadow 
education secretary, Lucy Powell, and shadow minister for women and equalities 
Kate Green.

“We struggle to see how removing these topics from the curriculum helps to 
achieve this worthy aim.

“We also feel it is just as important to provide the space for young men to 
discuss the issues that can arise from gender and increase understanding of 
feminism, as it is for young women.”

The letter follows protests over the removal of a dedicated section on 
feminism and equality in therevised politics course put out to consultation 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/gcse-and-a-level-reform-geology-and-politics-pe-short-course>
 by the Department for Education at the start of this month.

Related: Plan to axe feminism from A-level politics triggers protest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/20/feminism-axed-a-level-politics-dfe-draft-protest>

The draft names only one woman, Mary Wollstonecraft, in a list of liberal 
thinkers that includes Jean-Jacques Rousseau, who once claimed that “a woman’s 
education must be planned in relation to man”.

Instead, the politics of feminism appears relegated to a section on pressure 
groups, with the draft content suggesting “how far pressure group methods and 
influence have changed over time, including the suffragists and suffragettes” 
as a topic.

The consultation on the proposal for the AS and A-level content runs until 15 
December, and campaigners and students are urging the public to oppose them.

Earlier, June Eric-Udorie launched a petition 
<https://www.change.org/p/add-more-female-thinkers-to-the-politics-a-level-syllabus>
 urging Morgan against approving the changes, and asking her to add more women 
writers and thinkers.

The Liberal Democrat leader, Tim Farron, took to Twitter to voice his concerns.

— Tim Farron (@timfarron) November 20, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/timfarron/status/667745741398548481> 
Just like you can't teach maths without numbers, you can't teach politics 
without women. This must be rethought:https://t.co/xqpdvkHxnJ 
<https://t.co/xqpdvkHxnJ>
 <https://twitter.com/timfarron/status/667745741398548481> 
Powell and Green said they were unhappy that the Department for Education had 
justified the move on the grounds of giving more choice to schools.

“It strikes us as odd that the department is content for this freedom not to 
extend to requiring students to know and understand the ideas of 15 different 
male political thinkers, and just one woman,” they wrote.

“As a result, the decision to drop these topics comes with the real risk of 
sending a message to the next generation that government thinks issues of 
equality are not a priority.

“We’re calling on you now to reconsider and reinstate these vitally important 
topics in the final draft.”

A spokeswoman for the department said that feminism would still be studied 
within A-level sociology – a subject far more popular among female than male 
pupils.

“We want schools to highlight the issues faced by women from all walks of life 
and ages in history, including the work of key female political thinkers within 
the ideologies covered and in UK and global politics,” she said. “We are 
carrying out a consultation on politics A-level, and as always we will listen 
carefully to the views of the sector.”

Related: Female students start to show more interest in science and engineering
 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/feb/18/female-students-science-engineering-sixth-formers-stem-subjects>

Last year there were nearly 14,000 entries for politics A-levels 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/alevels> compared with more than 30,000 
for sociology – including 23,000 entries by women.

The current A-level syllabus includes a dedicated section on feminism and 
ethnicity. Last year’s AQA politics and government A-level paper asked 
candidates: “Explain the term patriarchy in the context of feminism,” and to 
discuss the idea: “Legislation has failed to deliver equality of outcomes in 
respect of gender and ethnicity.”

After the consultation is concluded it will be up to the examination boards to 
submit papers for approval by Ofqual, the exam regulator. The boards may choose 
to include specific questions on feminism within optional sections on political 
ideologies.
