
The Greek government and its eurozone creditors have reached a deal after 
marathon all-night talks, but can we trust the decisions and deals of 
sleep-deprived politicians?

Were the negotiators sleep deprived?

The talks lasted almost 17 hours through the night and into Monday morning. 
Politicians emerged to announce the deal looking weary and red-eyed.

Jeroen Dijsselbloem, the eurozone’s top official, said he did manage to sleep 
for a few hours. But he also emerged from the talks looking exhausted.

Does sleep deprivation hamper decision-making? 

Yes, according to Prof Michael Chee, director of the centre for cognitive 
neuroscience <http://www.cogneuro-lab.org/DynamicPage.aspx?u=1> at at Duke-NUS 
Graduate Medical School in Singapore, who likens late-night negotiations to 
torture. “It’s a horrible way to make a decision,” he said, noting photographs 
of Angela Merkel looking half asleep. He said: “It is kind of 
last-man-or-woman-standing situation in Brussels. When you’re sleep deprived 
your ability to process new information drops, your ability to deal with 
distraction is impaired, and your short-term memory declines. All the 
fundamental elementals of having to process information rapidly are diminished.”

Is sleep deprivation torture? 

“Prolonged sleep deprivation is an especially insidious form of torture 
because it attacks the deep biological functions at the core of a person’s 
mental and physical health,” 
<https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/dreaming-in-the-digital-age/201412/why-sleep-deprivation-is-torture>
 according to Kelly Bulkeley director of the Sleep and Dream Database. Writing 
in Psychology Today he said the worst effects include disorientation, visual 
misperceptions, apathy, severe lethargy and social withdrawal.

“Eventually the victims suffer hallucinations and a total break with reality,” 
he writes. But these symptoms only occur after days without sleep. The Greek 
crisis has seen many prolonged meetings over the last week, but none of the 
politicians involved have been entirely deprived of sleep. But Chee says the 
analogy of torture is useful when considering late-night negotiations because 
they are also about breaking the will of participants. He said: “I truly 
believe that the way they [European negotiators] operate is essentially the 
torture method to break people’s will by keeping them up so they are physically 
and mentally drained so eventually the most insistent person who is standing at 
the end probably prevails.”
— Danny Kemp (@dannyctkemp) July 13, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/dannyctkemp/status/620459117061238789> 
Journalist takes picture of cameraman filming journalist sleeping 
pic.twitter.com/0TKfVl2SSP <http://t.co/0TKfVl2SSP>
 <https://twitter.com/dannyctkemp/status/620459117061238789> 
What kind of bad decisions are made after sleep deprivation? 

People tend to make over-optimistic gambles when they are tired and show 
recklessness about financial losses. 
<http://healthland.time.com/2011/03/09/improve-your-odds-in-vegas-try-getting-a-full-nights-sleep/>
 “While well-rested participants sought to minimise the effect of the worst 
loss, sleep deprivation caused the same individuals to be less concerned about 
losses and to shift to a strategy that improved the magnitude of the best 
gain,” a paper by Chee’s team found. Describing the results to the Guardian, he 
said: “People take riskier bets and they become more insensitive to losses when 
they are deprived of sleep. You tend to chase gains, because the brain system 
that responds to losses is dulled when you are sleep deprived.”

What bad decisions have been made after sleep loss? 

Some of the worst human and environmental health disasters have been partially 
attributed to sleep loss <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK19958/>and night 
shift working, according to a study of sleep disorders and sleep deprivations. 
They include the tragedy at the Bhopal chemical plant in India, the nuclear 
reactor meltdowns at Three Mile Island and Chernobyl and the grounding of the 
Star Princess cruise ship and the Exxon Valdez oil tanker.

Are there safety regulation to guard against the hazards of sleep deprivation? 

Yes, and ironically the best known safety regulation on the risks of 
overworking is theEuropean Union’s working time directive 
<http://ec.europa.eu/social/main.jsp?catId=706&langId=en&intPageId=205>. It 
warns:

The improvement of workers’ safety, hygiene and health at work is an objective 
which should not be subordinated to purely economic considerations.

All workers should have adequate rest periods. The concept of ‘rest’ must be 
expressed in units of time, i.e. in days, hours and/or fractions thereof. 
Community workers must be granted minimum daily, weekly and annual periods of 
rest and adequate breaks. It is also necessary in this context to place a 
maximum limit on weekly working hours.

It is particular stern about night working. It says:

Research has shown that the human body is more sensitive at night to 
environmental disturbances and also to certain burdensome forms of work 
organisation and that long periods of night work can be detrimental to the 
health of workers and can endanger safety at the workplace … Night workers 
whose work involves special hazards or heavy physical or mental strain do not 
work more than eight hours in any period of 24 hours during which they perform 
night work.


 Should politicians avoid all-night negotiations? 

“Your ability to direct and hold attention and depress distractions all 
declines when you are sleep deprived,” warns Chee. He adds: “Clearly it is very 
suboptimal to make these very important decisions which affect millions of 
people. But this pattern of late-night meetings has been going on for years. 
It’s a tactic of wearing down the other side until they literally capitulate.”

Anders Sandberg, research fellow at Oxford University’s Future of Humanity 
Institute, <http://www.fhi.ox.ac.uk/about/staff/> goes further. “Sleep-deprived 
negotiation is irresponsible and harmful,” he warned in a recent blogpost. He 
points out that sleep deprivation can hamper mental activity as much as 
drinking alcohol. “If you wouldn’t drink and negotiate, why stay up late and 
negotiate?” he asks. And he urges politicians to avoid all-night sessions: 
“When some[one] tries to mess with the agenda in the hope of coming out on top 
because of exhaustion, refuse to play the game: everybody loses if joint 
decisions are of low quality.”
