
A few weeks ago I had the opportunity to see first-hand the operations of 
Anglo American’s Unki mine in Zimbabwe, site of one of the world’s richest 
platinum deposits. The precious metal is not simply ornamental; most of it ends 
up in vehicle exhaust systems, where it converts toxic emissions into less 
harmful gases. Platinum is also used to make consumer electronics (such as the 
phone in your pocket) and medicines, including cancer-fighting drugs.

In short: society depends on it. And yet, that does not minimise the fact that 
we must be responsible, socially and environmentally, in the way we extract and 
process metals like platinum.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t66h%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t66h%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ed290717988fe71c7b1b23c71e65f2cef3e29d4%2F147_0_6132_3680%2F6132.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lessons%20from%20Zimbabwe%3A%20the%20standard%20for%20responsible%20mining%20is%20being%20set&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t66h%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lessons+from+Zimbabwe%3A+the+standard+for+responsible+mining+is+being+set&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t66h%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ed290717988fe71c7b1b23c71e65f2cef3e29d4%2F147_0_6132_3680%2F6132.jpg>
 Unki mine’s concentrator plant in Zimbabwe. Photograph: Photographer: Geoff 
Brown/Geoff Brown 
I did not visit Zimbabwe to see the product. I went to analyse the process, 
along with a team of auditors from theInitiative for Responsible Mining 
Assurance <http://www.responsiblemining.net> (IRMA). Unki was the second mine 
field-tested under the draftStandard for Responsible Mining 
<http://www.responsiblemining.net/irma-standard/>, an effort to certify social 
and environmental performance at industrial-scale mine sites around the world.


After years of dialogue with the mining industry, organised labour, NGOs, 
impacted communities, and businesses, it was exciting to put the certification 
scheme through its paces.


The Standard for Responsible Mining is intended to define the sustainability 
standards that leading mining companies should aim for. For example, employees 
are entitled to a safe, non-hazardous work space. In places like Zimbabwe, 
where unemployment is high, it is not enough just to create a certain number of 
jobs; we must be a net benefit to the community overall, improving the economic 
conditions generally and ensuring mine operations do not harm the local 
environment.


With all this in mind, we immersed ourselves in the Unki experience, learning 
from those on the ground who understand the issues best. The most critical 
learning from the field test: while further stakeholder input and refinement is 
needed in some areas, we are close to a standard that could be implemented by 
responsible mining companies.


The on-site staff provided us with tours into the underground workings, where 
nearly 1,000 workers descend to depths of up to 300 meters every day. Above 
ground we visited the processing plant where platinum concentrate is extracted 
from the ore. We visited the tailings impoundment and considered the critical 
issues of dam stability, water quality and potential wildlife exposure to mine 
process waters. We had conversations with mine workers, hearing about health 
and safety procedures.


Related: Sustainable Development Goals: how can the mining sector contribute? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/mar/29/sustainable-development-goals-how-can-the-mining-sector-contribute>

Along with other representatives of the IRMA, we sat down with the independent 
auditors during and after the Unki mine inspection. Their overall feedback was 
very encouraging, and included ways that language in the Standard for 
Responsible Mining can be clarified. An important learning in the field test is 
that performance against the Standard can be measured, and applying the 
standard can result in mines that better serve the interests of all 
stakeholders.

This week the Initiative for Responsible Mining Assurance is publishing the 
second and final draft of the Standard for Responsible Mining for public 
comment before it becomes final as a certification program, akin to those 
available now in the fisheries, agriculture and forestry sectors. While this 
draft is based on extensive review and feedback from experts and those closest 
to the issues, we are eager foradditional commentary 
<http://www.responsiblemining.net/irma-standard/stakeholder-feedback/>. The 
comment period ends on 5 June.


As a society we are increasingly attuned to where and how we get the things we 
need. We look to impartial arbiters to assure our clothes, coffee, paper, and 
other products are sourced responsibly. Soon we will be able to say the same 
for platinum, iron ore, gold, copper and the other metals and minerals we 
depend on.

