
‘I bet you’ve looked at drone footage and just thought ‘wow’,” says Guardian 
photographer and licensed drone operatorGraeme Robertson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/ng-interactive/2015/nov/10/autumn-colour-a-drones-eye-view-of-maples-at-the-national-arboretum>
. “That’s because you are seeing something you have never seen before.”

Robertson is explaining the appeal of drone photography, which has had a surge 
in popularity in recent years. This is due to the availability of affordable 
drones,including theDJI phantom <http://www.dji.com/product/phantom> series, 
which costs from £350 – giving amateur film-makers the chance to shoot 
helicopter-style footage. There is also the matter of social media’s appetite 
for wow-factor images, particularly when it comes to showcasing travel 
destinations and travelling itself. Cool location + drone = viral.

Drones entered the mainstream imagination in an unlikely way. The unmanned 
aerial vehicles first became household names in the early noughties when they 
were being used, controversially, by the US military; “drone strikes” became a 
buzzword in the press. A decade later drones were being mooted for a far more 
benign purpose: as a means of deliveringAmazon orders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/nov/12/amazon-drones-cambridge-prime-air-testing>
 “straight to your porch”. Now, in 2016, drones are giving social media users 
access to mesmerising, swooping shots from the sky that provide new 
perspectives at a time of an obsession with photographing, and documenting, the 
world.

Instagram – the often strange 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/sep/08/holiday-snaps-to-hipster-barbie-travel-through-the-eyes-of-instagram>
 but flourishing photo app – is a key platform for drone footage. According to 
the company, there are currently 1,627,557 posts tagged with#drone 
<https://www.instagram.com/explore/tags/drone/> and 295,406 posts using 
#dronestagram <https://www.instagram.com/explore/tags/dronestagram/>. This is 
fuelled by the rise of video on Instagram in general: video views have 
increased by 40% in the last six months.

A search of the site reveals dozens of drone photography accounts, many with 
huge followings; these include@dronelife_ 
<https://www.instagram.com/_dronelife_/> (144,000 followers), @3drobotics 
<https://www.instagram.com/3drobotics/> (132,ooo followers), @dronenerds 
<https://www.instagram.com/dronenerds/> (92,400 followers), @dronesdaily 
<https://www.instagram.com/dronesdaily/> (40,600 followers) and @experienceabove
 <https://www.instagram.com/experienceabove/> (14,400 followers).

The kind of footage to expect is “classic” drone shots of a single spot while 
the camera rises; bird’s-eye views of coastlines, skylines, canyons, bridges; 
abstract photos of human impact on the ground, such as beach umbrellas from 
above, or the lines drawn in soil by farm vehicles; and amped-up shots of any, 
already rather visually dramatic, location found on Earth.

One of the most popular accounts is @droneheroes 
<https://www.instagram.com/droneheroes/>, which has gained almost 60,000 
followers since launching a year ago, when founder Ronny Brouwers bought a 
drone for his summer holiday to the Philippines. When he set up the account 
there were few pages where high-quality drone photo and video content were 
being shared. Now it is one of the fastest-growing drone pages on Instagram.

“It is going like a rocket,” says Brouwers, who has spent much of the last 
year travelling the world to produce drone content for the travel industry. 
“News pages are interested in drone images and each clip of an existing popular 
place goes viral on the internet. So, it’s a perfect way for the travel 
industry to promote its business, surroundings, or even the country, since the 
exposure is massive.”

In many ways, drone photography follows in the shadow of the GoPro 
<https://www.youtube.com/user/GoProCamera>: tough, compact cameras designed to 
be attached to an individual to capture high-definition point-of-view footage. 
GoPro cameras were quickly adopted by the action sports world and YouTube was 
flooded with exciting first-person footage putting the viewer in the shoes of 
everyone from surfers to base jumpers.

This is the view of the team behind @droneoftheday 
<https://www.instagram.com/droneoftheday/>, Manuel Lopez and Nicolas Soro. They 
explain how their first films actually came from attaching GoPros to drones and 
posting the footage online – this was before many drones came with built-in 
cameras.

“We thought to ourselves, ‘Everyone is going to want one of these’,” they say. 
“A few years back, you would need to set up a helicopter charter or plane 
rental to capture unique aerial shots … now you can carry a drone in a backpack 
with you and shoot at your own pace and convenience.”

It’s no surprise that drones have been adopted by those documenting extreme 
outdoor pursuits – activities that have always been difficult and expensive to 
film with conventional equipment. These filmmakers include professional rock
climber Dave MacLeod <https://twitter.com/davemacleod09>, whose first drone 
film, Miles Away, follows mountain runner Alicia Hudelson as she makes her way 
through the Swiss Alps and the hills of Catalonia. It won the top award at this 
year’sDroneFest <http://www.dronefestival.co.uk/> film and photography festival.

“Drones are fantastic for capturing the sense of being in the wider 
landscape,” says MacLeod. “There is a sense of moving; it also has a kind of 
dreamy quality that is like the memories your mind creates of your travels 
through the outdoors. The sense of movement and space is important.”

For Amy Silverman, photography editor for adventure travel magazine Outside 
<http://www.outsideonline.com/>, drone photography is now a “normalised part of 
advertising, as well as storytelling”, but there are limitations. “GoPros 
mounted on helmets and surfboards broke down similar barriers but drone footage 
is ultimately more watchable,” she says. “You still need elements of good 
narrative to hold a viewer’s attention.”

The boom in drone footage is not just driven by the professionals: millions of 
drones are sold to amateur photographers, hobbyists and gadget fans, stocked 
everywhere from Argos to Amazon. Major UK retailerDrones Direct 
<https://www.dronesdirect.co.uk/> estimates that, to date, UK consumers have 
spent close to £400m on drones. The retailer says that in the last year sales 
have increased by 120%.

Of course, there are problems with the idea of millions of people flying 
remote-controlled devices. It is not difficult to find reports of crashes, near 
misses and serious injuries being caused by them. In fact, in a large number of 
cases, flying a drone is illegal without getting permission and all the 
professionals the Guardian spoke to were keen to point this out.

Laws vary from country to country, but in the UK there are a lot of 
limitations regarding where you can fly a drone – made clear in the Civil 
Aviation Authority’sDronecode 
<http://www.caa.co.uk/Consumers/Model-aircraft-and-drones/The-Dronecode/>. 
Drones with cameras cannot be flown within 50 metres of people, vehicles, 
buildings or structures; essentially making London a no-fly zone for drones. In 
the US, as of December 2015, all drones weighing more than 250g need to be 
registered with theFederal Aviation Administration <https://www.faa.gov/uas/>.

“To be honest, it makes me a little worried,” says Brouwers. “It’s waiting for 
something terrible to happen. Anyone can go to the store today and buy a drone 
without any registration. The software isn’t ready (yet) to avoid people flying 
in no-fly zones. People need to be aware of the rules and regulations that each 
country has put in place for flying drones. It is the task of the drone 
manufacturers and the government to tackle this problem.”

The Guardian’s Robertson, who spent three years training to use drones safely, 
feels strongly about the dangers of people using them without following proper 
procedures, but understands why drones are so desirable.

“The world is full of photos and we’ve seen things from almost every angle,” 
he says. “Now we’re seeing shots that are something new to look at for the 
first time again. And that’s something to get excited about.” 

