
When I found out Quentin Crisp had moved to America, Tom (my partner at the 
time) and I thought we had to figure out how to meet him. Growing up, I had seen
The Naked Civil Servant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tvandradioblog/2008/may/05/nakedcivilservantsequel>
 and we had just been to see his filmResident Alien 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0102777/>. So Tom said let’s just look him up – 
and he was listed!

“We’d love to take you to lunch,” we said. And he goes, in that voice: “Hold 
on please while I check the Sacred Book.” There was a rustling noise and he 
wrote it in his diary and we arranged to meet at a restaurant.

It was for lunch on a Sunday. Lo and behold, there he was. His hat was a 
wonderful shade of purple felt, matching the rinse in his hair. He had 
co-ordinated it with his shirt, blazer and neckerchief. He took the hat off and 
arranged his hair like a swirl.

We told him what we did – I was a buyer at Henri Bendel 
<http://www.henribendel.com/> and Tom was head of visuals for Neiman Marcus 
<https://www.neimanmarcus.com/en-gb/index.jsp>. Quentin had done windows as 
well, so there was something to break the ice. What was to be an hour-long 
lunch lasted until 6pm. He wasn’t afraid to let you know his opinion. He talked 
about him being him and I asked: “How do you reconcile that in New York?” and 
he said: “Why would I ever want to assimilate?” I think the question is still 
valid in many regards. If he disagreed with you he would say: “I’ll try to see 
it your way,” meaning: “I’m totallynot going to see it your way.”

After the first hour or so he knew we were going to be friends. We walked him 
home. He was 80. The East Village in those days was rough. He was in a rooming 
house, single room, bathroom down the hall. Tiny room with a bed; typewriter on 
the bed. A hot plate because he liked to make himself an egg. He was taken out 
for breakfast, lunch and dinner. He always used to say: “If you like champagne 
and peanuts you can live for free in NYC forever.”

He lived on East 3rd Street across the street from the Hells Angels Club 
House. I asked him if he worried about that and he said: “Oh no, we get along. 
We’re friends.” They took care of him on that block. Maybe it’s because they 
were all outsiders.

He was accessible to all: you just had to call him. He used to say: “In London 
no one is your friend; inNew York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york>
 everyone is your friend.”

Ed Burstell is managing director of Liberty. His memoir, Ed Burstell, At 
Liberty: From Rehab to the Front Row, £20, is available from Liberty (
liberty.co.uk 
<http://www.liberty.co.uk/fcp/product/Liberty//At-Liberty:-From-Rehab-To-The-Front-Row/130371>
)
