
In a surprise move by the normally pro-women Conservative government, feminism 
is to be dropped from A-level politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/20/feminism-axed-a-level-politics-dfe-draft-protest>
. Women were taking up far too much room on the syllabus, which meant that some 
men didn’t have the requisite amount of space required for the proper 
ventilation and comfort of their genitals. So the women had to go.

In a revised version of the course, which is to be put to consultation, the 
section on feminism has been removed, along with any mention of gender equality 
and the patriarchy, and replaced with lots of drawings of ejaculating penises, 
from the pen of education secretary and minister for women and equalitiesNicky 
Morgan <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicky-morgan>. Gender equality is 
all very well in theory, but it’s just not practical when you try to implement 
it on the A-level syllabus – or on public transport.

Related: We can’t leave feminism out of A-level politics | Letter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/03/we-cant-leave-feminism-out-of-a-level-politics>

Now I don’t want to sound paranoid, but a pattern is starting to emerge. A few 
things have happened recently – and, indeed, over the last 200,000 years – that 
make me think there are some individuals in positions of power who are 
unenthusiastic about the emancipation of women. There seems to have been a 
concerted effort to airbrush from the history books the women who were not 
married off at three, or who did not die in childbirth.

Before I started reading up on women and feminism in 2013, after I saw a gap 
in the standup comedy market, the only famous women I knew of were the Virgin 
Mary, Margaret Thatcher and Esther Rantzen – and I didn’t want the careers of 
any of those women. Had I known about Hatshepsut and Eva Peron and Linda Carter 
earlier, I might have won a Chortle award before I was 42.

But it’s no joke. In January this year, the ultra-Orthodox Jewish newspaper 
Hamevaserdigitally removed all traces of women from a photograph of a unity 
march 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/14/israeli-newspaper-hamevaser-merkel-women-charlie-hebdo-rally>
 after theCharlie Hebdo attacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/charlie-hebdo-attack> in Paris, due to 
modesty concerns. When world leaders linked arms to march against terrorism, 
Angela Merkel, immodestly dressed in a long, woollen coat, gloves and a scarf, 
was removed from the image. Hamevaser also cut out the mayor of Paris, Anne 
Hidalgo, though the picture editor left her dark glove on the sleeve of a 
marcher. I like to think of that glove as the ghostly, decapitated hand ofMary 
Wollstonecraft 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/womens-blog/2015/oct/05/original-suffragette-mary-wollstonecraft>
, a feminist version of Thing from The Addams Family, which goes around 
slapping misogynists’ faces every time they say something stupid.

Then, a few weeks ago, the British Passport office unveiled the new Creative 
United Kingdom passport, celebrating 500 years of British talent, but was able 
to think of onlytwo women against seven men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/03/new-uk-passport-design-features-just-two-women>
: the mathematician and writer Ada Lovelace and the architect Elisabeth Scott. 
Naturally, Scott’s face was superimposed on to the body of a cheerleader and 
Lovelace was pictured inside a giant cocktail glass, licking a cherry.

Now Nicky Morgan, who presumably feels she’s done quite enough for women in 
the year she’s held the post, has decided she no longer sees the need for 
feminism on the A-level syllabus. Surely, if we’re serious about achieving 
gender equality, we need to educate and inform our children, for they will 
inherit the Earth, or what’s left of it – and that includes teaching them about 
thebattles fought and won by women 
<https://www.change.org/p/add-more-female-thinkers-to-the-politics-a-level-syllabus>
, for the benefit of all humanity. Removing feminism from politics is like 
removing the female reproductive system from biology.

Related: Bridget Christie: Oh, to be Jeremy Clarkson! Clearly, I’ve been 
playing to the wrong crowd 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/21/bridget-christie-jeremy-clarkson-supporters-top-gear>

I’m doing my best, but I’m out of my depth. I often have very young girls in 
my audiences. Once, a group of teenagers sat horrified in the front row for the 
first 15 minutes – and who can blame them? What’snot embarrassing about a 
shouting, middle-aged Gloucester woman who’s just said the word vagina and 
whose mock outrage involves spit dribbling down her chin? But then, afterwards, 
these girls tell me that they found the link: they made the connection between 
feminism the ideology and feminism the life tool; they saw how being called 
slags for not flirting with the boys is connected to being cat-called on the 
way to and from school; and how their looks are still considered the most 
important thing about them. And how the issues they face simply for being girls 
are connected to issues that every girl and woman faces. And that the battle to 
resolve all these issues is called feminism. But these girls should know all 
this already, because they should be learning it at school.

• Bridget Christie appears at the Leicester Square theatre 
<http://leicestersquaretheatre.ticketsolve.com/shows/873539028/events?TSLVq=f9115d5b-2a25-4623-a2c7-1a9b043ce990&TSLVp=0ca95089-9a95-43a1-b9ba-bc9f769e90aa&TSLVts=1448366421&TSLVc=ticketsolve&TSLVe=leicestersquare&TSLVrt=Safetynet&TSLVh=0ffd02174d91cceabefab2aeef75bc6a>
, London, until 2 December.
