
New York Times <http://www.theguardian.com/media/new-york-times> staff in 
Paris have launched a last ditch attempt to save an editorial operation in the 
city that stretches back to the 19th century.

The NYT told staff in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/26/new-york-times-editing-prepress-facilities-paris-london>
 it was cutting 69 out of about 110 posts in Paris, where the original Paris 
Herald – later the International Herald Tribune and the International New York 
Times – has been based since 1887.


The proposal suggests keeping about half of the editorial jobs the company 
wants to axe, while making up some of the cuts in London, New York and Hong 
Kong.

Related: New York Times to close editing and prepress facilities in Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/26/new-york-times-editing-prepress-facilities-paris-london>

Though the company plans to continue printing the international edition, it is 
understood that only advertising and admin roles, as well as the NYT’s separate 
small Paris bureau, will be retained in the city with a handful of jobs moved 
to London, Hong Kong or New York.

A person close to the negotiations said the proposal was not just about 
protecting job cuts in Paris, but preserving the sensibility of the newspaper.

He said: “We proposed a plan in which the newspaper would be still put out 
from Paris, but with a dramatically reduced number of employees, so to make it 
work out numbers wise, so we also proposed management consider reducing staff 
in our other offices in Hong Kong and London.

“It’ll still be a bloodbath [but] Europe and the continent are not the same as 
Britain, they are not the same as New York, they are not the same as Hong Kong.

“We are not doing this just to save jobs. We are doing this to save the same 
sensibility this paper has had for 130 years.”

The NYT recently unveiled a $50m global expansion plan 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/14/new-york-times-to-invest-50m-on-global-digital-expansion>
, but it is understood that most of the jobs will be aimed at making the 
content produced in New York more accessible to a global audience.

Jonathan Freed, a former union representative at the Paris operation who left 
in September after 32 years working for the NYT, said it had been clear for 
four or five years that management planned to close the office, with warning 
signs including a lack of digital training for staff based there.

“Over time it became clear that the Times did not want to work in Paris any 
more,” he said. “They opened the office in London and said if you want to have 
a career path then you need to move to London.

“My understanding is that basically nobody is now being given the chance to 
move to London, they’re being told that’s it. It’s just a bloodbath.”

An NYT spokeswoman said the company would not discuss ongoing negotiations, 
adding: “As we’ve said before, the IHT proposal to reorganise its Paris 
operations is about enabling that office to continue to play a meaningful role 
as the New York Times Company increases its efforts to reach international 
digital and print audiences.”

