
The women’s group at the Government Digital Service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/government-digital-service> (GDS) is 
for everyone, irrespective of gender, who cares about having an equal and 
diverse workplace. But that’s not a snappy and concise name for a group. So we 
call it the women’s group. It’s now a year old.

Having an active and supported women’s group can help make GDS a better place 
for everyone to work. Issues that affect women don’t just belong to women. GDS 
is still only a few years old and has seen a lot of changes during that time. 
We faced some of the same problems that many tech startups face, including 
working so hard to get the job done that we didn’t always focus on promoting an 
inclusive culture.

People who were naturally more confident and more assertive thrived whereas 
those who prefer to take time and collaborate could be left out. The women’s 
group was formed as a direct response to this, and its aim is to make GDS a 
more inclusive place to work. We’ve been empowered by our senior team and by 
the whole organisation to make recommendations for change, and we’ve always 
been listened to and strongly supported.

What we’ve achieved

We started the group in 2015 with five objectives. To:

 * Raise awareness and be a voice for women. 
 * Solve problems. 
 * Provide support. 
 * Provide training. 
 * Socialise and network. 
So far, with help from colleagues across GDS, we have started as we mean to go 
on. We’ve rolled out unconscious bias training to all line managers at GDS. 
We’ve set up a reverse mentoring scheme for all senior civil servants, to help 
managers find out what people outside their usual sphere think about working at 
GDS and open up lines of communication.

We run monthly talks by inspirational women. We’ve already welcomed speakers 
from tech and digital industries, government and the House of Lords. We’ve also 
secured funding to host sixcodebar training events 
<https://gds.blog.gov.uk/2016/02/19/hosting-codebar-at-gds/> in 2016. On 
International Women’s Day in March, we published our parity pledge. We 
committed to send more women to speak at events, and not to send speakers to 
events where the organisers aren’t working hard to improve speaker diversity. 
We’ve started work on presentation and public speaking training for everyone at 
GDS regardless of their seniority, skill or experience.

We’ve ensured all GDS interview panels are mixed and we’ve increased the pool 
of women who feel confident conducting and chairing interviews by running 
training sessions.

The GDS executive board has published its objectives and each included one on 
diversity. We’ve pushed for hiring of more permanent civil servants instead of 
fixed-term contracts, which can put women off applying and affects maternity 
leave. And we linked up with the GDS LGBTQ+ group.

What’s next

We’re constantly looking for ways to improve. Our plans include: 

 * Expanding unconscious bias training to all staff.

 * Training members of the group to facilitate these sessions.

 * Working with our recruitment team to increase the number of women hired 
into technical roles.

 * Improving how people find out about working here, looking again at what 
events we should be speaking at and how we write job descriptions that don’t 
put women off applying.

 * Setting up more training sessions, including interview, presentation and 
public speaking training, and finding more opportunities for women to speak and 
develop their skills. 
 * Setting up a work experience programme with Stemettes and Next Tech Girls, 
to give young women experience of science, technology, engineering and maths 
(Stem) jobs at GDS and learn from the women who work here. 
It doesn’t take long to make a change

When we held our first workshop 14 months ago, concern about culture was the 
number one issue people wanted to tackle. We’ve worked hard to find ways that 
we could improve things for everyone. In April, we held our third workshop and 
saw only one sticky note on the wall that talked about a problem with culture.

So things are improving. And they’re improving fast.

Zara Farrar is a creative producer at the Government Digital Service. This is 
an edited version ofa blog  
<https://gds.blog.gov.uk/2016/06/02/about-the-gds-womens-group/>that first 
appeared on the GDS website.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
