
Pop art created some of the most recognisable works of art in the world, from 
Andy Warhol’s soup cans 
<http://www.moma.org/collection/browse_results.php?object_id=79809> to Roy 
Lichtenstein’s Look Mickey 
<http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/Collection/art-object-page.71479.html>. Yet 
many aspects of the pop movement have gone under the radar, such as the 
Australian artists who worked in bold ways ahead of their time, and the female 
artists whose work had to dramatically push boundaries to compete with the men. 
By looking beyond the iconic works and allowing these lesser known elements to 
come forward, the Art Gallery of New South Wales’ latest exhibitionPop to Popism
 <http://www.artgallery.nsw.gov.au/exhibitions/pop-to-popism/>, part of 
Destination NSW’s Sydney International Art Series 
<http://www.sydney.com/events/sydney-international-art-series-9038997>, tells 
the story of a language ­– not just an art movement – that is still widely used 
today.

When pop art emerged in the early 1960s it transformed how audiences 
understood art. As a reaction to the gestural and painterly styles of abstract 
expressionism, and with the introduction of mass media, artists wanted to 
create more accessible work relevant to everyday life. They turned towards 
communications, advertising, television, film and comic books as materials to 
reflect these changes and the impact of technology in a rapidly evolving world.


“Pop artists were saying – actually, let’s look at real life. Let’s look at 
how people are actually living, let’s look at the popular culture that’s all 
around us, and bring that into the art gallery”, describes Wayne Tunnicliffe, 
curator of Pop to Popism.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F42q45%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F42q45%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F31%2F1414715964728%2F2af958b3-d12e-42ba-b048-0391756c7bdd-2060x1430.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pop%20to%20popism%3A%20The%20language%20of%20pop&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F42q45%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pop+to+popism%3A+The+language+of+pop&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F42q45%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F31%2F1414715964728%2F2af958b3-d12e-42ba-b048-0391756c7bdd-2060x1430.jpeg>
 Roy Lichtenstein, Look Mickey, 1961 Photograph: Art Gallery of New South 
Wales/Supplied 
The exhibition begins with the vibrant emergence of pop art in the early 
sixties and continues geographically and chronologically. Swinging London looks 
at artist groups such as The Independent Group that includedEduardo Paolozzi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2005/apr/22/obituaries> and Richard 
Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/feb/07/richard-hamilton-called-him-daddy-pop>
, and aimed to revitalise art in the postwar era. Classic American pop art 
features the famous works ofEd Ruscha 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/sep/12/ed-ruscha-obama-pop-art> 
andRobert Rauschenberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/feb/09/robert-rauschenberg-love-loss-jammers>
, and the European movement presents works bySigmar Polke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2014/apr/17/alibis-sigmar-polke-moma-in-pictures>
 andGerhard Richter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2011/oct/13/gerhard-richter-tate-modern-video>
. Australian pop is a significant part of the exhibition, with artists including
Richard Larter 
<http://www.artgallery.nsw.gov.au/collection/works/?artist_id=larter-richard> 
andRobert Boynes 
<http://www.artgallery.nsw.gov.au/collection/works/?artist_id=boynes-robert>. 
Late pop art includes work made in the early to mid seventies, likeDuane 
Hanson’s Woman with Laundry Basket 
<http://www.artgallery.sa.gov.au/agsa/home/Collection/detail.jsp?ecatKey=4769>, 
which begin to reflexively look back at the pop culture as defining a lifestyle.


The exhibition finishes on Popism, a term which reflects the values of pop art 
that have continued to influence contemporary art, particularly the methods of 
mechanical reproduction, the un-expressionist style, and the emergence of art 
that combines media. The merging of art forms, with an emphasis on 
appropriation and remix, brings into focus the idea of pop as a language, with 
its trademark values of borrowing material from modern everyday life.

Throughout the exhibition there is a particular focus on demonstrating the 
strength of female artists at the time with works by artists such asNiki de 
Saint Phalle <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/jan/31/france.art>, 
Rosalyn Drexler <http://www.pacegallery.com/artists/113/rosalyn-drexler>, 
Martha Rosler <http://www.moma.org/collection/artist.php?artist_id=6832> and 
Vivienne Binns 
<http://www.qagoma.qld.gov.au/exhibitions/past/2011/ten_years_of_contemporary_art_the_james_c_sourris_am_collection/vivienne_binns>
. “Any female artist in the 1960s had to be pretty tough to compete with the 
men, so they often did quite tough work as well”, Tunnicliffe points out.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F42q45%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F42q45%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F31%2F1414716110347%2Fcbcae012-b884-43e9-9804-a5de688b812c-1699x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pop%20to%20popism%3A%20The%20language%20of%20pop&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F42q45%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pop+to+popism%3A+The+language+of+pop&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F42q45%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F31%2F1414716110347%2Fcbcae012-b884-43e9-9804-a5de688b812c-1699x2040.jpeg>
 Rosalyn Drexler, Race for time, 1964 Photograph: Art Gallery of New South 
Wales/Supplied 
Tunnicliffe believes now is the perfect moment to look back at where pop art 
came from. “To think what relevance it has now and to put Australian artists 
into that context, because there’s never been a pop survey to show Australian 
artists with their international peers before.”


The Australian pop artists reacted to many of the same things as their 
international counterparts, but were much bolder when it came to pushing social 
boundaries.


“Australian pop is often quite erotic, there’s quite a strong hedonistic 
sexual element” says Tunnicliffe. Pop artists such as Martin Sharp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/dec/02/martin-sharp-australian-artist-who-came-to-symbolise-the-60s-dies-aged-71>
 and Mike Brown 
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/art-and-design/a-brush-with-rebellion-20111111-1nay1.html>
 were among those charged with obscenity over references in their works:Sharp’s 
involvement in the cover art of underground OZ magazine in 1964 
<http://ro.uow.edu.au/ozsydney/>, and Brown 
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/kind-of-blue-20111110-1n7x7.html>’s 
Paintin’ a-go-go exhibition in 1965, were both anti-establishment reactions 
against the art market.


“Australia was intensely socially conservative during that period and the 
artists were amongst those pushing against it, trying to bring about greater 
liberalization.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F42q45%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F42q45%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F31%2F1414716583758%2Ff8b28145-bcb6-4622-82e8-f5270a235605-1347x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pop%20to%20popism%3A%20The%20language%20of%20pop&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F42q45%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pop+to+popism%3A+The+language+of+pop&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F42q45%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F31%2F1414716583758%2Ff8b28145-bcb6-4622-82e8-f5270a235605-1347x2040.jpeg>
 Martin Sharp, Mister Tambourine Man, 1967 Photograph: Art Gallery of New South 
Wales/Supplied 
While the retrospective gives context, a significant part of the exhibition is 
also a reminder of how the language of pop art is used today. Tunnicliffe 
points to the work of many contemporary Aboriginal artists such asRichard Bell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/feb/21/richard-bell-asylum-seeker-policy-is-a-manifestation-of-australian-racism>
,Tracey Moffatt 
<http://www.artgallery.nsw.gov.au/collection/works/?artist_id=moffatt-tracey> 
andTony Albert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/australia-culture-blog/2014/aug/08/sydney-artist-wins-aboriginal-art-award-for-work-inspired-by-police-shooting>
, who explore race in similar ways to how Australian artists from the sixties, 
such as Sharp and Brown, were using pop art to oppose conservative social 
issues.

“I think the language of pop has stayed with us. It seems to have another 
zeitgeist moment, there’s pop material turning up all over the place.”


So while the soup cans and comic books may be what get people into the gallery 
this summer, there’s another narrative to explore – one that’s more gritty, 
unexpected, and closer to home.



Pop to Popism <http://www.artgallery.nsw.gov.au/exhibitions/pop-to-popism/> at 
the Art Gallery of New South Wales is part of Destination NSW’sSydney 
International Art Series. 
<http://www.sydney.com/events/sydney-international-art-series-9038997>

