
Privatisation <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/privatisation> has been a 
major trend in social care since the 1990s, but practices such as zero hour 
contracts, 15 minute care slots and sub-minimum wage pay are increasing public 
concern.

Once the domiciliary care workforce was made up of local authority home helps 
who had valued, secure jobs. Now it is typified by low paid, part-time care 
assistants, with minimal job security and career prospects. The workforce is 
increasingly attracted to other sectors, such as supermarkets, for better terms 
and conditions. Arecent review 
<http://www.yourbritain.org.uk/uploads/editor/files/The_Kingsmill_Review_-_Taking_Care_-_Final_2.pdf>
 (pdf) painted a dismal picture of working conditions in the care sector.

Related: Cure to the short working life of a social worker: flexibility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2016/feb/25/short-working-life-social-worker-flexibility>

Some three in every four of England’s 15,000 care homes are now run for profit 
and the proportion is rising. Des Kelly, who until recently was the director of 
the National Care Forumhas said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/18/des-kelly-people-paying-for-care-national-care-forum)>
: “On a good day, we reckon we would be able to count 20% [non-profit] and 6% 
or so left in the public sector … I don’t think that represents a healthy mixed 
economy. What we have done very effectively over a period of about 30 years is 
to denationalise the care sector.”

These changes have arguably had a detrimental effect on the workforce. 
Typically workers in the private sector are paid less than those in the 
not-for-profit sector, and the latter are paid less than those in the state 
sector who have managed to hang on to more favourable terms and conditions. 
Whether privatisation will increase the number of jobs available remains to be 
seen, although it seems unlikely – representatives of the sector have argued 
that theintroduction of the national living wage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/aug/20/national-living-wage-threat-uk-care-homes-osborne>
 will leave it at risk of “catastrophic collapse” because of higher wage bills. 
Despite this, research from the Royal College of Nurses found that38% of care 
home nurses 
<http://www.nursingtimes.net/roles/older-people-nurses/care-homes-struggle-to-meet-residents-needs/5042716.fullarticle>
 felt they were already understaffed.

The social care workforce is huge – 1.5 million – and spread across an 
enormous number of organisations. Of these, the Care Quality Commission (CQC) 
estimates that57% of all social care jobs 
<http://www.skillsforcare.org.uk/Documents/NMDS-SC-and-intelligence/NMDS-SC/Analysis-pages/The-size-and-structure-Report-2015.pdf>
 (pdf) are in the private sector. Most are equally split between domiciliary 
and residential settings (highlighting the sector’s continued reliance on 
institutional provision) and many are part time.

Nor does privatisation seem to have benefited service users. One young, 
unqualified worker says: “I visit one elderly man, who lives with his son. He 
served in the second world war. His son has severe mental health problems, and 
is unable to care for himself. I visit their house in the morning to help with 
daily tasks. They live in squalid, nasty conditions. I have very little 
nutritious, acceptable food to cook for them – [just] microwave and tinned 
meals. I’m not specialised or trained in caring, and I’m paid £7 an hour for 
the work I do. This is the best on offer for this veteran and his son.”



Related: Making an impact: the graduates who chose social care after university
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2015/aug/26/graduates-who-chose-social-care-after-university>

There are however, some more encouraging trends. Social care 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/social-care> has always been a place of 
positive innovation. Many people still want to work in the sector and many do 
it well. There are now more personal assistants employed by service users. This 
could be a wonderful chance for greater choice and control for both parties.

There are also a number of creative user-led organisations, co-operatives, 
social enterprises, mutuals and micro-employers that could be the catalyst for 
a better service. They could provide real peer support creating new kinds of 
jobs, and could recruit and train service users to work in new cooperative and 
collaborative ways. This could build onexisting initiatives 
<http://www.disabilitywales.org/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/Co-operation-and-Co-operatives-in-the-Development-of-Direct-Payments-Schemes-in-Wales-Eng.pdf>
 (pdf) to pool personal budgets and set up new collective services, from 
personal assistant co-operatives to non-medicalised crisis support services for 
people in distress.

Any discussion of the social care workforce has to take account of the 
sector’s chronic underfunding. This continues to shape everything – especially 
why all efforts to integrate health and social care have failed at a 
fundamental level and why the NHS is increasingly being undermined by the lack 
of support for older and disabled people to return home from hospital. One day, 
the government will have to bite the bullet. The need for a revitalised 
approach to the social care workforce grows daily and so does the political 
pressure to bring it into being.



Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
