
It is not often a committed advocate of comprehensive education is invited to 
address one of the country’s leading independent schools. But after a robust 
exchange at a conference between myself and the head of Westminster school, 
Patrick Derham, I was asked to speak to his students. Derham is one of a 
handful of independent school heads who grasps that something needs to change, 
though not quite in the way I am about to suggest to his students.

My chosen title is: What’s the problem with private education? It feels like a 
good time to enter the lion’s den and offer a strongly contrary view to the 
received wisdoms of this deeply Tory age in which the power of wealth and with 
it, private education, is as resonant and divisive as ever.

Related: University admissions study reveals extent of Oxbridge divide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2011/jul/08/university-admissions-study-oxbridge-divide>

It was not always so. In the run-up to the 1944 Education Act, political 
leaders of all parties seriously debated, but ultimately rejected, the 
enfolding of the old public schools into the new structure of free secondary 
education. In the progressive 60s and 70s, schools such as Eton were considered 
both something of a joke and emblems of an outdated oppression, as symbolised 
by Lindsay Anderson’s explosive allegorical 1968 film, If. In 1973, Labour’s 
Roy Hattersley told prep school heads of the party’s “serious intention” to 
reduce and eventually abolish independent schools. It seemed logical to assume 
that theBerlin Wall separating private and state education 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/2014/01/education-private-schools-berlin-wall> 
would soon be dismantled.

How wrong could you be? As the Oxford historian David Kynaston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/dec/05/-sp-social-mobility-decline-elitist-education-david-kynaston>
, one of the most acute current critics of private education, observes: 
“Endless reports point to the privately educated stranglehold and the sheer 
disparity in life chances, but I’ve yet to see an editorial in a serious 
broadsheet, including the Guardian, or more than the occasional speech by a 
politician, that squarely confronts the issue.” He adds: “It is a sad shortfall 
in what is supposed to be a mature democracy.”

We have recently heard the now familiar arguments on this question from the 
Sutton Trust 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/feb/24/privately-educated-elite-continues-to-take-top-jobs-finds-survey>
, social mobility tsarAlan Milburn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/11/uk-faces-permanent-generational-divide-social-mobility-tsar-warns>
, academicJohn Goldthorpe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/12/uk-education-reforms-not-helped-social-mobility>
 and Ofsted chiefSir Michael Wilshaw 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/09/ofsted-chief-criticises-independent-schools-lack-of-help-for-state-schools>
, while the Labour MPDan Jarvis 
<http://www.yorkshirepost.co.uk/news/opinion/dan-jarvis-labour-will-only-change-if-it-becomes-a-party-of-reform-1-7770720>
 spoke recently of how “the daughter of a cleaner in … Kingstone, Barnsley, 
[should] have the same life chances as the son of a barrister in Kingston upon 
Thames.” Rousing stuff, but how likely is this to be achieved as long as a 
pupil at an expensive independent school has as much spent on their education 
in one year as the average UK citizen earns in total and a student at a state 
school outside London is educated on roughly £4,000 a year – about half a 
term’s fees at Westminster?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jjkd%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jjkd%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2335ca738c144fd1aedff7a6557be6dd9fd0aeed%2F0_354_4724_2835%2F4724.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%20returned%20to%20my%20father%E2%80%99s%20school%20to%20say%20why%20private%20education%20must%20go&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jjkd%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I+returned+to+my+father%E2%80%99s+school+to+say+why+private+education+must+go&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jjkd%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2335ca738c144fd1aedff7a6557be6dd9fd0aeed%2F0_354_4724_2835%2F4724.jpg>
 Private education today seems entrenched as ever, but in the runup to the 1944 
Education Act political leaders considered enfolding them into the new free 
secondary state system. Photograph: Getty 
While the 700 or so pupils seat themselves in the body of Westminster Abbey, 
no less, to hear me, I am locked in vigorous disagreement with Derham: he is 
determined to put me straight on the perception of private education. (Mine is 
well out of date, apparently.) Certainly, Westminster is far from the Hogwarts 
image of old. It is more ethnically diverse and is co-educational in the sixth 
form. For all that, the grand public schools still offer, as in myfather’s day 
<http://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/from-the-archive-blog/2014/mar/14/tony-benn-labour-died-aged-88>
 (he was a Westminster pupil long ago) a smooth route to the top with yearly 
fees between £24,000 to £33,000 and the highest rates of acceptance to Oxbridge 
of any school in the country.

A key part of the elite product on offer, even to boarders born in Beijing, is 
familiarisation with the architecture and atmospheres of the English 
establishment, including regular services in the stained-glass glow of the 
abbey and the chance, today, to hear school musicians play the heart-stoppingly 
beautiful first movement of Bach’s Concerto for Two Violins in D minor, at 
which point I nearly lose my resolve.

Related: Private school gives pupils a boost worth two extra years of 
education, research shows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/feb/26/private-school-gives-pupils-a-boost-worth-two-extra-years-of-education-research-shows>

I don’t want my speech 
<http://melissabenn.co.uk/writings/what-is-the-problem-with-private-education/> 
to be just one more incantation of the injustices of our country’s shameful 
educational apartheid. I describe the interesting near misses of history, such 
as that pre-1944 possibility of reform, and more significant victories such as 
Finland’s astonishing decision in the 1970s to abolish all private and 
selective schools, thus creating one of the world’s finest and fairest 
education systems.

We have to find a new way through this old, old problem. Up to now, there have 
been two main paths to potential reform: outright abolition, as perennially 
called for by a few brave souls – the playwrightAlan Bennett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jun/17/alan-bennett-attack-private-education-lecture-wrong>
, for example – or the intermittent requests placed on the independent sector 
by nervous governments to do more to help state schools. Some private schools
sponsor academies 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/aug/18/private-schools-academies-independent-dna-wellington-college>
, although these experiments can have a whiff of patronage about them and have 
had very patchy results. Meanwhile, a few top private schools, such as 
Westminster, have backedhighly selective sixth-form free schools 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/apr/05/free-school-sixth-form-further-education-technology-working-world>
, often at great cost to the public purse.

Serious attempts to claw back anomalous tax advantages from the independent 
sector have usually ended in failure. In 2011, the courts in effect returned to 
private schools the right to decide what constitutes “public benefit 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2011/oct/14/private-schools-public-benefit-ruling>
” in return for charitable status. In 2014, the then shadow education secretary
Tristram Hunt 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/nov/24/private-schools-labour-warning-tax-breaks-tristram-hunt>
 was roundly criticised for daring to suggest the withdrawal of business-rate 
relief unless independent schools entered into a more meaningful partnerships 
with state schools.

But there is a third way. In Kynaston’s words, this is the “harder route to 
reform”: abolition of the fee-paying principle and integration of private 
schools into a national system. It is hard to imagine, in the current climate, 
any major party contemplating it. For all their supposed evangelism about 
educational inequality, the Tories have offered no serious challenge to private 
education: far from it. The whip hand only ever hovers over theunderfunded 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/05/school-deprivation-funding-changes-education-budget>
 and ever more demoralised state sector.

Labour, too, has shown little appetite for the fight in recent decades. But 
Jeremy Corbyn’s idea for aNational Education Service 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/12/what-does-jeremy-corbyn-think> 
provides a sound framework for a fundamental rethink. And political moods can 
change quickly.

Related: Oxbridge colleges named and shamed for failing to admit poorer 
students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/dec/12/oxbridge-colleges-shamed-disadvantaged-students>

As I tell the Westminster pupils, Finland teaches us significant lessons. 
Reformers need to build consensus for change across the political spectrum 
while resisting a return to the grammar/secondary modern divide as the price of 
integration. The very first thing Derham says to me as we file out: “You know 
you’d have to bring back selection?” But for someone like Kynaston this is “a 
second-order issue compared to the ending of fee-paying education.”

As for the pupils, my talk is met by what feels like a slightly tense silence. 
Most are rushing to classes but one boy thanks me for saying “really necessary 
things about the privilege in this place”. Later, both the head and chaplain 
send me courteous thank-you notes, indicating that I have stirred up a great 
deal of debate, and caused some students much “wrestling with the issue”.

What have I learned from this experience? That the next critic of private 
education to speak in any similar place should suggest a full-on debate, 
bringing in pupils from nearby state schools. Let the conversation begin.
