
1. The smartphone

Although not new, the smartphone’s potential is yet to be realised in health 
and care. Efforts to curate quality apps, for example through an NHS app 
library, have had little success. Sophisticated apps can fit into health 
services.Ginger.io <https://ginger.io/> offers people with depression or 
anxiety problems the ability to track their mood and share data with clinicians 
to offer interventions.


Smartphones can serve as the hub for new diagnostic and treatment 
technologies. Some people with type 1 diabetes, dissatisfied with medical 
technology companies’ progress, are driving forward the development of an 
artificial pancreas.

Their ubiquity also makes them ideal to gather large amounts of data to 
improve understanding of disease at a population level.BigPD <http://bigpd.org/>
 is a project seeking to sign up 100,000 people to track their health and 
develop new insights into Parkinson’s disease.

 2. At-home or portable diagnostics

Clinicians can bring hospital-level diagnostics to the home through portable 
x-ray machines, blood-testing kits and other technologies. Patients can use 
tools like theAliveCOR ECG 
<http://www.imedicalapps.com/2013/03/physician-review-iphone-alivecor-ecg-heart-monitor/#>
, embedded in a smartphone case, which helps interpret heart test results via 
an app and facilitates sharing with clinicians.


Some people with disabilities or long-term conditions use assistive devices to 
help them perform certain tasks or activities. Assisted devices could have 
embedded sensors capable of gathering data on their use. A tremor spoon is 
already on the market for use by people with Parkinson’s disease. By 
incorporating sensors and deploying its data analytic expertise, the aim is to 
understand how someone’s disease changes over time.

 3. Implantable drug-delivery mechanisms

Between a third and a half of all medication prescribed to people with 
long-term conditions is not taken as recommended. Several technologies in 
development could enable patients and care professionals to monitor and improve 
adherence to a prescribed drug regime.


There is sensor technology so small it can be swallowed and combined with 
drugs in pill form. When the pill dissolves in the stomach, the sensor is 
activated and transmits data via a wearable patch to a smartphone app. Patients 
and clinicians can see how well they are adhering to their prescription, though 
it raises important questions about patients’ privacy and autonomy.

4. Digital therapy

Digital therapeutics are health or social care interventions delivered through 
a smartphone or a laptop. They embed clinical practice and therapy into a 
digital form.

Computerised cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT)

A new generation of automated digital therapies has been developed that aims 
to deliver CBT at scale with better engagement.Sleepio 
<https://www.sleepio.com/> is one example, a six-week tailored programme 
delivered through the web designed to treat insomnia and help alleviate anxiety 
and depression. There have been positive early results in randomised controlled 
trials.

 5. Genome sequencing

Advances in genome sequencing and the associated field of genomics will give 
us better understanding of how diseases affect different individuals. With the 
genetic profile of a person’s disease and knowledge of their response to 
treatment, it should be possible to better predict their response to treatment.


Population-level studies

Major projects are underway internationally to understand the relationship 
between genes and health at a population scale. In the UK, the government is 
sponsoring the100,000 Genomes project <http://www.genomicsengland.co.uk/> in 
England. In the US, one company promises to build a database featuring 1m 
genomes by 2020 and currently has 20,000 sequenced genomes linked to other data 
about people’s physical characteristics.

 6. Artificial intelligence

Machine learning is a type of artificial intelligence that enables computers 
to learn without being explicitly programmed, meaning they can teach themselves 
to change when exposed to new data.


New insights into big datasets

Several businesses hope to use these techniques to provide diagnostic support. 
Enlitic, IBM’s Watson division and Google’s Deep Mind have started to explore 
potential applications in healthcare.

 7. Blockchains

Blockchains are decentralised databases that keep a record of how data is 
created and changed over time. Their key feature is they can be trusted as 
authoritative records without a single, central authority guaranteeing accuracy 
and security.


Electronic health records are widely used, but they are usually centralised, 
provided by a small number of suppliers. Some commentators have described how 
records using blockchain technology would bring benefits like resilience and 
encourage interoperability, with the patient or clinician given the encryption 
keys to control who sees the data.

 8. Online communities

Social networks like MedHelp <http://www.medhelp.org/>, PatientsLikeMe 
<https://www.patientslikeme.com/> and HealthUnlocked 
<https://healthunlocked.com/> bring together people with interests in health 
and care to support each other, share learning and even provide a platform for 
tracking health data, helping people manage their condition and contributing to 
research.


With new technologies like these come new opportunities for our health and 
care system: improving the accuracy and usefulness of information we can gather 
on our health as citizens and patients; changing how and where care is 
delivered; and offering new ways to prevent, predict, detect and treat illness.


Challenges include how to ensure universal access to the benefits of 
technologies through theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>. The 
system needs to get better at dealing with the great volume of health 
information these technologies generate.


Matthew Honeyman is a policy researcher at the King’s Fund and Dr Cosima 
Gretton is an academic foundation doctor at Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS foundation 
trust

This is an abridged version of an article that first appeared on 
kingsfund.org.uk 
<http://www.kingsfund.org.uk/publications/articles/eight-technologies-will-change-health-and-care>
.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.

 * This article was amended on 29 April 2016 to make clear it was jointly 
written by Matthew Honeyman and Cosima Gretton; it had previously been 
attributed to just Honeyman
