 Bhaskar Chakravorti. 
The UN General Assembly committed to “eliminate poverty in all its forms 
everywhere” by 2030, when it met in New York last year. The Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs) were launched with much fanfare, endorsed by 
heads-of-state, celebrities and CEOs. Thanks, to a campaign on Twitter, 
Instagram and the like, the SDGs launch was thetop trending topic 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/05/nyregion/forget-coachella-and-bonnaroo-the-un-is-the-place-to-be.html?_r=0>
 in the US during the assembly.

Now, the headlines have moved elsewhere. Heads-of-state have returned to other 
pressing matters. The celebrities who spoke up for the SDGs -Usain Bolt 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DdLqiTvFwJk>, Jordan’s Queen Rania 
<http://www.jordantimes.com/news/local/queen-rania-addresses-global-citizen-festival-call-unity-engagement>
 andBeyonce <http://www.beyonce.com/what-are-the-global-goals/> - have moved on 
to other tweetable events.
 <http://events.ethicalcorp.com/reports/SORB/index.php>

A recent survey <http://events.ethicalcorp.com/reports/SORB/index.php> paints 
a sobering picture of business engagement with the SDGs. Only 37% of corporate 
respondents in the US said they were planning to engage with them.


Additionally, the top three goals of possible interest to business were: SDG 
13: climate action; SDG 8: decent work and economic growth; SDG 12: responsible 
consumption and production – all classic public goods. My worry is that they 
are vulnerable to a tragedy-of-the-commons: each CEO, has a unilateral 
incentive to under-engage since the benefits are so diffuse and shared so 
widely.

Given that 2030 is not that far, when one considers the magnitude of the 
goals, it is worthwhile asking, which of the many stakeholders can maintain the 
momentum? Whose incentives are most closely aligned with achieving the goals 
and who has the resources to execute at scale across countries?

The answer is unavoidable: global business, as a stakeholder group, is best 
positioned to take the lead.

Supported by the Citi Foundation, we at The Fletcher School, Tufts University 
have launchedInclusion Inc. <http://fletcher.tufts.edu/InclusionInc> We engage 
in research, analysis and in-depth conversations with key business 
decision-makers, from CEOs to sustainable development officers. Our purpose was 
to understand how they are integrating investments in sustainable development 
into their strategic mix. In this series, I’ll share highlights of what we’re 
learning and the implications for business and development sector leaders.

Related: Zambia's national multi-stakeholder approach to achieving the SDGs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/may/18/zambias-national-multi-stakeholder-approach-to-achieving-the-sdgs>

To get started, consider two rules of the road en route to 2030. 

The SDGs cannot succeed without business leadership

A few macro-realities:

 * The World Bank recently moved the goal posts 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/poverty/brief/global-poverty-line-faq> by 
shifting the poverty line from $1.25 (88p) a day to $1.90 (£1.34) a day. A 
close to 50% increase in the poverty threshold makes getting to the goals even 
harder. 
 * In the case of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), it could be argued 
that China’s state-led initiatives alone, explain thedramatic reduction in 
poverty thus far 
<http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21578665-nearly-1-billion-people-have-been-taken-out-extreme-poverty-20-years-world-should-aim>
. With China slowing down, the next phase will require progress more evenly 
across other developing countries. Emerging markets have been coping with slow 
growth for five consecutive years. With challenging socio-political contexts 
prevailing in most of them, governments in the developing world will struggle 
to deliver. 
 * Governments in developed economies are also handicapped, with a plethora of 
domestic challenges, slow growth and declining productivity. 
Since it accounts for 90% of the world’s jobs 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2012/10/01/jobs-cornerstone-development-says-world-development-report>
 and60% of global GDP 
<http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/survey/so/2013/car112713a.htm>, the 
private sector has a disproportionate degree of leverage and potential to fill 
the gaps. Considering the $3 tn (£2.1tn) a year price tag bysome estimates 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2015/09/26/us-development-goals-finance-idUSKCN0RQ0RD20150926>
, to accomplish the SDGs and with governments having reneged on past 
commitments to the MDGs’, another deep-pocketed stakeholder must step in. 
Sustainable development depends on sustainable business.

Sustainable development serves sustainable business interests 

According to estimates from McKinsey 
<http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/strategy/winning_the_30_trillion_decathlon_going_for_gold_in_emerging_markets>
, there could be a $30tn (£21tn) consumer market in 2025 in emerging markets. 
But as these markets experience slow growth and currency devaluations, the 
$30tn prize seems more distant. In the longer-term, the failure to close many 
of the gaps in getting to the SDGs would cause the realised value of these 
markets to fall far short of the estimates. Missing the goals will lead to 
significant“trapped value”. 
<http://www.amazon.com/Innovation-Emerging-Markets-International-Political/dp/1137480289>
 AsSecretary General Ban-Ki Moon put it 
<http://www.un.org/sg/statements/index.asp?nid=9020>: “The case is clear. 
Realising the Sustainable Development Goals will improve the environment for 
doing business and building markets.”

How the SDGs can help business orchestrate action 

Our research 
<http://issuu.com/ibgc_fletcher/docs/1221365_citi_foundation_sustainable/3?e=13663347/10237172>
 highlights why companies invest in sustainable development, and why they don’t 
invest enough. The most frequently cited motivation was that of mitigating 
business risk from disrupted operations, supplies or reputational damage. The 
need to adhere to industry norms of transparency, traceability, environmental 
responsibility came in second, with winning share and establishing a beachhead 
with future customers as the third. The more readily measurable and the more 
immediate the issue, the more highly motivating it is.


Related: Being a woman business owner offers unusual challenges but great 
reward 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/may/05/being-a-woman-business-owner-offers-unusual-challenges-but-great-reward>

Balanced against these motivating factors are the barriers. A top barrier to 
taking action is the complexity of the context in most developing regions. With 
partnerships with local actors essential for execution, companies find it hard 
to work with and coordinate across so many disparate multi-sector stakeholders.

The SDGs offer an organising framework for partners to agree to a common 
end-point and then work backwards from. Having a publicly declared goal helps 
keep partners motivated to follow through or face significant reputational risk 
– and thus mitigate the tragedy of the commons.

The biggest risk is if companies find it too lofty and too much of a “UN 
initiative” or one best left to governments - and disengage. It requires 
imagination to make the link between sustainable business and sustainable 
development. Each CEO should imagine the world of 2030 with and without 
progress on the goals and what the differences would be for their respective 
companies.

The first step towards eliminating poverty in all its forms everywhere is to 
first eliminate poverty of the imagination.

Bhaskar Chakravorti  
<http://fletcher.tufts.edu/IBGC/About/Team/bios/chakravorti>is the senior 
associate dean of international business and finance at The Fletcher School, 
Tufts University. He is also the founding executive director of Fletcher’s
Institute for Business in the Global Context <http://fletcher.tufts.edu/IBGC> 
and author of the book, The Slow Pace of Fast Change.

Content on this page is paid for and provided by Business Call to Action 
<http://www.businesscalltoaction.org/>, sponsor of the business and the 
sustainable development goals hub 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/series/role-business-development>

