
Just after the UK publication of Toni Morrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/apr/25/toni-morrison-books-interview-god-help-the-child>
’s now-celebratedBeloved 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/jul/08/fiction.tonimorrison>, I and 
a few other black women in the arts were invited to have tea with the American 
novelist at her hotel, Brown’s in Mayfair. It was February 1988. I was setting 
up in London as a fledgling filmmaker.

I had been an admirer since reading her first novel, The Bluest Eye 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/may/02/toni-morrison-crush-of-the-week>
. She looked unremarkable; she did not wear her hair in locks, as she does now, 
and was dressed soberly. She was largely unrecognised for her literary output, 
which was one reason I was there, highly incensed by this. She ordered high tea 
for us, and I remember mostly her selfless interest in us rather than in 
herself, and I stuttered to communicate with her about my creative ambitions.

She was very aunt-like, gently encouraging the photographers, filmmakers and 
writers assembled before her – pioneers, really, as we had few role models to 
fall back on. But she was also challenging and particular; one could tell she 
required us to be mannerly and not too casual in her presence, looking somewhat 
askance at those who were sharing armchairs. As teatime progressed and I took 
one small bite of the scone she proffered, our eyes locked for a moment over 
the fine bone china. Then, with the genteel atmosphere of Brown’s fizzing 
around us, Morrison asked us to consider: “Why is a Russian writer called a 
Russian writer and an American writer a black or African-American writer?”

The 1985 Brixton riots were still relatively fresh in our minds and we 
identified strongly as black Londoners, yet here she was asking us to rethink 
ourselves. She was challenging us, her fans, and when some of us put up reasons 
for our own qualified Britishness she was terse, thinking us naive, I suspect.

A measure of how little mainstream acknowledgement she had received after two 
decades of writing was that the TV show on which she and editor/publisher 
Margaret Busby had been due to appear to discuss publishing dropped the item. 
Outraged, Margaret and I decided to make our own film. She generously gave us 
an hour in her tight schedule and we filmed our own interview – and managed to 
sell the resulting film to Channel 4. Later that monthBeloved won the Pulitzer 
prize.

SL Bridglal went on to produce a documentary on Toni Morrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/tonimorrison>, Identifiable Qualities. 
She is currently writing her first novel
