
Driving when you are drowsy can be as dangerous as having a few drinks, says 
theAmerican Academy of Sleep Medicine 
<http://www.aasmnet.org/resources/pdf/pressroom/Drowsy-driving-position.pdf>. 
Which is a worry, becausea recent American Automobile Association Foundation 
for Traffic Safety report 
<https://sleepfoundation.org/white-paper-consequences-drowsy-driving> found 
that 10% of US drivers admitted falling asleep behind the wheel, whilea 2011 UK 
survey of 1,000 drivers 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/dr-michael-j-breus/the-dangers-of-drowsy-dri_b_901650.html>
by Brake, the road safety charity, found that one in eight drivers had nodded 
off for up to 30 seconds.

Drowsiness, like alcohol, makes you less alert, slows your reaction times and 
means you are more likely to have an accident even if you don’t actually fall 
asleep. About one in five crashes in which a person is killed involves a drowsy 
driver. Driving while drowsy usually occurs at high speeds, is most common in 
men between 16 and 24 years of age and occurs most often between 11pm and 8am. 
The car typically veers off the road and the driver isn’t alert enough to brake.

The solution


It would seem we are a bit too relaxed about driving when tired. Shift 
workers, people on medications that cause sleepiness and anyone who is sleep 
deprived (as a new parent, I drove with my fingernails digging into my hands to 
keep myself awake) should realise that they could be drowsy drivers. There are 
obvious symptoms of tiredness such as yawning, but other big clues that you 
should pull over include being unable to recall the last few miles, missing 
road signs, drifting out of your lane, getting too close to the car in front or 
finding it hard to maintain your speed and needing more effort to keep your 
head up. If you do feel sleepy you should pull over immediately or, if you’re 
on a motorway, as soon as it is safe to do so.

The Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents 
<http://www.rospa.com/road-safety/advice/drivers/fatigue/road-accidents/> says 
that two cups of caffeinated coffee and a 15-minute nap is the most effective 
way to stop feeling sleepy. Turning on the radio, opening the window or asking 
a passenger to say something interesting won’t wake you up sufficiently.

Driving is best done during normal waking hours; in particular, avoid driving 
between midnight and 6am, when you are naturally sleepy. Plan your journey so 
that you have a break for 15 minutes every two hours – ideally getting out of 
the car – and don’t do a long drive after you have worked a full day. If your 
drive is monotonous, especially if on a motorway, it is even more important to 
get a good night’s sleep (around seven hours). Whenever possible, avoid driving 
alone and, if on a long trip, try to share the driving.
