
It was C's mother's birthday last weekend, and I could not help but notice 
that she and all her friends had called their children the same names. It was 
not unusual to hear a conversation such as this: "Well, David's in St Lucia." 
"Your David or my David?" "My one. Your one's over there by the scones."

This would never happen now. Nicking your friends' children's names is totally 
taboo. Nicking your friends' names for your own children is taboo. When J had 
her second daughter, it took 10 days to name her, and at one point she said, "I 
was hoping you would die over the weekend, then I could call her Zoe." At which 
my mum said, "Oh, tell her it's fine! I don't mind!", as if it wasn't my 
identity at all we were talking about, it was still a 70s idea she was trying 
out, like putting cardamom in rice.

It is taboo even to call your child a name that rhymes with somebody else's 
child's name, though the person who invented that weird rule is my sister, and 
it didn't stop her calling one of hers a name that rhymed with Spot (it is open 
season on dogs, apparently. If I'd got his brother, Tyson, this would probably 
never have happened).

It is not taboo to deride someone's name idea, but you should be aware that it 
won't put them off, and however good your objection, the child will inevitably 
grow into the name, just by being repeatedly called by it, and you will end up 
the cussed individual who couldn't keep her stupid thoughts to herself. Even 
though it's not taboo, it's still annoying, so if you don't think you can keep 
it to yourself, why not try not asking? You will find out in the end.

I know â€“ it's impossible, especially when you are pregnant. And there are only 
two possible responses, a) that is ridiculous. What a stupid, ridiculous person 
you are, or b) that is great. I want to steal it and this will have to be the 
end of our friendship. Though last night, when my friend E said she had decided 
on Ezra, none of that happened. I just went, "Huh. Cool." "Yes, he was a Nazi. 
But also a poet." "Huh. Cool." "I think the poet thing will last longer than 
the Nazi thing . . . And also, it has a Z in it. Amazing how few boy's names 
you could say that about."

The conversation before that, I immediately stole the name. It was underhand, 
especially since I'm due first and it was his idea, but at the same time, a) we 
are not that close, and b) there isn't a b. I was just happy to trash the 
friendship. We both have plenty of friends. So anyway, the name was 
Huckleberry, and then C vetoed it because it was poncy. "It doesn't have to be 
poncy. We could shorten it to Huck." "Hmm," he said. "Can you think of any word 
that rhymes with? Off the top of your head?" "No. No I can't."

I'll tell you something weird, which is that there is often a swell around one 
weird name, so that loads of people suddenly choose it, even when they don't 
know one another. Eight years ago, two Ottos of my acquaintance were born 
within a week of each other. (Probably also a Nazi . . . and maybe a poet.) So 
even though I am not allowed Huckleberry, just by saying it out loud, I've made 
it more likely that 2009 will see more than one. What can I say? My entire role 
in this episode has been very annoying.

Apart from the Huckleberry veto, C has eschewed the traditional "No" paternal 
function (why do they call them hunter-gatherers, men? Surely, since the dawn 
of time, their noticeable gender-trait was to wake up and say "no" to 
everything? And then get on with hunting, and only then gather?) Instead, he 
has chosen a name and is engaged full-time in not letting me tell anyone what 
it is. It's daft. I am concentrating so hard on who I've accidentally told, and 
getting them not to tell him I've told them, it's like a whole new layer of 
stress. I may as well be having twins.

This morning, I idly asked my friend O, whose baby isn't due until Christmas, 
if they had a name, assuming he wouldn't have a clue, and he said: "We've got 
one. It's perfect for a boy or a girl." "Oh yes?" "Democracy!"

Huh. Cool.
