
Nearly 20 years on, the Pergau dam affair remains Britain's biggest aid 
scandal. Not only were hundreds of millions of pounds in UK aid linked to a 
major arms deal, but the project was deemed hopelessly uneconomic by officials 
in Britain andMalaysia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia>. In late 
1994, aid for the project was declared unlawful in a landmark case at the UK 
high court.

The Guardian ran more than 100 articles 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2012/12/11/1355225198826/Pergau-Dam-001.jpg>
 on Pergau that year, which dug into the secrecy surrounding the affair and 
asked how it was possible that so much could have gone wrong.

As the senior civil servant in charge of UK aid when the scandal broke, Tim 
Lankester found himself the centre of attention. It was a 1993National Audit 
Office (NAO) report <http://www.nao.org.uk/publications/archive/9293.aspx> – 
which noted his refusal to sign off the spending without formal, written 
instruction from ministers – that effectively blew the whistle on the project. 
His move raised the question: why had senior politicians approved £238m in aid 
– then the largest grant awarded for a single project – against the advice of 
civil servants?

Lankester has now written a fascinating but eye-wateringly expensive book on 
the affair <http://www.routledge.com/books/details/9780415529525/>. Uncovering 
forgotten documents and reconstructing the twists and turns of events, it 
offers a behind-the-scenes take on the controversy that would redefine British 
foreign aid.

"We were slipping in this direction for years," he says, describing the 
"pessimistic" mood among UK aid officials at the time. The aid budget had been 
slashed, more was being directed through international organisations, and what 
was left was increasingly being abused by commercial interests. "Pergau was us 
drawing a line in the sand," he says.

The UK aid programme at the time was managed by the Overseas Development 
Administration (ODA), a department of the Foreign Office. Without its own 
cabinet minister, the ODA was too weak to defend its corner, says Lankester. 
Meanwhile, the government's controversial aid-for-trade policy brought 
increased pressure from business, which saw the aid budget as a honey pot.

The end of the cold war had ratcheted up competition in the global arms trade; 
British firms, along with some people in government, were after any opportunity 
to boost sales.

The trouble began in 1988 with a secret defence agreement linking the promise 
of civilian aid to Malaysia with a major arms export deal. Lankester, at the 
Treasury then, sent a memo to John Major warning that the linkage could "create 
acute embarrassment to ministers and wasteful public expenditure … I have 
little doubt that the press will eventually get on to this".

However, it would take five years for details of the project to emerge. There 
were more people who knew about Pergau in business than in Whitehall, says 
Lankester, while NGOs knew nothing before the NAO report. He doubts the project 
would have gone through had more people known more about it earlier. Lankester 
cautions against solely blaming politicians, saying civil servants "gave way 
too easily".

Looking back, he admits he had doubts about the legality of the project and 
should have sought formal legal advice. He also underestimated the power of the 
business lobby in Whitehall and the Malaysian prime minister's own desire to 
push through the dam project, he says. On the UK side, he puts much of the 
affair down to the "extremely dominant" Margaret Thatcher, who was known to 
have views on aid and trade with Malaysia. "It was difficult for ministers to 
stand up to her."

Lankester visited Pergau for the first time last summer, and contrasts the 
drama of the affair with what he found – immense natural beauty and the 
relatively well-functioning dam. "It does work quite well, but it came at such 
a high cost," he says. The affair did leave some positive legacies: a 
cross-party consensus that aid should be officially "untied" from commercial 
interests, a new act enshrining in law its poverty reduction focus, and a 
cabinet minister for the new Department for International Development (DfID). 
Now, when a permanent secretary dissents from a spending proposal, parliament 
is immediately notified.

His book, however, ends with a warning: "It is impossible to say that 
something like this will never happen again with British aid."

Revelations that £500m in UK aid is spent through a small group of, primarily 
British, consultants 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/datablog/2012/sep/21/why-is-uk-aid-going-to-uk-companies>
 raised questions in September about who benefits – and who profits – from the 
UK aid programme.

The World Development Movement 
<http://www.wdm.org.uk/past-campaign/tied-aid-and-development-pergau-dam>, 
which led the legal challenge against aid for the Pergau dam,sounded the alarm 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2012/feb/06/old-british-aid-policy-rears-head>
 and pointed to the legacy of Pergau after the former development secretary 
Andrew Mitchellreportedly linked 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/aid-to-india-part-of-broad-plan-to-build-trade-and-investment-says-minister-6278373.html>
 aid to India with ambitions to sell Typhoon fighter jets last year.

"We just shouldn't go there," Lankester says of linking trade with aid. It's a 
message he'll take to DfID this month, where he's presenting his book. "I'm 
happy for us to spend money in countries where we have trade relations, but I 
don't want any linkage," he says. "It's just too dangerous. It's a slippery 
slope. That's the lesson of Pergau."

• The Politics and Economics of Britain's Foreign Aid: The Pergau Dam Affair, 
Routledge, September 2012 
<http://www.routledge.com/books/details/9780415529525/>
