
For decades, young Britons have enjoyed the freedom of Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, able to work, study and travel 
freely on the continent, and enjoy healthcare and other privileges while they 
do so.


But how would all that change if Britain voted to leave the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> on Thursday?

Will young people still be able to get jobs in Europe?

Britain’s membership of the EU means that citizens are able to live and work 
anywhere within the 28 countries of the EU.

“If you want to work in Germany or France, you are able to work on the same 
terms as citizens there,” said Megan Dunn, the outgoing NUS president. “This 
means you don’t need special visas. If we were to leave, it’s unlikely we would 
be able to work on the same terms. It’s possible you would need some kind of 
visa to work abroad and this would impact on your ability to acquire a job.”

Sorana Vieru, a vice president of the NUS, thinks that leaving the EU would 
limit the job opportunities of young people in the UK.

“Freedom of movement across the EU currently means young people have a wider 
pool of graduate jobs to choose from, as more and more organisations work 
across Europe or specific targeted industries graduates find attractive are 
booming in other EU countries,” she said. “Restricting freedom of movement 
means finding a job abroad becomes much harder for young people.”

How will it affect young people wanting to study at universities in Europe?

Figures from the OECD last year showed that undergraduates in England pay the 
highest tuition 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/nov/24/uk-has-highest-undergraduate-tuition-fees-in-industrialised-world-survey-finds>
 fees in the world, on £6,000 a year. Some young Britons have responded by 
choosing to study at significantly cheaper European universities, particularly 
in the Netherlands and Germany. More than 15,000 British students also study in 
Europe as part of the Erasmus scheme, although some countries outside the EU 
take part in the scheme, including Norway and Turkey.

Vieru said that although students could still study outside the EU, “it may be 
harder to get visas and fees may be more expensive”. She added: “I think we can 
safely assume that if we’re not part of the EU, we’ll be paying international 
student rates in Europe if those institutions charge them.”

In the UK, young people might also find that Brexit changes their student 
experience. There are more than 20,000 EU students at UK institutions and this 
number is likely to dwindle.

Would Brexit make it easier for young people to find jobs in the UK?


Much would depend on the economic impact and whether a move to leave the EU 
would, as many international financial organisations have warned, trigger an 
economic reversal in the UK.

If Brexit does prompt a recession, it is young people who are most likely to 
suffer. Research shows that graduates who enter the jobs market during a 
recession earn less than those who do so in a buoyant economy, and that the 
differential persists for years.


Researchers at the Centre for European Reform 
<http://www.cer.org.uk/insights/why-young-people-are-right-fear-brexit> (CER) 
note that if unemployment were to rise, it would be the under 30s who would be 
most vulnerable.

“Economists know a good deal about the impact of recessions on different 
social groups,” said Christian Odendahl and John Springford in the CER report. 
“They have also studied how recessions impact the future earnings of these 
groups after the economy returns to normal. And the verdict is clear: it is the 
young and the low-skilled who suffer the most.”

A study by PathMotion surveying HR managers and senior executives of 75 top UK 
graduate employers released last week revealed that 49% of employers said they 
were likely to lower their intake of graduates if Britain left the EU.

However, if UK companies were unable to freely hire EU graduates as a result 
of Brexit, 25% of employers said they would be likely to increase recruitment 
of British graduates.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yjdy%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yjdy%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41d0f4b19b89469097041580ec915697facbf5c3%2F0_0_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20jobs%20to%20travel%20and%20study%3A%20how%20will%20Brexit%20affect%20young%20Britons%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yjdy%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From+jobs+to+travel+and+study%3A+how+will+Brexit+affect+young+Britons%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yjdy%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41d0f4b19b89469097041580ec915697facbf5c3%2F0_0_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 Students at a freshers fair. Brexit would see the number of EU students at UK 
institutions fall as well as affect British students wanting to study in 
Europe. Photograph: Martin Godwin for the Guardian 
Wouldn’t the drop in immigration make it easier for young people to find work?

This argument might make sense on a local level, in parts of the country 
where, for example, the rising number of tradesmen may have depressed wages or 
made it harder for apprentices to get a start.

But on a national level, a drop in immigration would not necessarily help 
young people looking for work because of the impact on the economy. Remain 
campaigners repeatedly make the point that immigrants put in more to the 
economy in terms of taxes than they take out.

“Immigration into the UK is positive, it boosts the economy and it makes our 
society richer and more diverse,” said Vieru. “Also, not all migrants come into 
the UK to do graduate-level jobs, they fill roles right across the jobs market. 
Leaving the EU is likely to have an impact on businesses wanting to set up and 
develop in the UK, and that is what will have an impact on the graduate jobs 
market, not immigration.”

How will Brexit affect young people’s ability to travel in Europe?

Many young people choose to take gap years in Europe or travel regularly on 
the continent. The threat Brexit poses to visa-free travel is a concern for 
some. Jason Naylor, 19, from Wigan, said: “I personally don’t really want to 
live or work in Europe but travelling for holidays is extremely important for 
most people and it would be great to always have the option to live or work 
there too. I think that Brexit would leave our ability to travel, live or work 
in Europe in the balance.”

Dunn, a board member of Britain Stronger in Europe, said: “Our membership of 
the European Union makes it easier for young people to travel in Europe. Visas 
in EU countries are not required, and travel is cheaper because of the EU. 
Airfares are lower because of the single market and roaming charges have 
recently been reduced because of it, and will be axed altogether next year. 
Visa applications could be costly and lengthy, and travellers might lose the 
ability to use the European Health Insurance Card, leaving them with higher 
insurance costs.”

Would leaving the EU make it easier for young people to get on the housing 
ladder?

Chris Grayling, leader of the House of Commons, told supporters last month 
that leaving the EU would mean young people in the UK could get on the housing 
ladder more easily, due to the limits on immigration that could be introduced. 
He said that rising house prices were partly caused by increased migration, and 
that young people should consider the “practical consequences” of a vote to 
remain in the EU.

But remain campaigners counter that credit conditions could tighten, making it 
harder to get a mortgage. Housebuilders would likely slow investment while 
uncertainty persisted.

Darren Mason, 21, from Lancaster, is worried about the uncertainty in the 
housing market after the referendum, although he admits it could make housing 
more affordable. “It may lower prices as per supply and demand, but it’s too 
difficult to know for sure in regards to the whole debate,” he said.

What would be the economic impact of Brexit on young people?

The prospect of Brexit has already hurt the pound, and if sterling were to 
fall dramatically in the days and weeks ahead, it would have an inevitable 
impact on inflation, making the cost of living dearer. George Osborne’s threat 
of an emergency budget would take further steam out of the economy.

The effect of Brexit on the economy is the key reason for many young people 
supporting remain. When asked what was the most important factor influencing 
her vote in the referendum, Amelia Heathman, 23, from Liverpool, said: “The 
strength of the economy. I think that the news this week has shown that the 
sterling is stronger in the EU.”


 She added: “I’ve read a lot about how much EU funding has had a positive 
impact on markets, businesses and industries and I’m concerned about the effect 
Brexit will have on this, on potentially shrinking industries, meaning there 
will be less jobs for young people.”


