
The abortion <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abortion> debate may be 
lacking certain things: more women instead of men legislating about it, 
perhaps, although as we know women can’t be trusted to make decisions about 
their own bodies because they’re too busy thinking about strappy sandals and 
how to contour their faces. But one quality in which it is overly blessed is 
the first person pronoun.

People’s personal feelings about abortion have always dominated the debate, 
and I get it: abortion is a more emotional issue than, say, descaling the 
kettle. But it is one thing for a woman to stand up and say she had an abortion 
to fight against the stigma, asfeminists have been doing for decades 
<http://www.msmagazine.com/radar/2006-07-24-we-had-abortions.asp>; it is quite 
another to think your experience should have any bearing on abortion’s 
legality, as has become all too common in recent years.

A woman by the name of Stephanie Chatfield generously illustrated this for us 
recently when she took to the place where everyone’s feelings and experiences 
go to die today: I refer, of course, to Facebook. Chatfield is the wife of 
Michigan’s Republican state representative,a chipper-looking chap called Lee 
<http://gophouse.org/representatives/northernmi/chatfield/>. Lee, as it 
happens, is currently co-sponsoring a state anti-abortion bill and defunding 
sexual health provider Planned Parenthood, and someone was threatening to 
expose the fact that his wife had an abortion in high school. So, commendably, 
Stephanie decided to tell this story herself in along Facebook post 
<https://www.facebook.com/voteleechatfield/posts/470804093117881>. Less 
commendably, she seemed to think this gave her special insight into abortion’s 
morality.

Related: Boris Johnson is blond, plays stupid and wants to lead the country. 
Remind you of anyone? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/21/boris-johnson-blond-wants-lead-country>

“I know for certain: I made the wrong choice,” she wrote. “To all Pro-Life 
advocates, be against abortion – yes, but let’s continue being proactive and 
looking for young girls and women who are hurting, suffering and confused so we 
can offer them assistance.” That assistance, presumably, does not include 
giving them a lift to Planned Parenthood.

These kinds of stories, in which someone confuses their personal experience 
with a general epiphany, appear every few months. A few years ago political 
commentatorMehdi Hasan <http://www.theguardian.com/profile/mehdihasan> explained
why he opposes abortion 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/lifestyle/lifestyle/2012/10/being-pro-life-doesnt-make-me-any-less-lefty>
: “I sat and watched in quiet awe as my two daughters stretched and slept in 
their mother’s womb during the 20-week ultrasound scans. I don’t need God or a 
holy book to tell me what is or isn’t a ‘person,’” he wrote, apparently 
labouring under the unhappy delusion that pro-choice advocates were trying to 
abort his children specifically.

Of course this cuts both ways: personal experience is just as irrelevant when 
it comes to arguing for abortion. Chatfield’s post has been roundly scorned by 
liberals, but given how many of them have praised feminists over the years for 
writing about how abortion has benefited their lives, this seems a tad unfair. 
Yes, feminists use their experience as an argument for access to abortion, 
whereas Chatfield is using hers to deny it, but you can’t privilege one story 
over another simply because it suits your argument. This is why reducing a 
general issue to a personal anecdote leads ultimately to a dead end. Start 
fighting about abortion by anecdote and you end up with men waxing lyrical 
about their wives’ sonograms, and no one wants that.

To say abortion should be banned because you regretted yours is like saying 
marriage should be banned because you hate your husband. By all means, tell 
your story, but the idea that legislative changes should emerge from it 
demonstrates a level of egotism that makesDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> look like a paragon of 
humility.

Sure, personal stories are more interesting to read than dry argument, and all 
abortion stories are personal, which is why this debate, more than any other, 
gets so bogged down in them. But too much emphasis is placed on people’s 
experience these days. Whereas once the personal was the political, now the 
personal is everything, and there’s no actual argument necessary.

What the abortion debate needs is empathy, not narcissism – empathy that not 
every woman has your life, your privileges, your options, which is why your 
experience doesn’t count for a hill of beans here. It doesn’t matter if you had 
an abortion and regretted it, or loved it so much you celebrated the moment on 
Instagram with a jazzy filter, because abortion is a collective issue, not an 
individual one. That’s true whether you’re arguing about time limits or its 
legality full stop. Reducing it to the personal is the worst kind of 
confirmation bias in the guise of brave self-exposure. If the only argument you 
have is yourself, then you need to think more about your argument and less 
about yourself.

 * The headline of this article was amended on 6 June 2016 to comply with 
Guardian style regarding language around the abortion debate.
