
Muslims are the new Mexicans in US politics. References to Muslims by 
politicians have become interchangeable with references torefugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/20/muslim-databases-and-rabid-dogs-gop-in-ugly-scramble-to-vilify-syrian-refugees>
,immigrants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/07/donald-trump-ban-all-muslims-entering-us-san-bernardino-shooting>
 andterrorists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/23/donald-trump-says-muslim-communities-not-reporting-suspected-terrorists>
 in much the same way that Mexicans have long been synonymous withdrug dealers, 
criminals and rapists 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2015/06/16/full-text-donald-trump-announces-a-presidential-bid/>
.

And this week, following the attacks in Brussels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/brussels-attacks>, a number of presidential 
candidates had things to say. As the target of so much attention, it’s worth 
fact-checking some of those claims made recently about Muslims.

Donald Trump

“When they [British Muslims] see trouble they have to report it. They are not 
reporting it. They are absolutely not reporting it and that is a big problem.”

– Speaking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/23/donald-trump-says-muslim-communities-not-reporting-suspected-terrorists>
 on ITV’s Good Morning Britain, 23 March 2016

British home secretary Teresa May described 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/23/trump-plain-wrong-to-say-muslims-turning-blind-eye-to-terror-may>
 Trump’s comments as “plain wrong” when speaking to the House of Commons, 
adding: “This is absolutely not the case – he is just plain wrong.” The UK 
government offers the public severalways to report suspected terrorism 
<https://www.gov.uk/terrorism-national-emergency/reporting-suspected-terrorism> 
but since those reports are a matter of national security, I don’t have access 
to any data about the individuals making those reports. Neither, presumably, 
does Trump.

In a widely misreported 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/reality-check/2015/nov/23/does-the-suns-claim-about-uk-muslims-sympathy-for-jihadis-stack-up>
 survey that asked British Muslims about their attitudes to “young Muslims who 
leave the UK to join fighters in Syria” (note, no mention made in this language 
to jihadis, terrorists or Isis), almost three-quarters of respondents said they 
had no sympathy at all.

Sun/Survation poll 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/11/uk-muslimsinsyria/giv-32650EjgjzPOFrvKr/>
Assessment: Suspiciously evidence-free.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F22%2Frepublican-presidential-candidates-brussels-attacks-video&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F22%2Frepublican-presidential-candidates-brussels-attacks-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Republican%20candidates%20weigh%20in%20on%20deadly%20Brussels%20attacks%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F22%2Frepublican-presidential-candidates-brussels-attacks-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Republican+candidates+weigh+in+on+deadly+Brussels+attacks+%E2%80%93+video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F22%2Frepublican-presidential-candidates-brussels-attacks-video&media=>
 Republican candidatesweigh in on deadly Brussels attacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/mar/22/republican-presidential-candidates-brussels-attacks-video>
Ted Cruz

“If you look here in the city of New York, New York had a proactive policing 
program that Mayor Michael Bloomberg championed to work cooperatively with the 
Muslim community to prevent radicalization.”

- Speaking at a news conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/23/ted-cruz-nypd-muslim-surveillance-bill-de-blasio>
 in New York, 22 March 2016

Cruz made the comment hours after the attacks in Brussels on Tuesday, in a 
speech outlining a proposal to “patrol and secure Muslim neighborhoods”.

His description of NYPD’s “proactive policing program” could make it hard to 
figure out which scheme Cruz is referring to – because the NYPD Muslim 
monitoring scheme is generally referred to as their surveillance program.

The American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) certainly doesn’t describe the NYPD 
scheme, which has been in place since at least 2002, as “proactive” – theirsite 
<https://www.aclu.org/factsheet-nypd-muslim-surveillance-program> explains:

“The NYPD’s surveillance program is based on a false and unconstitutional 
premise: that Muslim religious belief and practices are a basis for law 
enforcement scrutiny.”

New York’s federal courts would seem to agree. In January, the NYPD lost 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/nypd-settles-muslim-surveillance-lawsuit-1452187209>
 two civil rights lawsuits that accused the force of unfairly monitoring 
Muslims. Cruz’s claim that the program worked “cooperatively” with New York’s 
Muslims is also a very generous reading ofpractices 
<https://www.aclu.org/factsheet-nypd-muslim-surveillance-program> such as 
tracking individuals and using so-called “mosque crawlers”.

Assessment: A convenient reinterpretation of the facts.

Hillary Clinton 
— Hillary Clinton (@HillaryClinton) March 23, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/HillaryClinton/status/712716739738517504> 
In our fight against radical jihadism, we have to do what actually works. What 
doesn't work: offensive rhetoric that demonizes all Muslims.
 <https://twitter.com/HillaryClinton/status/712716739738517504> 
A 2009 article <http://www.apa.org/monitor/2009/11/terrorism.aspx> by the 
American Psychological Association weighs up the evidence for Clinton’s 
argument. Interviews conducted by a psychologist with 60 former terrorists 
revealed that those individuals tended to:

 * Feel angry, alienated or disenfranchised. 
 * Believe that their current political involvement does not give them the 
power to affect real change. 
 * Identify with perceived victims of the social injustice they are fighting.

Assessment: A logical argument supported by some evidence, but more research 
is needed in this field.

Bernie Sanders 

“At the end of the day, we cannot allow the Trumps of the world to use these 
incidents to attack all of the Muslim people in the world. That is unfair – to 
imply that if somebody is a Muslim they’re a terrorist, that is an outrageous 
statement.”

- Speaking 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2016/03/23/bernie-sanders-on-kimmel-trump-using-brussels-to-attack-all-muslims.html>
 on Jimmy Kimmel, 22 March 2016

This is not quite a comment about American Muslims per se, but the Vermont 
senator has spoken very little about that community (a point of difference 
between him and other presidential candidates). Sanders’ comments about Trump 
have some evidence.

The New York billionaire could well be capitalizing on this week’s deadly 
terrorist attacks in Brussels. The Republican candidate’s popularity as 
measured by polling numbersjumped 
<http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/past-terrorist-attacks-helped-trump-capitalize-on-anti-muslim-sentiment/>
 significantly after the attacks in Paris and again after San Bernardino.

Assessment: An ungenerous interpretation of Trump’s motives, but one supported 
by past experience.
