
In March 2003, a US-led coalition of forces invaded Iraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq>, signalling the start of what became 
known as the Iraq War. The invasion consisted of three weeks of major combat 
operations which concluded with the government of Saddam Hussein being deposed 
and the capture of the Iraqi capital Baghdad by American forces.

Guardian front page 21 March 2003 following the invasion of Iraq 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1387208915304/The-Guardian-21-March-2003-.pdf>

The Guardian newspaper placed reporters and photographers in the area to cover 
the run up to the conflict. A small number of Guardian staff were embedded with 
the military forces, including the British army and navy, whilst others 
travelled independently. PhotographerSean Smith 
<http://www.theguardian.com/profile/seansmith>, best known for his coverage of 
conflicts, was based in Baghdad, while reporterJames Meek 
<http://www.theguardian.com/profile/jamesmeek> was based in Kuwait, near the 
Iraqi border, before the outbreak of war.

However not all war correspondents were based in the Middle East. Julian Borger
 <http://www.theguardian.com/profile/julianborger>, the Guardian Washington 
correspondent, reported from the American headquarters of the US department of 
defense, the Pentagon, where he attended regular briefings from the US military.

Iraq War Voices

In the aftermath of the invasion the Guardian carried out a series of 
interviews with staff who covered the start of the war for the newspaper, 
including both reporters and photographers. These interviews form a series 
entitledIraq War Voices 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=OHP%2f30&>
 and are an important part of Guardian News & Media Archive's oral history 
collections.

Topics covered by the interviews include the compulsory training undertaken by 
journalists before departure, the equipment used in the field to allow them to 
report back to the Guardian offices in London, and their interaction with the 
local people and the armed forces. Interviewees also offer their personal 
reflections on the war.

Preparing to enter a warzone

Reporting from the front line of war holds obvious dangers, and a number of 
journalists and photographers have lost their lives reporting from war zones. 
To prepare staff as much as possible in advance of the Iraq War, the Guardian 
provided training courses for all of its war correspondents run by former 
members of the armed forces. The aim of the training was to thoroughly prepare 
them for work in hazardous environments. During training staff were taught 
essential survival skills such as intensive first aid, the importance of 
rationing and how to put up a tent. They also attended more in depth courses of 
conflict training which taught them how to clear landmines, deal with kidnap 
situations, and prepare for a chemical warfare attack.

In the following 2 minute audio extract from her oral history interview, 
former Guardian journalistAudrey Gillan 
<http://www.theguardian.com/profile/audreygillan> details the training provided 
to war reporters by the newspaper.

Audrey Gillan discusses her war coverage training 
<http://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/audio/iraq-war-2003-invasion-gillan>

Reporting from the frontline

Journalists who were embedded with the forces had to accept certain terms 
including restrictions on reporting. They were escorted by officers and were 
required to make reports available to media operations staff in the military 
before being sent for publication. They were not to compromise security by 
revealing details, such as locations, which might endanger the troops they were 
embedded with. Despite these restrictions, being embedded allowed journalists 
unique access to members of the armed forces. They lived and worked alongside 
the armed forces, sharing their food, accommodation and basic domestic chores, 
and at times came under the same fire.

Audrey Gillan was embedded with the Household Cavalry during the invasion of 
Iraq in March 2003 andblogged 
<http://www.theguardian.com/Iraq/diary/0,,912681,00.html> about her 
experiences. Being embedded allowed Gillan to gain an insight into the daily 
routine of the soldiers and in 2003 she was named the What the Papers Say 
Foreign Correspondent of the Year for her writing about the war and the 
soldiers fighting it.

Iraq War diary entry by Audrey Gillan, The Guardian, 4 April 2003 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1387208915492/'Luxury-of-a-wash'-The-Guar.pdf>

Technology and reporting

The physical act of reporting from conflict zones has changed dramatically for 
reporters as technology has advanced over the past century. During the Second 
Boer War (1899-1902) articles took three to four weeks to arrive, meaning that 
readers had to wait to read a full account of the action, and even during the 
Falklands conflict in the early 1980s there were long delays between the action 
and reports reaching Britain.
 Pocket cartoon by David Austin which appeared in the Guardian on 24 March 
2003, four days after the invasion. A couple are sat in front of a television 
discussing the Iraq War coverage. (archive reference DAU/1/8) Photograph: 
Guardian 
Today news services offer 24-hour rolling news, and newspaper websites such as 
theguardian.com <http://www.theguardian.com/uk> can be updated instantly. 
However, keeping up with the demand for news can be problematic when attempting 
to file reports in a war zone. In his interviewJamie Wilson 
<http://www.theguardian.com/profile/jamiewilson> discussed the difficulties he 
faced whilst on board the naval ship HMS Marlborough whilst embedded with the 
British navy. When attempting to file his article with the Guardian offices in 
London, Wilson found that the ship's email system was down. He resorted to the 
use of a fax machine, which he disovered no one on board knew how to use. 
Eventually Wilson dictated his copy over the ship's phone, all 2000 words, 
taking over an hour. In all, he estimates it took eight hours from the point he 
finished writing, to successfully getting the copy to the Guardian.

Consulting the oral history collection

The oral history collection 
<http://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/2004/aug/18/1> can be consulted in the 
GNM Archive reading room byappointment 
<http://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/2002/jun/06/3>. More information about 
the recordings can be found by searching our onlinecatalogue 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/default.aspx>.

Past teaching resources of the month from the GNM Archive 
<http://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/series/resource-of-the-month>

More teaching resources can be found on our resources for teachers 
<http://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/resources-for-teachers> page.
