
Hawaii Volcanoes national park <http://www.nps.gov/havo/index.htm>

Located on the Big Island, the crown jewel of Hawaiian parks 
<http://www.nps.gov/havo/index.htm> boasts both the world’s most active volcano 
– Kilauea – and the world’s largest volcano – Mauna Loa. Ranging in elevation 
from sea level to the 4,168-metre, sometimes snowy, summit of Mauna Loa, the 
park encompasses a diverse array of ecosystems, from lush tropical rainforest 
to barren volcanic deserts.

A number of active and historical lava flows <http://hvo.wr.usgs.gov/> can be 
seen throughout the park, including the ongoing eruption from the summit of 
Kilauea at the Halema’uma’u crater, often visible from the overlook at the
Jaggar Museum <http://www.nps.gov/havo/planyourvisit/craterrimtour_jaggar.htm>. 
Keep an eye out for the two types of Hawaiian lava: the smooth and ropey 
Pahoehoe and the jagged, sharp a’a. Thepark offers two campsites 
<http://www.nps.gov/havo/planyourvisit/camp.htm> (one with cabin rentals), and 
upscale rooms are available at theVolcano House Hotel 
<http://www.hawaiivolcanohouse.com/>, reservations highly recommended.

Top tip: The Crater Rim road takes visitors past many of the park’s 
highlights, including the Jaggar Museum and the Kilauea overlook, but be sure 
to get out of the car at the marked scenic stops for a better look at the steam 
vents, lava tubes and historical lava flows along the route. 


Pu’uhonua o Honaunau national historical park 
<http://www.nps.gov/puho/index.htm>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4vmde%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4vmde%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F14%2F1408030604220%2Fda2d073b-4fe5-4255-b49c-5c2e079268cd-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Hawaii&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4vmde%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top+10+national+and+state+parks+in+Hawaii&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4vmde%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F14%2F1408030604220%2Fda2d073b-4fe5-4255-b49c-5c2e079268cd-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Photograph: Alvis Upitis/Getty Images 
This park, on the Big Island’s western Kona coast, protects one of the most 
sacred and significant archaeological sites in the Hawaiian island chain. In 
the native Hawaiian language,Pu’uhonua o Honaunau 
<http://www.nps.gov/puho/index.htm>, means “place of refuge”. In ancient times, 
the islands were governed by strict laws – and violating certain rules, called
kapu, was punishable by death, unless the accused could make it to the “place 
of refuge”, to have their crimes absolved by a priest.

The site, enclosed by a 295-metre-long, 3.6-metre-high L-shaped masonry wall, 
still standing 400 years after its construction, also served as a haven for 
women, children and injured warriors during times of war. The concept of 
sanctuary was important in Polynesia, and many such sacred places were once 
found in the Hawaiian islands. Today, the park has several ancient and 
reconstructed archaeological sites, including temple platforms, royal 
fishponds, sledding tracks and a coastal village.

Top tip: This park is one of the best places to learn about traditional 
Hawaiian culture. Artisans give daily demonstrations on weaving, fishing, 
carving and other trades and crafts. Visitors to the Royal Grounds can also try 
their hand atkonane <http://www.konanebrothers.com/How-to-Play.html>, a 
traditional Hawaiian board game similar to draughts.

Puako Petroglyph archaeological preserve <http://www.puako.org/culture.html>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4vmde%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4vmde%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F14%2F1408031617911%2F37e062f1-6bc5-4d84-bd44-372bf56dd47d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Hawaii&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4vmde%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top+10+national+and+state+parks+in+Hawaii&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4vmde%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F14%2F1408031617911%2F37e062f1-6bc5-4d84-bd44-372bf56dd47d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Petroglyph man, Puako. Photograph: Ron Dahlquist/Corbis 
Rock art can be found in several places in the Hawaiian islands, but nowhere 
more abundantly than at thePuako Petroglyph archaeological preserve 
<http://www.gohawaii.com/big-island/regions-neighborhoods/kohala-coast/puako-petroglyph-archaelogical-preserve>
 on the north-west shore of the Big Island. Puako boasts the largest collection 
of petroglyphs in the Pacific, with more than 3,000 designs etched in black 
basalt.

The carvings, known as k’i’i pohaku to native Hawaiians, are thought to have 
been made thousands of years ago – rock art is notoriously difficult to date – 
and include images of boats, dancers, family groups, warriors, dogs, chickens, 
turtles and deity symbols. A 1.5-mile trail winds through the lava field, past 
more than 1,200 carvings – most found on horizontal rock faces on the ground.

Top tip: Puako is on the Kona coast, whose unique microclimate produces some 
of the finest and most expensive coffee beans in the world. After your 
petroglyph hunt, be sure to stop in a cafe for a homegrown cup of Kona coffee. 
Even in Hawaii, it’s still expensive.

Haleakala national park <http://www.nps.gov/hale/index.htm>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4vmde%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4vmde%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F14%2F1408031928814%2F424dad35-b473-4bf0-8c70-c1e0dcf2c3b8-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Hawaii&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4vmde%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top+10+national+and+state+parks+in+Hawaii&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4vmde%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F14%2F1408031928814%2F424dad35-b473-4bf0-8c70-c1e0dcf2c3b8-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Haleakala is inactive so visitors can even sleep in the crater at the 
campground. Photograph: Ron Dahlquist/Corbis 
The only currently active volcanoes in Hawaii are on the Big Island, but all 
the islands in the chain are volcanic, formed from a series of eruptions over 
the past 28m years.This park <http://www.nps.gov/hale/index.htm> on the east 
side of the island of Maui protects the Haleakala crater, a massive fissure 
seven miles across, two miles wide and more than 760 metres deep.

Haleakala last erupted in around 1500AD and is currently inactive, so it’s 
possible to hike down into the crater for a closer look. Visitors can even 
sleep in the crater at the campground or stay at one ofthree historic cabins 
along the trail <http://www.nps.gov/hale/planyourvisit/wilderness-cabins.htm>. 
Tread lightly: Haleakala is home to more endangered species of plants and 
animals than any other US national park. These include the Hawaiian goose, 
which nests in the crater.

The skies above Maui are some of the darkest in the world for stargazing and 
the park is home to the Haleakala observatory, operated by the University of 
Hawaii’s Institute for Astronomy. A number of dive shops in the area rent 
binoculars and telescopes, and star maps are available from the visitor centre.

Top tip: Even if you don’t sleep in the crater, be sure to catch sunrise or 
sunset from the summit of Haleakala.

Iao Valley state monument 
<http://www.hawaiistateparks.org/parks/maui/index.cfm?park_id=36>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4vmde%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4vmde%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F14%2F1408029926402%2F36735144-e5e3-4cdf-bac3-0a4f514c34b4-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Hawaii&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4vmde%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top+10+national+and+state+parks+in+Hawaii&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4vmde%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F14%2F1408029926402%2F36735144-e5e3-4cdf-bac3-0a4f514c34b4-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Iao Needle. Photograph: Ray Mains/Pacific Stock/Alamy 
On the western half of Maui, the lush Iao Valley 
<http://www.hawaiistateparks.org/parks/maui/index.cfm?park_id=36> is home to 
the Iao Needle, a 366-metre pinnacle of basalt that presides over the Iao River 
valley. Known to the natives as Kuka`emoku and representing the phallic stone 
of Kanaloa — the Hawaiian god of the ocean – the Iao Needle served as a natural 
altar and a lookout during times of war. No trails run to the top, buta few 
hardy hikers have bushwhacked their way up the thickly foliaged spire to the 
summit <http://hawaiianforest.com/exploring-iao-needle>.

Today the Iao Valley is a peaceful place, offering relatively easy hikes, a 
dizzying array of tropical plants and clear swimming holes, but in 1790, this 
was the site of an historic battle between King Kamehameha I and the Maui army. 
Because of its narrow opening and abundant resources, the Iao Valley was a 
natural stronghold in times of war. So when King Kamehameha I invaded Maui in 
the summer of 1790, the Maui army made their last stand at Iao. Their defeat 
was a major turning point in Hawaiian history, leading to the unification of 
the islands’ many chiefdoms in 1810.

Top tip: Climbing the Iao Needle is very dangerous and should only be 
attempted by experienced hikers, but a 0.6-mile loop trail runs along the Iao 
river, through an ethnobotanical garden to an overlook of the formation.

Makena state park 
<http://www.hawaiistateparks.org/parks/maui/index.cfm?park_id=38>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4vmde%2Fsfb%23img-6&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4vmde%2Fsfb%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F14%2F1408030274168%2F9a597394-65e9-4fd6-b437-b03b67060797-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Hawaii&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4vmde%2Fstw%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top+10+national+and+state+parks+in+Hawaii&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4vmde%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F14%2F1408030274168%2F9a597394-65e9-4fd6-b437-b03b67060797-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Family friendly Big Beach in Makena state park. Photograph: Mason Vranish/Alamy
Hawaii is famous for its white-sand beaches and Maui’s Makena state park 
<http://www.hawaiistateparks.org/parks/maui/index.cfm?park_id=38> is one of the 
largest such expanses in the islands and a popular spot for sunbathing, 
bodyboarding, snorkelling and surfing. Makena, on the southern tip of Maui, 
offers views of the Haleakala and Kaho’olawe mountains, as well as the islands 
of Molokini and Kahoolawe located just offshore.

Makena beach <http://makenabeach.org/> offers little shade, so bring an 
umbrella and plenty of sunscreen. But most afternoons, a weather phenomenon 
known as the Makena cloud rolls in, blanketing the sky between the Haleakala 
and Kaho’olawe peaks. The cloud is often welcome as it keeps the white sand 
cool during the hottest part of the day.

Top tip: Makena has two beaches: the family friendly Big Beach, also known as 
Oneloa beach and the nudist-friendly Little Beach, also known as Pu’u Olai, a 
smaller beach just north of Big Beach, separated by a steep outcrop of rock. On 
Sunday evenings Little Beach is often host to celebratory drumming and fire 
dancing.

Diamond Head state park 
<http://www.hawaiistateparks.org/parks/oahu/Index.cfm?park_id=15>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4vmde%2Fsfb%23img-7&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4vmde%2Fsfb%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F14%2F1408030059196%2Fcd303080-8c95-4403-85a0-b3dd2c5ecc21-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Hawaii&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4vmde%2Fstw%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top+10+national+and+state+parks+in+Hawaii&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4vmde%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F14%2F1408030059196%2Fcd303080-8c95-4403-85a0-b3dd2c5ecc21-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Photograph: Douglas Peebles Photography/Alamy 
Home to the capital city of Honolulu and a major international airport, Oahu 
is the most populated of the Hawaiian islands, but it still has plenty of 
parks. Just east of Honolulu risesDiamond Head 
<http://www.hawaiistateparks.org/parks/oahu/Index.cfm?park_id=15>, one of the 
islands’ most recognisable landmarks. This broad, nearly circular volcano was 
given its name by British sailors in the 19th century, who mistook the 
formation’s abundant quartz crystals for diamonds. Because of its location on 
the southern tip of Oahu, Diamond Head has long been used as a defensive 
platform and the best views are had from atop the second world war bunkers on 
the summit.

Top tip: A short but steep trail winds to the top of Diamond Head 
<http://www.everytrail.com/guide/diamond-head-summit-trail>, climbing 
three-quarters of a mile, through a tunnel and up more than 150 steps, 
including a spiral staircase. The views of the Pacific Ocean and nearby Waikiki 
are well worth the effort, especially at sunrise or sunset.

Pu’u o Mahuka Heiau state historic site 
<http://www.hawaiistateparks.org/parks/oahu/puuomahuka.cfm>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4vmde%2Fsfb%23img-8&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4vmde%2Fsfb%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F14%2F1408031411751%2F38df1dbd-390e-4682-b943-16e0e64be4a2-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Hawaii&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4vmde%2Fstw%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top+10+national+and+state+parks+in+Hawaii&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4vmde%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F14%2F1408031411751%2F38df1dbd-390e-4682-b943-16e0e64be4a2-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Eddie Aikau competing in the Big Wave surfing contest, at Waimea Bay. 
Photograph: Corbis 
In Hawaiian, Pu’u o Mahuka 
<http://www.hawaiistateparks.org/parks/oahu/puuomahuka.cfm> means “hill of 
escape”, and legend has it that, while the island chain was being formed, the 
volcano goddess Pele leapt from this spot, on the north shore of Oahu, to the 
next island, Molokai. Three temples, orheiau, dating from the 17th century, 
still stand here – the upper platform of one was once used as a sacrificial 
temple during times of war. The site also served as a lookout and signal 
station with fires visible as far away as Kaua’i to the west.

Pu’u o Mahuka is on Waimea Bay, one of the most famous surfing spots in 
Hawaii. In winter, storms send massive 15-metre waves crashing into the bay. The
Quiksilver Big Wave Invitational 
<https://www.youtube.com/user/quiksilverbigwave> surfing competition is 
traditionally held here, but only in years where the waves top six metres. The 
competition window is open between December and February, with oceanographers, 
meteorologists and big wave surfing experts working together to forecast when 
to begin the competition – if the waves are worthy.

Top tip: You don’t have to be a big- wave surfer to experience the swells at 
Waimea Bay. In spring, summer and autumn, the waves are generally mild.

Waimea Canyon state park 
<http://www.hawaiistateparks.org/parks/kauai/index.cfm?park_id=4>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4vmde%2Fsfb%23img-9&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4vmde%2Fsfb%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F14%2F1408030168811%2Fd2cf6a41-0fea-4955-a440-7fb8209f120f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Hawaii&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4vmde%2Fstw%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top+10+national+and+state+parks+in+Hawaii&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4vmde%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F14%2F1408030168811%2Fd2cf6a41-0fea-4955-a440-7fb8209f120f-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Photograph: Prisma Bildagentur AG/Alamy 
At the far western end of the Hawaiian island chain, Kaua’i is the oldest of 
the islands, last active around five million years ago. A road encircles the 
outer edge of the 560 sq mile island, but the interior is wild and undeveloped. 
In the centre of the island, Mount Wai’ale’ale is considered the rainiest place 
on Earth, with an annual rainfall of more than 11,000 millimetres (in soggy 
2012 the UK saw just 1,311mm).

Nicknamed the Grand Canyon of the Pacific, the 900-metre-deep Waimea Canyon 
<http://www.hawaiistateparks.org/parks/kauai/index.cfm?park_id=4> was carved by 
the Waimea river, a sometimes raging torrent fed by the island’s extreme 
rainfall. The canyon is famous for its colourful scenery: the rocks exposed in 
the canyon depths are bright red, and year-round heavy rainfall means a lush 
array of greenery. The best places to take in the views are at the Waimea 
Canyon and Pu’uokila lookouts, a short walk from the paved Route 550.

Top tip: The Kukui trail <http://www.kauai.com/kukui-trail> drops from the rim 
of Waimea Canyon down more than 600 metres into its red and green depths. After 
2.5 miles the trail ends at the Wiliwili Camp, where you can rest for the night 
before climbing back out of the canyon. Advance permits for overnight stays are 
required.

Na Pali coast state park 
<http://www.hawaiistateparks.org/parks/kauai/napali.cfm>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4vmde%2Fsfb%23img-10&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4vmde%2Fsfb%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F14%2F1408031495988%2Fd85617d1-4c43-44d7-89c8-bc77d3afdcb9-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Hawaii&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4vmde%2Fstw%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top+10+national+and+state+parks+in+Hawaii&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4vmde%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F14%2F1408031495988%2Fd85617d1-4c43-44d7-89c8-bc77d3afdcb9-2060x1236.jpeg>
 One of the calmer sections of the Kalalau Trail. Photograph: David Samuel 
Robbins/Corbis 
The Na Pali coast of Kaua’i 
<http://www.hawaiistateparks.org/parks/kauai/napali.cfm> is home to the one of 
the most famous, and infamous, footpaths in the world: the Kalalau Trail. This 
clifftop trail hugs the north-west coast of Kaua’i for 11 miles, running 
through tropical rainforest and along the edge of 600-metre cliffs from Ke’e 
beach to the Kalalau Valley.

The high rainfall, slippery conditions and sheer cliffs have earned this 
picturesque path a dangerous reputation – one precipitous section is nicknamed 
“crawler’s ledge” and in2008 Backpacker magazine declared Kalalau one of 
America’s most dangerous trails 
<http://www.backpacker.com/october_08_americas_10_most_dangerous_hikes_kalalau_trail_kauai_hi/destinations/12626>
. Hikers should be equipped with good footwear and trekking poles and beware of 
stream crossings in times of heavy rainfall. Kalalau Valley can also be reached 
by kayak, but dangerous storm waves and currents, especially in winter can be 
treacherous.Boat rentals and guides can be found in Hanalei 
<http://www.napalikayak.com/>.

Top tip: Despite the dangers, the Kalalau trail is a very popular hike. 
Permits are required for both day hiking and overnight stays. Make reservations 
well in advance. Camping is permitted six miles in at Hanakoa Valley and 11 
miles in at Kalalau Valley. The first two miles of the trail, from Ha’ena state 
park to Hanakapi’ai beach, makes for a scenic day hike.
