
For Jeremy Corbyn <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>, silence 
appears to be golden. Since his election, the new Labour leader has spoken only 
briefly to broadcasters.

He gave interviews soon after his victory on Saturday 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/newsbeat/article/34232177/jeremy-corbyn-young-people-have-to-be-heard>
 to Greg Dawson, the political editor of BBC Radio 1’s Newsbeat, and Channel 4 
News. Since then, however, he has preferred to keep his own counsel.

He pulled out of BBC1’s Andrew Marr show on Sunday (although his deputy, Tom 
Watson, stepped in). And confronted by Sky News cameras in the streethe refused 
to answer reporters’ questions 
<https://twitter.com/DMcCaffreySKY/status/643212718502223872> and told them to 
stop bothering him, adding: “No comment.”

As for the press, he granted a short interview to the Daily Record 
<http://www.dailyrecord.co.uk/news/politics/jeremy-corbyn-warns-nicola-sturgeon-6437299>
, which had supported him, and wrote articlesfor the Morning Star 
<http://www.morningstaronline.co.uk/a-d997-Jeremy-Corbyn-Thank-you-all-for-making-this-happen#.VfaMJZ1Viko>
, another supporter,and the Labour-supporting Daily Mirror 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/jeremy-corbyn-expose-toriesbluster-boldly-6437112>
, which had preferred Andy Burnham.

But it is the fact that he appeared to turn his back on BBC’s current affairs 
programmes that has raised most eyebrows. Suggestions that it was a case of 
pique because of last Monday’s Panorama,which his supporters regarded as a 
hatchet job 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/jeremy-corbyns-team-send-complaint-to-bbc-over-its-hatchet-job-panorama-programme-10495955.html>
, were wide of the mark.

My understanding is that he did not feel it to be necessary and was worried 
about a possible conflict with a constituency event. Some of his team, however, 
believed it was a mistake not to do Marr because of its agenda-setting 
potential.

Could his silence then be considered as an instance of a pre-planned decision 
to keep schtum? In other words, is it part of his media strategy?


In fact, Corbyn has no media strategy at all. Well, that needs explanation. 
After his election on Saturday, his own team - including his head of press, 
Carmel Nolan - were superseded by theLabour 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party machine.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F14%2Fjeremy-corbyn-behind-scenes-labour-leadership-video&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F14%2Fjeremy-corbyn-behind-scenes-labour-leadership-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F14%2F1442240656346%2FKP_475445_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Exclusive%3A%20behind%20the%20scenes%20with%20Jeremy%20Corbyn%20as%20he%20wins%20the%20Labour%20leadership%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F14%2Fjeremy-corbyn-behind-scenes-labour-leadership-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Exclusive%3A+behind+the+scenes+with+Jeremy+Corbyn+as+he+wins+the+Labour+leadership+%E2%80%93+video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F14%2Fjeremy-corbyn-behind-scenes-labour-leadership-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F14%2F1442240656346%2FKP_475445_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Exclusive: behind the scenes with Jeremy Corbyn as he wins the Labour 
leadership 
There was a slight overlap between campaigners and party officials, but media 
matters are now in the party’s hands. And it will need to get to grips with an 
unconventional leader who, clearly, is his own man. Officials can give advice 
but it is up to him whether he accepts it.

What will concern them is the idea that Corbyn will adopt a sort of fortress 
mentality, attempting to eschew any dealings with a largely hostile mainstream 
media.

It is unclear whether Nolan, who has stepped down from Corbyn’s team, will 
rejoin him. Her future hangs on whether she is formally offered a Labour party 
job, and whether, of course, it suits her. She currently lives in the Wirral.

Nolan, a radio and newspaper journalist, is respected by Westminster 
correspondents as a serious operator, not least because she understands how 
they work and what they want.

Now 50, her journalism career began as a BBC trainee in Wales, later working 
for theLiverpool <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/liverpool> news agency, 
Mercury. One of her tasks was to interview the bereaved in the aftermath of the 
Hillsborough football stadium tragedy in 1989.

She later worked for two Liverpool-based radio stations, City and Merseyside, 
before joining the Daily Post and then the Liverpool Echo. She has freelanced 
for many years, often writing theatre reviews.

Nolan was one of the architects of the Stop the War coalition 
<http://www.stopwar.org.uk/>, which was launched in 2001 after George W Bush 
announced his “war on terror.” Corbyn, who chairs the coalition, spoke at its 
first meeting.

Another early supporter was George Galloway, then a Labour MP, and the 
Guardian’s Hugh Muir revealed 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2007/nov/01/1> that it was Nolan’s 
daughter, Hope, who came up with the name for Galloway’s anti-war party, 
Respect, in 2004. She was then aged eight.

Nolan’s politics may be very different from Alastair Campbell’s, but she is 
known to be an admirer of Tony Blair’s former director of communications, 
regarding his handling of the media as “genius.”

That view could well go down well at Labour’s headquarters. So a job offer for 
her could well be on the cards.

 * This article originally said that Corbyn pulled out of Monday’s Radio 4 
Today programme. The BBC say he was not booked to appear.
