
It is this simple: you cannot eat euphorbias, and for this reason alone I went 
off them. I know it’s a little harsh; there are plenty of pretty plants you 
can’t eat, but there are also plenty that you can, such as solomon’s seal (
Polygonatum × hybridum <https://www.rhs.org.uk/plants/details?plantid=1503>) or 
water lotus (Nelumbo nucifera 
<http://www.kew.org/science-conservation/plants-fungi/nelumbo-nucifera-sacred-lotus>
, surely one of the loveliest flowers in the vegetable garden). And thus 
I wandered off down that path.

However, I have eaten my fill of prettiness and am relaxing my rules. Plus, I 
now spend a lot of time in a garden full of euphorbia and I have to admit they 
are handsome things.

I never kicked Euphorbia polychroma 
<http://www.missouribotanicalgarden.org/PlantFinder/PlantFinderDetails.aspx?kempercode=h820>
 out of my garden because that searing greenish-yellow among spring bulbs is 
utter brilliance. It works as well in dappled shade as it does in full sun, and 
it’s unfussy about its soil, so long as it remains damp. It looks very good in 
a vase. Deadhead after flowering, and it will give you a new flush of growth as 
reward.

Rounded shrub euphorbias such as E. characias 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Euphorbia_characias> or its eastern 
Mediterranean cousinE. characias subsp. wulfenii 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/99051/i-Euphorbia-characias-i-subsp-i-wulfenii-i/Details>
 and their many variants all like to bake in the sun. These are fancy, 
architectural plants with a strong presence and not always reliably hardy: 
perfect for city gardens, but temperamental if you’re in a frost pocket.
E. characias has large, rounded heads of dark-eyed, pale, yellow-green flowers 
carried on tips of upright stems in spring and early summer. A smaller, perhaps 
more manageable version isE. × martinii 
<https://www.shootgardening.co.uk/plant/euphorbia-x-martinii> (a cross between 
E. characias and E. amygdaloides) which has dark red nectar glands rather than 
the purple of characias.

Another architectural choice is E. × pasteurii 
<https://www.shootgardening.co.uk/plant/euphorbia-x-pasteurii>, which is a 
hybrid between the honey spurge (E. mellifera) and E. stygiana (not always 
hardy in British gardens). It has that classic rhododendron leaf, is evergreen 
and pretty in flower in spring. It needs space, because it can easily grow to 
2m, but it can be pruned after flowering. Mrs Robb’s bonnet (E. amygdaloides 
var.robbiae 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/93184/Euphorbia-amygdaloides-var-robbiae/Details?returnurl=%2Fplants%2Fsearch-results%3Fnm%3Deuphorbia%26aliaspath%3D%252fplants%252fsearch-results>
) works well in shade, even dry stuff, though it can be a bit of a thug: it 
grows to about 45cm and is a spreading, evergreen perennial. It has 
yellowish-green flowers in spring, borne about dark green leaves that are 
arranged in rosettes at the base of the stem. En masse it reminds me of a crowd 
waiting to board a train.

Related: Alys Fowler: go onwards and upwards with self-clinging climbers 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/12/alys-fowler-upwards-self-clinging-climbers-verticals>

This plant has a number of purple and variegated variants such as ‘Purpurea’ 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/66216/Euphorbia-amygdaloides-Purpurea/Details?returnurl=%2Fplants%2Fsearch-results%3Fform-mode%3Dfalse%26query%3DEuphorbia%2Bamygdaloides%2B%2B%2B%26aliaspath%3D%252fplants%252fsearch-results>
 and‘Craigieburn’ 
<https://www.shootgardening.co.uk/plant/euphorbia-amygdaloides-craigieburn>, 
but both tend to get mildew in the summer if dry. Cutrobbiae back after 
flowering to stop it self-seeding; and, if it likes you too much (and it can), 
dig up the roots to stop it spreading.

One final word of warning: take care when handling members of the euphorbia 
family, as they exude a milky sap when cut that is both poisonous and a skin 
irritant. It’s a good idea to wear gloves.
