
Last week, a freelance reporter with a thirst for public revenge decided to 
take on the insular New York media world. Predictably, his writing went viral.

Jacques Hyzagi unleashed a vicious torrent of insults  
<http://observer.com/2016/03/elle-on-earth/>targeting Elle magazine editors 
who, he argued, butchered his interview with Comme Des Garçons designer Rei 
Kawakubo.

In the piece, published in the New York Observer, he then went on to target 
the Atlantic (“boring”), Politico (“vapid”), New York magazine (“bores”) and 
New Yorker editor David Remnick (“nice, but he’s no William Shawn”).

But just who is Hyzagi to be such an arbiter of taste? And why is his online 
presence so limited?
 Jacques Hyzagi. 
We met at the local Starbucks in East Hampton on Friday night (Hyzagi lives in 
Manhattan, but is staying with friends right now). He was running 40 minutes 
late due to back and leg injuries from a motorbike accident a week earlier, 
which left him with a limp. Upon arrival, he asked me to turn my computer and 
phone off – and watched to ensure both went blank – and banned my use of a 
voice recorder.

I asked him why he’s keen to take such precautions. “This thing has exploded 
in such a way. It’s a sensitive time, a sensitive issue.” Dressed in 
sweatpants, he said he hadn’t slept in two days. “I was attacked in a very 
vicious way. I’m insulted every five minutes … I’m taking grenades from Iraq,” 
he said, referring to someone from Iraq who insulted him in Twitter.

He fidgeted, breaking apart a coffee stirrer into little pieces. His story got 
coverage in the New York Post, Hollywood Reporter, Jezebel and multiple fashion 
blogs, but clearly it wasn’t the reaction he was expecting.

“Why are people taking the side of the powerful figures I attack? There is a 
rush to conformity here I find puzzling,” he said. “Aren’t you supposed to 
question authority and establishment?”

His article, he said, is a conversation starter about ethics in journalism. In 
the piece, he claimed that Elle allowed Comme des Garçons to edit the interview 
as they wanted, turning it into a puff marketing piece rather than a 
hard-hitting interview. “Are we journalists here or are we corporate shills?” 
he asked.

He thinks people aren’t taking his side because he upset “the chain of 
command” by insulting editors. He also reckons he’s pissed off a lot of 
reporters because they think he’s come out of nowhere and hasn’t paid his dues.

Hyzagi spoke with a heavy French accent but said he has lived in New York for 
decades. He conveyed an air of international man of mystery – but that’s mainly 
because he refuses nearly all personal questions. “I’m afraid you’re trying to 
psychotherapy me,” he replied when I asked about his life.

He did tell me he grew up in Paris and worked in the offices of Charlie Hebdo 
as a teenager. He said he learned about journalism ethics while making 
documentaries for his master’s at NYU Tisch School of the Arts (a spokesperson 
from NYU said Hyzagi enrolled in the MFA film program in 1992, but dropped out 
before the end of the first term). He said he received his PhD in art history 
from the Sorbonne.

A self-proclaimed anarchist, he thinks that a backlash focusing on his 
personality means those in the media can ignore his larger concerns about the 
state of journalism.

“To portray me as a freak makes the system work. If they know I’m this average 
schmuck, it would scare the shit out of them,” he said.

And yet, how does an average schmuck with little media experience (he’s 
published just nine stories with the Observer, plus the Kawakubo interviews with
the Guardian 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/sep/20/rei-kawakubo-radical-chic#ifrndnloc>
 andElle <http://www.elle.com/fashion/a33802/rei-kawakubo-interview/>) land 
interviews withactor Morgan Freeman 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qd-Dxm75jg8>, philosopher Bernard-Henri Lévy 
<http://observer.com/2015/05/why-does-everyone-hate-bernard-henri-levy/>, 
comedian Ricky Gervais 
<http://observer.com/2015/08/ricky-gervais-is-the-funniest-man-alive/> and 
cartoonist Robert Crumb <http://observer.com/2015/10/robert-crumb-hates-you/>? 

After all, his first story published in the Observer was a convoluted 
resignation letter 
<http://observer.com/2014/06/cuny-professor-throws-shade-on-the-whole-damn-system-man/>
 after leaving his role as an art history lecturer at Queensborough Community 
College. The second was anexclusive interview with Julian Assange 
<http://observer.com/2014/10/free-julian-assange-an-exclusive-interview-with-the-wikileaks-founder/>
, where he was flown over to London and interviewed the WikiLeaks founder at 
his home in the Ecuador embassy.

“It’s like asking a magician his tricks,” he replied.

Hyzagi wrote in his piece, titled Elle on Earth, that he has dated models and 
knows designers; I suggested perhaps those personal connections helped him land 
the Kawakubo interview. He laughed.

“I got to Rei by fucking a supermodel. I got to Assange by fucking a spy at 
MI6. I got to Ricky Gervais by fucking Stephen Merchant [Gervais’s long-time 
comedy collaborator],” he announced, raising his eyebrows. “The bottom line is 
don’t ask McDonald’s for the secret sauce”.

He added: “Only assholes would tell you they got there by hard work … you got 
where you are now because your daddy had a lot of money and connections, or you 
seized opportunities”.

So is he a Trustafarian, living off some French family money? “I can assure 
you, I’m not. Have you heard about AmEx?” he said, adding that he only pushed 
for the Elle article to be published because he needed to pay off his credit 
card debt he accumulated during his trip to Paris for the interview.

Although he was “uncomfortable” explaining how he’d gotten his big-name 
interviews, he happily discussed his time at working atHara-Kiri 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hara-Kiri_(magazine)> – a monthly magazine by 
the publishers of controversial satirical magazine Charlie Hebdo which folded 
in 1989.

“I was a teenager, but fearless,” he said, explaining that he spent six months 
working on a project that never got off the ground. “I lived in the center of 
Paris and would go to famous writers and convince them to write for Hebdo.” He 
names novelist and playwright Marguerite Duras, whose home was near his. “I 
stalked her.”

It was the 1980s and Hyzagi spent his time writing and dreaming up wild ideas 
for Hara-Kiri. “I was seated next to a neo-Nazi. There was a weird leftist 
anarchist to my left,” he explained. “They were insane people put in a room 
together.”

The magazine’s founder, Georges Bernier, was “a walking nightmare but everyone 
loved him”. “He had no heroes and no allegiances,” said Hyzagi.

Once in the US, Hyzagi worked at small US colleges as an art history 
professor, which he resigned from publicly. He filed complaints with the 
Department of Education about being told to fake grades at Long Island 
University so students wouldn’t drop out,and spoke to the press about it 
<http://nypost.com/2012/09/17/liu-fakes-the-grade-prof-says/>. 

Although his self-destructive streak was obvious in his viral piece, he asked 
if there are job openings at the Guardian. He also wanted me to put down that 
he’s interested in working for the Independent.

Brushing those requests aside, I asked who he’d like to interview next. He 
mentioned Remnick from the New Yorker (despite insulting his leadership in his 
piece) and Dean Baquet, executive editor of the New York Times (although he 
also noted that no one should trust the paper because of its reporting of the 
Iraq war).

Other dream interviewees include Iranian filmmaker Abbas Kiarostami, Black 
Lives Matter activists, Barack Obama, Hillary Clinton and Jeb Bush. I ask if 
any of those interviews are already being discussed. “Some things are in the 
process of being made,” he said.

We talked for nearly three hours, and I told him I felt I only knew the bare 
bones of his life because he is so cagey. That’s exactly what he wants – to 
make sure his critics can’t dismiss him even more. “They want to make it 
personal to deflect, deflect, deflect,” he said.

Most reporters are lazy and greedy, he reckons. “Corporate media: they can’t 
piss on it because they want a piece of it. That’s a good quote,” he said.

Starbucks closed at 10pm, and we continued the conversation outside, only 
leaving when his back ached too much to stand. He tried to make sure I was 
going to write about the “real issues” he’d raised, but then threw his hands in 
the air.

“Talk about what you want,” he declared with a gallic shrug.

 * This article was amended on 3 April 2016 to correct Dean Baquet’s job title 
at the New York Times. He is the executive editor, not the managing editor. 