
Q I love bright lipstick and usually wear red. I fancy a change for summer, 
but I'm not sure of the new colours for the season. I have pale skin and dark 
hair and don't tan very easily, so I avoid lying out in the sun and look very 
pale in the summer. Can you advise?
Caroline

A Pale is the byword for beautiful these days, so your skin will look 
fashionable (you'll also enjoy the benefits in later years, as the sun is 
terribly ageing). You don't say if you prefer a cool or warm red. The former is 
blue based, the latter has a fuchsia undertone. For your complexion, blue based 
is the usual rule. For summer, experiment with orange tones - a big catwalk 
trend. This colour appeared on eyes at Dolce & Gabbana's show and on lips at 
Marc by Marc Jacobs, where the girls had sweetheart-shaped coral lips and pale 
skin - a very Forties look. Try using Stila Convertible Color in Gladiola or 
Chanel's Rouge AllureLipstick <http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/lipstick> in 
Exotic.

 Q I keep reading in trend reports for autumn/winter about the sack dress. Is 
this a joke, or do we really have this to look forward to next season?
 Amanda

A Don't worry - although the sack dress is supposedly back this year, it's 
actually been around for the past three seasons. Designers keep producing 
slight variations of the shift and simply changing the dress name. So far it's 
been known as the cocoon, the trapeze and the smock. This season it's the sack. 
Stella McCartney, Chloe, 3.1 Phillip Lim (pictured, left) and Moschino all sent 
them down their catwalks, and plenty of fashionistas will have them in their 
wardrobes. Many designers have tried to make it sound more desirable by calling 
it the 'luxe sack', but it's still a shapeless dress. Unless you are tall, with 
a flat chest, these dresses make you look six months pregnant, hanging straight 
down from your breasts to form an unflattering tent. The good news is that 
these frocks aren't made of sackcloth. 'Luxe' refers to the rich fabrics used: 
cashmere, satins and silks. As you've probably guessed, I'm not a Le Sack kinda 
girl, so thank goodness this season also offers cinch-waisted skirt suits.

Â· If you have a wardrobe question for Jo Jones, email her at 
ask.jo@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.jo@observer.co.uk>
