
Virtual reality, augmented reality, mixed reality. Whatever you want to call 
it, virtual reality (VR) is the new frontier for marketing communications. 
Almost 1.8 billion people globally already have VR devices. They’re called 
smartphones.


Anyone with a smartphone and a VR viewer can experience a rudimentary but 
nonetheless effective version of the Samsung Gear VR – or soon to be 
commercially available Oculus Rift. The adaptability of smartphones allows for 
bitesize VR experiences on devices that people around the world already own.

So, is 2016 a watershed year for VR? Estimates predict there will be more than 
12m VR sales <http://fortune.com/2015/05/07/vr-headset-launches/> by the end of 
2016 and globally, by 2020 the VR industry will have shipped30m headsets 
<http://www.juniperresearch.com/press/press-releases/virtual-reality-headset-shipments-to-approach-30-m>
. Some advertisers are already exploring the realm of virtual reality but where 
does the opportunity sit for PR?

VR could be considered the ultimate channel. It’s fully immersive and almost 
uninterruptible in comparison to other media. In VR you have a consumer’s 
undivided attention, the dream for earned-media storytellers. This means PR 
professionals are perfectly positioned to pioneer the new age of virtual 
reality.

Personally, I’m a huge advocate of VR and believe it’s time the PR industry 
fully scoped out its potential. I’m not talking about the introduction of VR 
into a pre-conceived experiential idea but, instead, true integration of the 
technology as a new media outlet and platform for future campaigns.

VR will undoubtedly have an impact on the future of journalism, especially 
with news outlets constantly looking for ways to bring back straying audiences. 
At the end of last year, The New York Times partnered with Google on aVR 
advertising project 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/21/business/media/the-times-partners-with-google-on-virtual-reality-project.html?_r=0>
. Handheld Google Cardboard VR units were delivered to more than a million 
subscribers of the print newspaper. Using their smartphone, subscribers were 
encouraged to download a special New York Times VR app.

This partnership was such a success that The New York Times announced last 
month they would send out Google Cardboard once again but this time to online 
subscribers. Can you see where this is going?

The success of this partnership is demonstrable proof that VR will not just 
live in the consumer or experiential PR sphere. There will also be significant 
opportunities for financial and corporate communication professionals to use VR 
as an alternative story telling mechanism.

If you’re still in any doubt about the potential of VR then think of it this 
way: VR could be the medium that future-proofs the PR industry for the next 10 
years, filling the void that print media is set to leave behind. And if you’re 
on top of it now, you’ll be there to ride the wave. Because it’s only going to 
get bigger.

Miles Freeman is account manager at Lexis <http://www.lexisagency.com/>

This advertisement feature is brought to you by the Marketing Agencies 
Association <http://www.marketingagencies.org.uk/maa>, sponsors of the Guardian 
Media & Tech Network’sAgencies hub 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media-network/series/agencies>.
