
A council in South Yorkshire will become the first in the country to shorten 
the long school summer break with an extra week off later in the year.

Barnsley <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/barnsley> council has approved plans 
to bring in the changes in the next academic year after concerns that the 
current length of summer holidays leads to poor educational achievement and 
issues with high holiday prices for families on low incomes.

It will reduce the six-week summer break by a week to create an extra holiday 
in the autumn term.

But headteachers at secondary schools in the area are in revolt over the 
council’s decision.

Related: Number of pupils taking unauthorised term-time holidays rises by 12% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/19/number-of-pupils-taking-unauthorised-term-time-holidays-rises-by-12>

School leaders have warned the move to abandon the six-week break for 
council-controlled schools will have a devastating impact on staff recruitment 
and exams, and cause confusion for parents with children at different schools.

Council bosses have given the go-ahead to overhaul the school holiday system 
in favour of four weeks and four days in the summer and an extra week in 
October starting from September 2017. They argued the long summer break could 
lead to “learning loss”.

But Nick Bowen has urged the local authority to reconsider, claiming many 
headteachers knew nothing of the plan.

Bowen, headteacher at Horizon community college, said the changes had been 
“fleetingly” mentioned at the end of a meeting when most school headteachers 
were not there.

He said: “We have been left perplexed that a change of this magnitude is being 
brought in without any real consultation with all headteachers in the area.

“This will affect our ability to recruit high-quality staff because they will 
not want a shorter break – they need to recharge their batteries – and also it 
may lead to them having different holidays to their children.

“There is also the fact that most of the academies in the area probably won’t 
come on board with it so everyone will have different holidays. And it will be 
a disaster in terms of attendance because parents who have multiple children 
will have to take other siblings out of school if the holidays don’t match.”

Barnsley council said the proposals had economic benefits for working parents 
who struggle to take their children away during the school holidays because of 
high prices.

Related: High court backs father who refused to pay fine for term-time holiday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/13/high-court-father-fine-term-time-holiday-jon-platt>

They have also claimed that the decision is based on research that suggests 
children should be off school for no longer than five weeks to achieve the best 
results.

Councillor Tim Cheetham said the decision had received a positive response 
from parents.

He added: “The decision to alter the borough’s term times and holiday dates is 
based on sound research evidence that shows the maximum length of the summer 
break should be no more than five weeks for the best educational outcomes.

“The proposal also has potential economic benefits and advantages for working 
parents.”

In January Brighton and Hove council  
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jan/06/brighton-and-hove-council-considers-cutting-summer-break-more-affordable-family-holidays>
said it was considering a similar move. The proposals are being debated and a 
report is expected to be presented to the committee responsible for the 
decision next week, followed by a three-week consultation process.

The council considered the move to enable families to take affordable holidays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2011/aug/15/school-holidays-double-price-family-break>
.

It came amid growing resentment from parents nationwide who incur heavy fines 
for taking children out of school during term time following a crackdown by the 
government in 2013.

In the past headteachers have been allowed to grant pupils 10 days’ leave in 
exceptional circumstances. Now, they are required to take a much tougher line 
on requests for authorised leave from parents, who are fined £60 if they take 
their child out of school without the headteacher’s permission.

That increases to £120 if not paid within 21 days. Those that fail to pay face 
possible prosecution with a maximum fine of £2,500 or a prison sentence of up 
to three months.

The Sussex council had experienced an enormous increase in the number of 
parents being fined for their children’s unauthorised absence from school.

According to local reports 
<http://www.brightonandhovenews.org/2015/11/09/term-time-holiday-fines-doubled-last-year-in-brighton-and-hove/>
, the number more than doubled in the past year, with schools referring almost 
a thousand cases to the behaviour and attendance team at the council.

The Local Government Association, which represents more than 370 councils, 
said parents were beginning to successfully challenge fines in the courts, 
claiming that they are an infringement of civil liberties under human rights 
legislation to decide what is in the best interests of their family.

Jon Platt, a father from the Isle of Wight who took his daughter on holiday to 
Disneyworld in Florida during term time,overturned a court fine 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/13/high-court-father-fine-term-time-holiday-jon-platt>
 after arguing that her unauthorised absence did not mean she failed to attend 
school regularly.

Platt refused to pay the initial £60 fine, which then doubled to £120, but 
magistrates ruled he had no case to answer shortly before he was due to face 
trial.
