
Last week on this section Marc DuBois gave an impassioned call 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/12/dont-blur-the-lines-between-development-and-humanitarian-work>
 not to blur the lines between humanitarian and development work. Yet his 
article describes exactly why business as usual is not good enough for today’s 
humanitarian crises. Throwing away the idea of independent, impartial and 
neutral humanitarian action is not the answer – yet a new way of working 
between humanitarian and development actors is urgently needed.

“Everyone should be frustrated with the travesty of humanitarian solutions 
being applied to protracted problems. A camp for displaced persons is a good 
place to find shelter, nutrition and (hopefully) safety; it is a terrible place 
to call home and raise your children,” wrote DuBois.

Indeed. Protracted crises are the new normal. Humanitarian appeals today last 
for7 years on average and 89% of humanitarian financing 
<https://docs.unocha.org/sites/dms/Documents/OCHA_TB15_Multiyear%20Planning_online.pdf>
 goes to crises lasting more than 3 years. The most shocking statistic is that 
the average length of displacement is now17 years 
<http://www.unocha.org/top-stories/all-stories/forgotten-millions>. This is 
enough for a child to be born,schooled <http://nolostgeneration.org/> (or not, 
tragically 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/16/education-30-million-children-have-lost-their-homes-syria-new-fund>
) and reach adulthood. Doing so with nothing but basic, short-term humanitarian 
assistance is an outrage to the idea that all children in the world deserve 
development opportunities.

Related: Refugees don't just live in camps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/apr/19/refugees-dont-just-live-in-camps>

In a piece 
<http://cic.nyu.edu/publications/addressing-protracted-displacement-framework-development-humanitarian-cooperation>
 published by my institute last year, a group of UN agencies and the World Bank 
argued for a new approach to protracted displacement – one that recognises 
displaced people have a right to be connected with development.

Linking humanitarian action and development helps both

The idea is a simple one: humanitarian actors have an interest in connecting 
their populations of concern to development opportunities such as good quality 
education and jobs. Similarly, development actors have an interest in ensuring 
that theyreach the furthest behind 
<http://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/sdgoverview/post-2015-development-agenda.html>
, which includes populations affected by humanitarian crises.

Getting humanitarian and development folks to work together in longstanding 
crises allows programmes to reach the most vulnerable, whether they are 
longstanding local residents or those displaced by humanitarian crises from 
another country or region. This is crucial for managing the politics of crises: 
it is difficult for Lebanese citizens, for example, to continue showing 
exceptional generosity to Syrian refugees if their government cannot show that 
extra education support will benefit poor local families too.

It also encourages more local capacity building. This is important because 
many of today’s crises (eastern DRC or South Sudan, for example) repeat. A new 
way of working together can help build local institutions which are then able 
to respond to future crises.

When the bombs are still falling, it is a different story

By contrast, in acute crises – such as the situation today in much of Syria – 
what is needed is classic humanitarian emergency response. In these situations 
where fighting is high intensity, the imperative to save lives and alleviate 
suffering cannot easily be combined with any long-term focus.


Related: ‘It's like trying to hit a football field from the top of Everest' – 
why aid airdrops just don’t work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/20/airdrop-effective-syria-humanitarian-government>

As laid out in the UN Secretary General’s report 
<http://sgreport.whsummit.org/> for the World Humanitarian Summit, the 
priorities are to press for political solutions to end the conflict, for 
respect of international humanitarian and human rights law by the combatants, 
and for humanitarian access. Humanitarian action will be, and should be, in 
traditional independent emergency response form. However, this does not mean no 
useful links with development actors can be made: they may have analysis and 
data to contribute.


Governments are part of the solution - not just the problem

DuBois underlines the link that development actors have with governments, and 
says that: “Distrust will flare if you come with an agenda to address the 
causes of their suffering, reinforce national authorities or stabilise fragile 
states.”


Trust is key. But the critique ignores three things. 


First, not all governments are distrusted. Humanitarians supported Indonesia’s 
efforts to protect its citizens after theIndian Ocean tsunami 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/25/-sp-boxing-day-tsunami-scar-aceh-village-nusa-indonesia>
 in 2004, for example, despite the Aceh conflict. Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF)
reported 
<http://www.doctorswithoutborders.org/news-stories/speechopen-letter/ecosoc-%E2%80%93-humanitarian-affairs-segment>
 that “local solidarity and national assistance played by far the most 
important role in the acute emergency response phase.” Governments are the 
first responsibility holders of the right to protect, and where they are able 
to fulfil that responsibility they should be supported.

Second, in conflicts where governments cannot play that role because they are 
party to a conflict, development actors have also adopted principles of “do no 
harm <http://www.alnap.org/pool/files/38368714.pdf>”, avoiding the appearance 
or reality of partisan support or undermining national governance. They have 
civil society and community partners as well as governments, and they switch 
between different modes of operating depending on the circumstances.


Related: The humanitarian system: 'A mammoth machinery losing track of what it 
is for' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/22/humanitarian-aid-system-power-concentrated-hands-of-few-losing-track>

Third, conflict situations do not transition in a linear way from war to 
peace. If the ceasefire proceeds in Syria, there may be areas where local 
development activities can take place and link up with humanitarian action, 
alongside others where conflict requires an independent emergency response.


Conflict occurs on a spectrum, with many grey areas. Respect for humanitarian 
principles applies in all cases, but the form of humanitarian action – and its 
links with development – needs to adapt. The test is to make sure our 
principles can translate into the best results for people on the ground: in 
active conflict that means focusing on protection; but in lengthy crises it 
also means getting kids into school and giving them development hopes for the 
future.

Sarah Cliffe <http://cic.nyu.edu/people/sarah-cliffe> is director of the 
Center on International Cooperation, New York University.


Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
