
He was listening intently, when suddenly he swung his right fist, catching me 
on my lips completely unaware. He was training to be a boxer and packed a 
punch. Blood splattered on my shirt with the thud of the fist, my glasses flew 
off, and everything seemed to slow down. I pushed myself off the settee, 
dropped the notes and tried to make for the door. I was acutely aware of his 
presence half a metre to my right as he followed me screaming and swinging his 
fist. His mother was crying and pleading with him to stop. Due to a past 
history of violence, a couple of policemen were in attendance and radioed the 
incident in. Two police vans turned up to take him away, ending the tirade of 
verbal abuse.


My gums were extremely swollen but luckily the x-ray did not show any 
fractures. However, the facial surgery registrar said the swelling was impeding 
blood circulation and my incisors would turn black and fall out. I am glad to 
say he was wrong; nine years on I still have my teeth.

This incident took place in 2006 when I was sitting beside a patient. He was 
being assessed by me, a GP and a social worker at home under the MentalHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Act. It was in response to his 
family’s concerns that he had stopped medication and was becoming increasingly 
paranoid and suspicious. At a recent review we had formed good rapport and he 
seemed generally happy to see me, so I had no sense of what was about to happen 
next.

My wife was aghast at my state. I did not want to talk – I could not. It was 
impossible to switch off, although it wasn’t so much that the assault played on 
my mind more the fact that I believed I had formed a good relationship with him 
and that my trust had been violated.

Related: The patient who taught me that being a doctor is a vocation, not just 
a job 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/apr/14/patient-doctor-vocation-not-job-medical-school>

The passage of time should have made me objective but I still find it 
emotionally challenging. Strangely, shame comes up as the primary response. 
Perhaps I didn’t read the signs, perhaps shame at initially feeling anxious.

After an assault, the emotional response is individual, but at some stage 
everyone asks: why did it happen? We can reason this away as someone being 
unwell or someone being inherently violent, but that would be a missed 
opportunity to ponder on what it must have felt like to be the patient?

Coming to terms with the incident was a lonely affair and it was in that 
loneliness that I developed empathy for how alone patients must feel when a 
united group of staff use powers vested in them. Staff may believe it is in the 
patient’s best interest, but this is not always an understandable perspective 
for patients.

The assault might have seemed unprovoked, but if three professionals turned up 
with the police with intent to take your liberties away when you are already 
feeling suspicious, how would you react? He was a boxer and responded in the 
way he knew best. This is not to say that assaults are to be expected. However, 
like I did, would you feel your trust was violated and would it make you 
anxious receiving care from people you believed to be perpetrators?

Related: Grief – and Lego in ears – the extremes of an A&E shift 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/mar/31/grief-lego-in-ears-extremes-ae-shift>

What emotional responses do our patients have? Do our patients feel shame 
after being at the receiving end of force, as I did after the assault? An 
organisation aspiring to push boundaries of humane care would want its 
frontline to consider these questions.

My experience has helped me make the case for change and empathise both with 
patients and staff. In mental health, reliance on coercion in the patient’s 
best interest is commonplace. But it breeds resentment, frustration and 
aggression and our frontline staff are often at its receiving end. In an ideal 
world, early detection and treatment will help patients retain insight and the 
driving seat, thus avoiding flashpoints like mine. So not just for our 
patients, if we truly care about our staff, the right support at the right time 
is essential and has to be the aspiration.

This experience was central to co-founding Promise <http://www.promise.global/>
, a new model of care with the premise that the exercise of force is 
incompatible with a vision of recovery at its heart. Our videoNavigating Rocky 
Waters <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ojtDRmgRzCw> teases out these seemingly 
binary positions of care and control, risk and recovery and shows the continuum 
that exists; with the right care patients do have more control, without risk 
there is no recovery.

 * Dr Manaan Kar Ray is clinical director of Cambridgeshire and Peterborough 
NHS foundation trust and cofounder of Promise Global.

If you would like to write a piece for Blood, sweat and tears, read our 
guidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/jul/14/healthcare-workers-tell-us-about-memorable-experience>
 and get in touch by emailinghealthcare@theguardian.com 
<mailto:healthcare@theguardian.com>.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
