
My mum is a chef, but when we were kids my musician dad always used to make us 
snacks. He’d do his tuna melt toasties – they are easy kid pleasers. Now I make 
them for my six-year-old son, Knight, who loves anything toasted. I don’t make 
plain tuna and cheese toasties. I don’t make plain anything – it’s not in my 
character. I’m not trying to sell tuna melts to the world, but mine is pretty 
delicious.

Here’s how to make the ultimate tuna melt:



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c5bn%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c5bn%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F4%2F1446646965747%2F091ef68b-228f-4a07-aabc-d62db24ab3e4-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kelis%3A%20how%20to%20make%20the%20ultimate%20tuna%20melt&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c5bn%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kelis%3A+how+to+make+the+ultimate+tuna+melt&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c5bn%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F4%2F1446646965747%2F091ef68b-228f-4a07-aabc-d62db24ab3e4-1020x612.jpeg>
 Step-by-step guide. Illustration: Son Of Alan 
Related: Kelis on being a musician and chef: most women are Renaissance women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/18/kelis-musician-chef-afropunk-festival>

 * Drain a can of tuna packed in water – not oil – and add what you have in 
the house. My basics are onion – spring, Spanish or red – chopped up really 
small, with a little garlic, a bit of olive oil, a little mayonnaise and, if I 
am in the mood, mustard. Tuna is pretty forgiving so you can add a lot of 
flavours to it.

 * Add vegetables to give it bite – chopped celery or grated carrots. I like 
texture and savoury and sweet things together, so I might add dried apple, 
raisins or cranberries, plus pistachios or hazelnuts for crunch. Finally, 
season with coarse salt.

 * Spread unsalted butter or even a little mayonnaise on the outside of the 
bread. Rye bread and sourdough are my favourites. Rye is particularly good with 
mayonnaise because it soaks in and toasts well too.

 * Put your bread buttered side down on your work surface and lay your first 
piece of cheese on the bread. I love cheese with flavour – gruyère, gouda or a 
sharp cheddar.

 * Then spoon on the tuna salad, lay on another piece of cheese and the second 
slice of bread, with the buttered side facing out.

 * Toast for three to six minutes in a sandwich press, or in a frying pan over 
a medium heat. I’ve asked every chef I have worked with – those at culinary 
school and my mother – “how do you know when it’s done?” And the answer’s 
always: “When it’s done.” So if the bread isn’t golden and the cheese isn’t 
melted it’s not done, but if it looks like it’s burning, take it out. You’ve 
got to bring your brain to the kitchen.
