
Philanthropy is on the rise 
<http://www.cityphilanthropy.org.uk/news/giving-uk%E2%80%99s-top-philanthropists-rises-78>
 and so are the number of banks, wealth managers, lawyers and advisers (also 
known as intermediaries) that are now providing philanthropic support to high 
net-worth individuals.

Related: New fundraising platform encourages donors to give little and often 
<http://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/jan/12/give-penny-app-fundraising-charity-donation-fitness-social-media>

Fundraisers are learning to take advantage, offering up donation opportunities 
for philanthropy advisers to present to their clients. But it’s a competitive 
and often closed space, so fundraisers need to be savvy. Here are some top tips 
for charities on how best to attract philanthropists and their money.

1 Be prepared

Before sending any communications out you should ensure your organisation 
appears robust to the outside world. Be self-critical and brace yourselves for 
hard questions. You should ensure you have a high-quality website including 
pictures, case studies and a written strategy. A great example of an engaging 
web presence isSolar Aid <http://www.solar-aid.org/about/>, which has an 
interestingimpact calculator 
<http://www.solar-aid.org/online-impact-calculator/> on its site, as well as 
case studies <http://www.solar-aid.org/casestudies/> and clear reporting 
<http://www.solar-aid.org/impact/> on the difference its work makes. 

2 Keep things simple

The role of philanthropy advisers is to streamline decisions. It is part of 
their job to point their clients in the direction of philanthropic 
opportunities, so charities need to provide them with a clear and concise 
summary of their work. A good example is thisone-page introduction to Riders 
for Health’s work 
<https://riders-live-cms.s3.amazonaws.com/MediaResources/13.01.08.mh.Press%20info%20sheet%20UK%202013.pdf>
.

Also remember, for banks and other intermediaries, access to a range of 
interesting opportunities is invaluable for deepening relationships. If your 
organisation can offer eye-catching options for their clients, you will put 
yourself ahead of the pack.

3 Find the right route in

If you’re approaching an intermediary company, research what services they 
already provide, and how your charity can help them achieve their goals. For 
example, why not suggest hosting an event with them, on a topic of particular 
interest to their clients.

If the company already has a philanthropy service – contact someone in that 
team and ask for a meeting to discuss client philanthropy opportunities. If 
not, contact someone on a client-facing team and mention that you work with 
donors with similar profiles to their clients?

You could also contact a corporate social responsibility or marketing-focused 
team that might be interested in supporting charitable giving.

4 Show what you can offer them

Make sure you have appropriate materials for a potential donor. This donor 
proposition should cover key information about the organisation and show what a 
donor’s money could do. It should be of high quality, reflecting your 
organisation’s branding and style.

For this audience, you should have a range of gift levels to choose from – 
£5,000, £10,000, £20,000 or higher, depending on your audience. Package these 
clearly in a short document.

Build your credibility by mentioning any other well-known funders or 
supporters, and if you can, include testimonials or quotes from high-profile 
figures who back the cause, or ideally the charity.

5 Create an emotional connection

While the information you provide needs to be slick and professional, don’t 
forget to include potent messaging and imagery, to create an emotional 
connection. Philanthropists may often be business-minded, but they are also 
people who want to feel inspired by the charities they support. If being a 
donor can give them, and their families, an opportunity to really make a 
difference and gain access to on-the-ground experience of the issues you are 
tackling – then mention it. Any adviser will also want to know about this.

6 Stay in touch and build trust

The main factor for success is having regular contact with the intermediaries 
and the donor.

Related: Is virtual reality the future of face-to-face fundraising? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/dec/21/virtual-reality-future-face-to-face-fundraising>

For any adviser, remember that they will value their client relationships 
highly and will only connect you with them if you display professionalism. And 
you must show respect for the existing client-adviser relationship. Keeping the 
adviser in the loop will support a vital foundation of trust.

For any donor, you should regularly – and concisely – report on how you’re 
doing, what achievements you’ve made, and what your plans are.

For more news, opinions and ideas about the voluntary sector, join our 
community <https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/>.
