
Before you all start spluttering that tofu is a “beige blubber 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2001/jun/17/foodanddrink.recipes>” 
with the “texture and disposition of a particularly upbeat sponge 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2000/11/05/magazine/food-do-you-tofu.html?pagewanted=all>
” (tip of the hat to Nigel Slater and the New York Times respectively), please 
bear with me. I, too, once believed tofu to be an utterly pointless waste of 
protein – after all, one of its biggest selling points is itsalmost complete 
absence of flavour 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2010/aug/03/tofu-bean-curd>
, while the consistency, which can vary from chewy loofah to slimy mush, could 
be politely described as challenging to many western palates.

But then, several years ago, I adopted a vegan diet for Lent, forcing me out 
of my comfort zone and into the welcoming arms of apock-marked old woman and 
her fearsomely spicy bean curd 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/jun/14/pock-marked-old-woman-s-tofu-recipe>
. And, finally, I got it – the bland creaminess of the gently wobbling cubes of 
tofu was the perfect contrast to the salty, fiery sauce. In fact, it works in 
much the same way aspaneer: a neutral protein source 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/apr/04/paneer-recipes-yotam-ottolenghi-paratha>
 for the non-meat eater.

That said, though the soft, almost custardy texture of that tofu continued to 
draw me even after I’d gone back to bacon, I found it harder to warm to the 
tough, soggy fried stuff often found in stir fries – which is why, when a 
waitress recommended some crispy tofu with lemongrass and chilli in a suburban 
Saigon restaurant, I was sceptical. When she later asked if we wanted dessert, 
we ordered a second round of tofu instead. That’s how good it was.

Yet my attempts to recreate this glorious dish at home, with its crisp crust 
and silky interior always ended in disaster and, more often than not, atofu 
scramble 
<http://www.greatbritishchefs.com/recipes/easy-vegan-breakfast-recipe-scrambled-tofu>
 rather than the stir fry base I was hoping for. Turns out tofu’s not just a 
difficult thing to love; it’s a difficult thing to cook – but I beg even 
sceptics give this recipe a try just once. You might well be surprised.

The variety
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gv4j%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gv4j%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe55d9cf25ff9882d92802c9f5dba34ac07a7f82f%2F0_106_3648_2187%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20crispy%20fried%20tofu&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gv4j%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+crispy+fried+tofu&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gv4j%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe55d9cf25ff9882d92802c9f5dba34ac07a7f82f%2F0_106_3648_2187%2F3648.jpg>
 Luke Nguyen’s tofu. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
To add to its accessibility problems, tofu comes in a number of varieties 
<http://demuths.co.uk/rachels-blog/article/tofu-types>, which, confusingly are 
sold under an even larger variety of names. As I understand it, the two 
principal kinds are silken and firm. Silken, which has been neither drained nor 
pressed, has the highest water content and the softest texture, reminiscent to 
this omnivore of a baked egg custard. Firm tofu, meanwhile, has been pressed to 
extract the moisture – how hard is indicated on the packet. Those labelled as 
“firm” or “extra-firm” are generally the best when it comes to developing a 
golden crust.

Though I love the smoothness of silken tofu, after trying Luke Nguyen’s recipe 
<http://www.sbs.com.au/food/recipes/crisp-silken-tofu-crusted-lemongrass-dau-hu-xa-ot>
 for crisp silken tofu crusted in lemongrass in The Food of Vietnam, I have to 
concede that the delicate texture is a nightmare for the amateur cook – however 
careful you are when turning it, it persists in falling apart in the pan. 
Extra-firm tofu seems a far safer option, and the consistency is probably a 
better bet for stir fries in any case.

The treatment
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gv4j%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gv4j%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e81e41bb5cad114a1b3c1021a92125ee855f3b1%2F0_0_3648_2187%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20crispy%20fried%20tofu&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gv4j%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+crispy+fried+tofu&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gv4j%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e81e41bb5cad114a1b3c1021a92125ee855f3b1%2F0_0_3648_2187%2F3648.jpg>
 Alice Hart’s tofu, Photograph: Felicity Cloake the Guardian 
Nguyen simply drains the tofu before use, but most recipes recommend at least 
one further step in order to keep it together, and help it to crisp in the pan: 
as J Kenji López-Alt of the website Serious Eatsexplains 
<http://www.seriouseats.com/2014/02/vegan-experience-crispy-tofu-worth-eating-recipe.html>
, “The key to both crispness and browning is the removal of moisture, so the 
drier you get your tofu to begin with, the more efficiently these reactions 
will take place, and the better the contrast between crisp exterior and moist, 
tender interior will be.”

He and Alice Hart 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/foodanddrink/recipes/8596635/The-new-vegetarian-crisp-spiced-tofu-with-cucumber-pickle-recipe.html>
, writing in her forthcoming book, The New Vegetarian (out in March), recommend 
wrapping in kitchen roll and pressing it down with something heavy for a few 
minutes. Andrea Nugyen, author of Asian Tofu,douses it with boiling salted water
 <http://www.vietworldkitchen.com/blog/2012/06/tofu-frying-tips.html>, while 
Van Tran and Ahn Vu, in Vietnamese Market Cookbook,boil it with salt and vinegar
 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=X47BhLSn5toC&pg=PT186&lpg=PT186&dq=Van+Tran+and+Anh+Vu+tofu+lemongrass+chilli&source=bl&ots=E-oFiJdN45&sig=h_FIcAVOwQPHElGtUrzbwxJ7iN0&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjZgqOE5rPKAhVE2B4KHe_7BQ8Q6AEIIzAA#v=onepage&q=Van%20Tran%20and%20Anh%20Vu%20tofu%20lemongrass%20chilli&f=false>
 (to “revive the tofu and clean it of any sourness”) before patting it dry. 
Vegan food writer Rhea Parsonsrecommends 
<http://www.onegreenplanet.org/vegan-food/the-secret-to-making-the-crispiest-tofu-for-all-your-dishes/>
 freezing the tofu before pressing “to make it even more firm and with a 
chewier texture” and Dana Shultz, of the blog Minimalist Baker, suggests baking 
it for 25 minutes before sautéing (“a little trick I picked up at a vegetarian 
cafe in San Antonio”).

Pressing seems to work just fine – especially if you follow López-Alt’s 
sensible suggestion of slicing it first, to increase the surface area. Freezing 
does make it firmer and easier to cut (though I don’t find this a problem with 
the extra-firm stuff), but the real surprise is the boiling. This may seem 
counterintuitive when trying to remove as much moisture as possible, but it 
does indeed give a crisper crust after frying – possibly by the process of 
osmosis, although the more scientifically minded among you may be able to say 
for sure.

Seasoning
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gv4j%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gv4j%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd50f4a23250bbee539375dd02a069a6ff967f1aa%2F0_92_3648_2187%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20crispy%20fried%20tofu&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gv4j%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+crispy+fried+tofu&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gv4j%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd50f4a23250bbee539375dd02a069a6ff967f1aa%2F0_92_3648_2187%2F3648.jpg>
 Rhea Parsons’s tofu. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
What boiling also does is lightly season the tofu, which may or may not be 
desirable depending on what you’re planning to do with it. I happen to think 
it’s a bonus, and certainly more effective than marinating the stuff, as Dana 
suggests – I take my eye off the pan for a minute to answer the door, and 
return to a kitchen full of smoke to find her (delicious) peanut butter and soy 
sauce dressing has formed an acrid crust on the outside. Adding dry spices is 
equally problematic – I struggle to crisp Hart’s tofu without burning the five 
spice and chilli rub, and the same goes for Luke Nguyen’s chilli and garlic. 
Best, I think, to leave any flavouring until after cooking, though if you 
really really want to do so, Tran and Vu’s trick of cutting slits in the cubes 
and pushing slivers of lemongrass and chilli into them proves the most 
satisfactory method.

Coating
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gv4j%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gv4j%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0dfffd5e71ec443cd59a1165377efd1ea1211c56%2F0_0_3648_2187%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20crispy%20fried%20tofu&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gv4j%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+crispy+fried+tofu&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gv4j%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0dfffd5e71ec443cd59a1165377efd1ea1211c56%2F0_0_3648_2187%2F3648.jpg>
 Minimalist Baker’s tofu. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Again, the benefits of coating depend on your plans for the tofu; López-Alt’s 
cornflour-and-vodka batter delivers a thin, crisp crust, while Parsons’ 
battered and cornflake-coated nuggets are completely, ridiculously crunchy and 
delicious, and pretty unbeatable if you’re planning to eat the tofu on its own. 
But it’s also possible, as Tran and Vu prove, to achieve crispness without any 
additional ingredients – just hot oil, which seems to me to be the best option 
for stir-fries.

Cooking
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gv4j%2Fsfb%23img-6&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gv4j%2Fsfb%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3dee3261320dc171f63fdee3c4f57277ae1c5f30%2F0_137_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20crispy%20fried%20tofu&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gv4j%2Fstw%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+crispy+fried+tofu&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gv4j%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3dee3261320dc171f63fdee3c4f57277ae1c5f30%2F0_137_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
 Kenji Lopez-Alt and Andrea Nguyen’s tofu. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the 
Guardian 
Baking produces a dry, but not overly crisp result, and both pan- and 
shallow-frying require a lot of faffing about with a thin spatula, whereas 
deep-frying produces consistently crisp, gorgeous results. I take comfort from 
the fact that, according to Harold McGee, deep-frying often adds less fat to 
food than pan frying it, because the high temperatures force the moisture to 
the surface to form a barrier the oil cannot penetrate.

It is, however, vital to blot the tofu as soon as it comes out of the pan, 
because as the temperature of the food cools, the rate of oil absorption 
increases. Then all there is to do is season (oradd to a stir fry 
<http://www.seriouseats.com/2014/02/vegan-experience-crispy-tofu-worth-eating-recipe.html>
 at the last minute, so it doesn’t go soggy) and scoff as fast as you can – 
after all, you wouldn’t want anyone to see you eating tofu.

The perfect crispy fried tofu
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gv4j%2Fsfb%23img-7&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gv4j%2Fsfb%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb67ae86b7a22d43590f0fd18fa2e04f0e9440cc4%2F117_227_3425_2054%2F3425.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20crispy%20fried%20tofu&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gv4j%2Fstw%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+crispy+fried+tofu&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gv4j%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb67ae86b7a22d43590f0fd18fa2e04f0e9440cc4%2F117_227_3425_2054%2F3425.jpg>
 The perfect crispy fried tofu. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
(Serves 4)
500g firm or extra-firm tofu (preferably freshly made, or the sort sold in 
refrigerated packs full of water rather than room-temperature cartons)
Salt, to cook
Neutral oil, to deep fry
1 stalk lemongrass, inside only, finely chopped (optional)
1 birds eye chilli, finely chopped (optional)

Bring a medium pan of water to the boil, and salt generously until it tastes 
like the sea. Meanwhile, cut the tofu into chunks about 3cm square. Add to the 
water, take off the heat and leave to sit for 15 minutes. Meanwhile, line a 
baking tray with kitchen paper or a clean tea towel.


Scoop the tofu out on to the baking tray and top with more paper or another 
towel. Add another baking tray or chopping board, and weight down with a couple 
of tins. Leave to sit for 15 minutes.

Fill a deep pan a third full of oil, and heat to about 180C, or until bubbles 
form around a wooden chopstick.

While the oil is heating, blot the tofu as dry as possible with fresh towels. 
Drop into the oil, stir once and cook until crisp and golden, then scoop out 
and drain on kitchen towel. Season and sprinkle with the lemongrass and chilli 
if using, or add to a stir-fry at the last minute.

Tofu: love it or hate it? And if the latter, would you consider giving it 
another go? What other dishes would you recommend to this recent convert, and 
is it worth making your own?
