
US cable channel AMC, home to critically lauded advertising drama Mad Men, is 
looking to develop a TV series based on Francis Ford Coppola's 1974 movieThe 
Conversation <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-conversation>.

The low-key thriller, about a paranoid surveillance expert called Harry Caul, 
played byGene Hackman <https://www.theguardian.com/film/gene-hackman>, who has 
a crisis of conscience when he suspects that a couple he is spying on will be 
murdered, earned three Oscar nominations, including best picture.

Former 24 executive producer Tony Krantz 
<http://www.variety.com/profiles/people/main/58170/Tony%20Krantz.html?dataSet=1>
 has been attempting to turn the movie into a TV series for more than a decade 
and has lined up an impressive roster of creative talent to work on the project 
for AMC.

Christopher McQuarrie 
<http://www.variety.com/profiles/people/main/31079/Christopher%20McQuarrie.html?dataSet=1>
, whose scriptwriter credits include The Usual Suspects, and Band of Brothers 
writerErik Jendresen 
<http://www.variety.com/profiles/people/main/549219/Erik%20Jendresen.html?dataSet=1>
, are working on a script for the TV version of The Conversation, according to 
American trade journal Variety.

The TV project would be set in the early 1970s – the same time period as the 
original movie - and centre on surveillance expert Caul.

"It gives us an opportunity to look back at the 1970s through the filter of 
2009," Krantz told Variety.

"The issues of privacy and individuality, and issues of spying and listening, 
are as relevant now as they've ever been. This is the perfect vehicle to tell 
those stories."

Krantz, McQuarrie and Jendresen previously worked on a modern-day version of 
The Conversation two years ago for ABC, but Krantz said it did not work out 
after the network chose to concentrate on female friendly dramas such as 
Desperate Housewives.

Krantz's Flame Ventures independent production company is attached to the 
project, along withSony Pictures TV 
<http://www.variety.com/profiles/Company/main/2125274/Sony%20Pictures%20Animation.html?dataSet=1>
 and Coppola'sAmerican Zoetrope 
<http://www.variety.com/profiles/Company/main/2008671/American%20Zoetrope.html?dataSet=1>
 label.

The series is seen as a good fit for AMC <http://www.theguardian.com/media/amc>
, a former movie channel, which is developing a strong reputation for high 
quality original drama.

As well as Mad Men, seen on BBC4 in the UK, the channel has also screened the 
critically acclaimed Breaking Bad and is currently co-producing the remake of 
The Prisoner with ITV.

· To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857. For all other 
inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 7278 2332.

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
