
Thousands marched in Warsaw this week after the leader of Poland’s ruling 
party backed a call from Catholic bishops for a complete ban on pregnancy 
terminations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/03/warsaw-protest-against-proposed-abortion-ban>
. In the US,Planned Parenthood is under fire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/planned-parenthood>, with Republican 
politicians lining up to condemn the organisation andlegislators repeatedly 
pressing to defund it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/19/defund-planned-parenthood-florida-bill-dentist-reproductive-care-alternatives>
. And Donald Trump last week called for women who have abortions to be 
“punished” – though he was forced to retract the comments, after they provoked 
the biggest crisis of his campaign. We are all familiar with the extremely 
rocky terrain of abortion rights in the US, and with the harassment faced by 
some women trying to access abortion services.Providers are being forced to 
close 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/12/abortion-clinics-rapidly-closing-liberal-states>
, and last year,a gunman stormed a Colorado clinic killing three people and 
injuring nine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/27/colorado-springs-shooting-planned-parenthood>
. The president of the Rocky Mountains chapter of Planned Parenthood, Vicki 
Cowart, suggested the stage for such violence was set by “a climate of rancour 
surrounding abortion”.

But many are unaware that US-style abortion clinic protests – complete with 
harassment, gory placards and the intrusive filming of women attending clinics 
– areincreasing at an alarming rate in the UK 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-34644369> as well. Last year, BBC news 
reported <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-34641228> that protests now 
regularly take place at around half of the UK’s abortion providers.Research 
from Birmingham’s Aston University found 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Internet%20Downloads/A%20Hard%20Enough%20Decision%20to%20Make%20-%20Dr%20Graeme%20Hayes%20&%20Dr%20Pam%20Lowe.pdf>
 that women trying to access abortion services had been followed, harassed, and 
even physically assaulted. Andone clinic in London is reportedly being forced 
to close because of intimidating protestors 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/women/womens-life/11753342/British-abortion-clinic-forced-to-close-by-pro-life-protestors.html>
.

Kerry Abel, chair of national pro-choice campaign Abortion Rights 
<http://www.abortionrights.org.uk/who-we-are/>, says: “People are shocked when 
they hear that activity normally associated with anti-abortion campaigning in 
the United States is happening here in the UK.

“These hard-line protesters,” she says, “would like to see abortion outlawed 
altogether and use tactics such as harassment and intimidation [to agitate for 
that].” Behaviours range from trying to physically block the passage of 
would-be patients and staff members to clinics, displaying large, exaggerated 
pictures showing “aborted foetuses”, to filming women outside clinics.

Abel says that it is no coincidence that we are seeing patterns from protests 
in the US replicated outside UK clinics: “The anti-abortion movement is well 
connected and funded, and UK anti-choice activists are not only importing 
tactics, but ideology from anti-abortion movements in the US.” We know, for 
instance, “that organisations such as40 Days for Life 
<https://40daysforlife.com/>, which is an American anti-choice group with 
established groups in cities across the UK, routinely establish protests at 
clinics in the UK 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/mar/26/40-days-life-prayers-protests>
.”

Next week, I will speak at a parliamentary meeting organised by Abortion Rights
 
<https://www.eventbrite.co.uk/e/abortion-access-in-2016-preventing-harassment-and-putting-pressure-where-power-lies-tickets-22772380804>
 to discuss methods of ending clinic harassment and to call on the UK 
government to take responsibility for addressing the problem. For Abel this is 
key – pressure needs, she says, to be taken away from clinics “and put it where 
it belongs – with the government”.

According to Abortion <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abortion> Rights, the 
Home Office has suggested that existing legislation under the Public Order Act, 
the Protection from Harassment Act and the Anti-Social Behaviour, Crime and 
Policing Act are sufficient to deal with the problem, but that there has been a 
reluctance to implement these laws in this context.

“The current legislation that aims to tackle harassment and intimidation in 
public is not being used effectively to protect women at clinics,” says Abel. 
“We are calling for the government, local authorities, police and local MPs to 
use existing powers to intervene and ensure women are able to access their 
legal right for information and abortion.”

Women elsewhere in the UK are facing draconian repercussions, stemming from 
laws passed during Queen Victoria’s reign, for making choices about their own 
bodies. Just this week,a 21-year-old woman in Northern Ireland was found guilty 
of taking pills to induce an abortion and was given a suspended prison sentence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/04/northern-irish-woman-suspended-sentence-self-induced-abortion>
, leading tocalls for Westminster to overturn Northern Ireland’s abortion ban 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/today-in-the-uk-a-woman-was-sentenced-for-the-crime-of-having-an-abortion-yet-we-act-outraged-at-a6968356.html>
.

Earlier this year, the British Pregnancy Advisory Service launched a campaign 
<http://www.wetrustwomen.org.uk/about-the-campaign/> calling for “cruel, 
archaic” abortion legislation to be overturned and for abortion to be 
completely decriminalised under UK law. In England and Wales, under existing 
law, abortion is still technically illegal under the 1861 Offences Against the 
Person Act, as the 1967 Abortion Act did not overturn the Victorian 
legislation, but simply added exemptions, with the ability to end a pregnancy 
still predicated on the consent of two doctors.

Meanwhile, as the government fails to respond to calls for action, anti-choice 
protesters are becoming louder and more active in the UK. It is 2016 – more 
than 150 years since the Offences Against the Person Act was passed. If we are 
as outraged as we claim to be by the war on reproductive rights elsewhere in 
the world, then it’s time to recognise what is happening at home as well, and 
take action.
