
Reports emerged on Wednesday that there are now “8 million foreigners living 
in Britain”, leading to questions being raised over the phrasing of this 
statement.
— Nick Sutton (@suttonnick) August 25, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/suttonnick/status/636278736149741568> 
Wednesday's Telegraph front page: 8 million foreigners living in Britain 
#tomorrowspaperstoday 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/tomorrowspaperstoday?src=hash> #bbcpapers 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/bbcpapers?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/C7VjkIGTHh 
<http://t.co/C7VjkIGTHh>
 <https://twitter.com/suttonnick/status/636278736149741568> 

Is this true?
The 8 million figure refers to the number of people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/aug/25/non-uk-born-residents-likely-to-exceed-8-million-in-latest-figures-thinktank-says>
 living in the UK who were not born in Britain.According to ONS data 
<http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/migration1/population-by-country-of-birth-and-nationality/revisions-to-population-by-country-of-birth-and-nationality---calendar-years-2004-to-2013/country-of-birth-and-nationality-tables--2013.xls>
, the figure in 2013 was 7.9 million. An increase in net migration since is 
likely to have pushed that past 8 million.


However, the number includes British nationals who were born abroad. The 
latest estimate for non-UK born, non-UK nationals living in Britain is 4.9 
million, the ONS said <http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/dcp171776_375449.pdf>, just 
under 8% of the population (or one in 13 people).

Related: Non-UK born residents likely to exceed 8 million in latest figures, 
thinktank says 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/aug/25/non-uk-born-residents-likely-to-exceed-8-million-in-latest-figures-thinktank-says>

Notable examples of Britons born abroad include Boris Johnson, Joanna Lumley 
and Mo Farah. Would you consider the mayor of London or the Olympic gold 
medallist and world champion foreigners?

The standfirst of the Daily Telegraph 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/dailytelegraph> story also seems to infer a 
connection between the 8 million figure and the “migrant crisis that continues 
to engulf Europe”.

But there is no connection between the two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/aug/10/10-truths-about-europes-refugee-crisis>
. Between 2,000 and 5,000 migrantshave reached Calais 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/aug/10/10-truths-about-europes-refugee-crisis>
, which is between 1% and 2.5% of the more than 200,000 who have arrived in 
Italy and Greece.

Moreover, Britain has received a fraction  
<http://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2015/aug/20/asylum-seekers-eu-comparison-germany-datablog>
of the asylum seekers in the EU: Germany deals with more in a month than the UK 
does in a year.

Is 8 million people a big number?


8 million is about 12.5% of the UK population, or one in eight people.


Although the figure has increased over the past decade, from 8.9% in 2004, 
there is not an “immigrant population” that can be considered too large or too 
small in absolute terms. The figure is a reflection of recent migration flows 
and a country’s history.

Official data shows 
<http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/File:Foreign-born_population_by_country_of_birth,_1_January_2014_(%C2%B9)_YB15.png>
 the UK proportion is higher than in Italy (9.5%) and slightly more than France 
(12%). It is slightly less than Spain (13%). And it is lower than Belgium 
(16%), Sweden (16%), Switzerland (27%) and Australia (28%).

Related: 10 truths about Europe’s migrant crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/aug/10/10-truths-about-europes-refugee-crisis>

In Germany, 20.3% of the population has a migrant background 
<https://www.destatis.de/EN/PressServices/Press/pr/2015/08/PE15_277_122.html>, 
while there are 10.9 million immigrants living in the country (about 13.5% of 
the population). The UK is not exceptional in this regard.

Do such errors matter?

The issue in this case is more than just a cavalier use of statistics.

There are risks when the perception of an issue and the facts do not align. It 
generates fear among the public (concern for immigration isat an all-time high 
<https://www.ipsos-mori.com/researchpublications/researcharchive/3614/EconomistIpsos-MORI-August-2015-Issues-Index.aspx>
 in the UK) and in turn this makes it more difficult for politicians and 
policymakers to act in a cool-headed manner, especially if they are worried 
about their approval ratings.


So why would anyone want to mislead in this way?

If you wanted to advocate tighter border controls or make a case against 
immigration, helping create a context in which the public believes the number 
of foreigners is higher than it actually is – or stretching the very definition 
of the term to give it a pejorative twist – would be a smart tactic.

