
With Father’s Day <http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/fathers-day> coming 
up this Sunday 21 June, we’d like you to share your stories, videos and 
photographs of fatherhood. Whether you’ve recently become a father for the 
first time, or have seen your children grow up and have families of their own, 
we’d like to hear your stories.

Father’s Day is also a time to remember your own fathers, so if you have a 
photograph or story about them, share it with us. We will feature the most 
interesting contributions in a Father’s Day gallery.

Some of you have already shared photographs of history repeating itself with 
your own children becoming fathers themselves:
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/55390806e4b07116b5ee4161/1494243> 
Open Hearts 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/55390806e4b07116b5ee4161/1494243>

This is a photo of my son, Zack and his firstborn son, Harry. Zack is a wine 
director in the City of London and sometimes works very long hours. But he's 
still excited to get home to see little Harry, feed him, change his nappy and 
have him close. It's very special to see the tenderness and open heart of my 
alpha male son and I love how open their body language is in this image of them 
having a little nap together.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By Jane Charilaou <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/guardianUser14679637> 

27 April 2015, 8:30 
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/54f83b91e4b069ec3435e5d8/1418643> 
Father and son 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/54f83b91e4b069ec3435e5d8/1418643>

My son reads my favourite picture book to my grandson, just as I did to him.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By jeanniemarg8 <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/jeanniemarg8> 

9 March 2015, 8:42 

Others have shared their most treasured memories of their own fathers and how 
they became doting grandparents:
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/546f1722e4b0eaa7d40c9c8f/1260271> 
My dad and son enjoying a race! 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/546f1722e4b0eaa7d40c9c8f/1260271>

My dad is no longer with us and my son is now over six foot tall, but this is 
on my screen saver. Their joy in each other was so evident.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By Yogi9955 <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Yogi9955> 

26 November 2014, 13:12 
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/51b9de1ae4b052f389185ba0/393097> 
My dad and my sons 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/51b9de1ae4b052f389185ba0/393097>

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By gertylz <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/gertylz> 

27 June 2013, 5:05 

Whether you have an experience of fatherhood or a photograph and story about 
your own father, you can share your photos, videos and stories by clicking on 
the blue ‘Contribute’ buttons on this article. You can also use the
GuardianWitness smartphone app <https://witness.theguardian.com/apps> or the 
Guardian app 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/global/ng-interactive/2014/may/29/-sp-the-guardian-app-for-ios-and-android>
 and search for ‘GuardianWitness assignments.’

 * GuardianWitness <https://witness.theguardian.com/> is the home of readers’ 
content on the Guardian. Contribute your video, pictures and stories, and 
browse news, reviews and creations submitted by others. Posts will be reviewed 
prior to publication on GuardianWitness, and the best pieces will feature on 
the Guardian site. 