
Let’s run a quick test of your native advertising nous. 

A brand has commissioned some content that looks like deep and engaging 
editorial for a news site.

There are striking images, compelling copy, embedded video and an interactive 
quiz at the end where readers can put their new found knowledge to the test.

Imagine something a little like the Netflix-Wall Street Journal collaboration, 
Cocaineomics <http://www.wsj.com/ad/cocainenomics>, or the Netflix-New York 
Times pieceWomen Inmates 
<http://paidpost.nytimes.com/netflix/women-inmates-separate-but-not-equal.html#.VW2LRM9Viko>
.

Your job is to tell the reader this is pay-to-play content rather than 
journalism.

First decision: what words do you use in the disclosure label?

Second decision: where do you put that label?

When it comes to words, “advert” seems to underplay the depth and quality of 
the content. This is hardly a screaming “Buy Now” display ad.

So “sponsored content”?

“Presented by”?

“Brand Voice” or “Brand Publisher”? 

You’re right to be wary, bearing in mind the Advertising Standards Authority’s 
recent adjudications againstBuzzFeed 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/13/buzzfeed-breaks-uk-ad-rules-over-misleading-advertorial>
 and theTelegraph 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/30/telegraph-criticised-asa-watchdog-michelin-advertorial>
 over insufficient disclosure.

There is no industry standard; instead a taxonomical mess to describe the 
various species of paid-for content depending on the depth of the commercial 
partners’ involvement and control over the final product.

In the spirit of transparency over who is paying for content – and what degree 
of control they are buying – the Guardian has publishedits glossary of terms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/2016/jan/25/content-funding>. 

As for position of the label, the odds are that you would head straight to the 
top of the page, probably just above the headline.

It’s a decision that fits the advice on native advertising from the UK’s 
Committees of Advertising Practice 
<https://www.cap.org.uk/News-reports/Media-Centre/2016/Insight-Putting-the-ad-in-native-advertising.aspx#.VrTNTViLTDd>
 and theUS Federal Trade Commission 
<https://www.ftc.gov/tips-advice/business-center/guidance/native-advertising-guide-businesses>
 (FTC).

But new research from the University of Georgia 
<http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/00913367.2015.1115380#.VrTYgViLTDc>
 underlines how confusing the language around native advertising is to 
consumers – and how the conventional “top of the page” approach to disclosure 
placement may be wrong.

Bartosz Wojdynski and Nathaniel Evans of the university’s Grady College of 
Journalism and Mass Communication ran two tests with a panel of 242 consumers.

Working with sample native ads of 500 to 600 words, the first test looked at 
disclosure language, the second at placement.

Wojdynski and Evans found that readers were seven times more likely to 
identify articles as paid-for content when labelled “advertising” or “sponsored 
content” than when badged “brand voice” or “presented by.”

Eye-tracking software in the second test revealed that only 40% of readers 
looked at a disclosure label at the top of the page, 90% when it was in the 
middle of the page, 60% when it was at the bottom.

Mid-page? The test included disclosure text “in an outlined box after the 
fifth paragraph of the story”.

Is this evidence that the mid-bar of the long-established “F-shaped” online 
reading pattern 
<https://www.nngroup.com/articles/f-shaped-pattern-reading-web-content/> was 
getting deeper attention than a quickly skimmed top line?

Some creatives will no doubt fear that mid-page disclosure bears the risk of 
interrupting the ad’s narrative flow or compromising user experience.

Indeed, in its response to the latest FTC guidance on native ads in December, 
the Interactive Adverting Bureau (IAB) warned that rules needed to be “
technically feasible, creatively relevant, and not stifle innovation 
<http://www.iab.com/news/iab-concerned-about-ftc-guidance-on-native-advertising/>
.”

Dr Wojdynski said some news organisations – for example the LA Times and 
Chicago Tribune – were doing a better job than others in using language that 
made the paid nature of native advertising clear to readers.

As for prominence and positioning, he added: “I’m not sure there is any major 
publisher that deserves an A grade or first-class mark in this area.

“If the goal is to minimise the likelihood that a consumer will miss the 
label, publishers need to do a better job of putting these labels in places 
where readers’ eyes will go. That means not at the top of the page with the 
banner and navigation, and not in the right rail, where consumers are used to 
seeing display ads.”

Dr Evans added that the combination of what a disclosure label said, where it 
was positioned on the page and when it was read had a strong bearing on reader 
sentiment towards the content and the advertiser.

“For example, disclosing the content as advertising after the consumer has 
already digested it may help them identify the content as advertising but might 
not be all that effective in mitigating negative sentiment toward the content 
or advertiser because they may feel deceived,” he said.

“In that regard, finding the appropriate time/location/language to help the 
consumer see and understand that it is advertising may afford them the 
opportunity to process the content with the knowledge that it is an ad. We 
believe that advertisers would benefit from being transparent in this vein, and 
furthermore, such an approach could end up being good for business in the long 
run.”

So is a rethink about guidance to advertisers, agencies and media houses on 
both sides of the Atlantic necessary?

“Bottom line: a one-size regulatory approach in the context of native is not 
going to achieve its potential until we have sufficient information concerning 
how consumers process and understand a variety of native executions,” Dr Evans 
said.

“So, I expect to see in the near future commissioned and independent research 
that examines the effects of different disclosure characteristics across 
different native advertising executions and formats.”

But if best practice still needs to be established, the basic principle is 
clear: tell the truth about content simply and clearly.

As Guy Parker, chief executive of the Advertising Standards Authority (ASA), 
wrote in January 
<https://www.asa.org.uk/News-resources/Media-Centre/2016/Opinion-piece-Hidden-ads-risk-killing-native-not-the-ASA.aspx#.VrSLmViLTDc>
: “Blurring advertising and editorial is prohibited by our rules and by the law.

“And it’s that blurring that risks killing native advertising, not ASA rulings 
that insist on unambiguously clear disclosure.”

Paul Hill is an award-winning journalist, content consultant and former 
content director ofFurther <https://www.further.co.uk/>. You can follow him 
@paulhill_biz <https://twitter.com/paulhill_biz>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Paid for by” – find out morehere 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
