
“Our main goal is to preserve the forest according to the customary traditions 
of our people. If there’s no forest, there’s no Orang Rimba and the other way 
round,” says Bepak Pengusai, head of customs in arombong, or group area, 
belonging to the Orang Rimba, an aboriginal people in Sumatra.

Indonesia’s devastating forest fires 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/nov/11/indonesia-forest-fires-explained-haze-palm-oil-timber-burning>
 pose a serious threat to the Orang Rimba habitat. From July to late last year, 
the fires killed a dozenpeople and caused respiratory tract infections 
<http://www.ifrc.org/en/news-and-media/news-stories/asia-pacific/indonesia/red-cross-continues-support-to-haze--hit-communities-in-indonesia-69651/>
 inhalf a million more. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/26/indonesias-fires-crime-against-humanity-hundreds-of-thousands-suffer>


Every year, landowners start fires to clear ground for farming, but last year 
a seasonaldrought spread the blazes 
<http://fires.globalforestwatch.org/map/#activeLayers=archiveFires&activeBasemap=topo&x=110&y=1&z=5>
 with catastrophic effect.

The emissions from the fires were so toxic they catapulted Indonesia to the 
top of the world rankings of air polluters 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-10-28/how-indonesia-s-fires-made-it-the-biggest-climate-polluter>
. On the islands of Borneo and Sumatra, indigenous communities including the 
Orang Rimba were hard hit. The fires also threatened endangered species, such 
as theorangutan <http://www.worldwildlife.org/species/orangutan>.

The Orang Rimba, which means people of the jungle in the Bahasa language, 
comprise about 2,000 aborigines from Jambi province in central Sumatra. Their 
territory extends across 60,000 hectares (148,000 acres), according to the
conservation group Warsi <http://www.warsi.or.id/>. Traditionally inhabiting 
rainforest as hunter-gatherers, their animist beliefs centre on protecting 
nature as their only source of sustenance.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jcyf%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jcyf%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F384d8e5317a2cd3bc61e28bcccd2d7326beee473%2F0_346_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Indonesia's%20forest%20fires%20threaten%20Sumatra's%20few%20remaining%20Orang%20Rimba&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jcyf%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Indonesia%27s+forest+fires+threaten+Sumatra%27s+few+remaining+Orang+Rimba&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jcyf%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F384d8e5317a2cd3bc61e28bcccd2d7326beee473%2F0_346_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Bepal Pengusai and Celitai are Orang Rimba, the aboriginal people 
traditionally inhabiting Sumatran forest. As head of customs, Bepal Pengusai 
says overexploitation of the rainforest is linked to the fires threatening 
their habitat. 
However, the expansion of corporate plantations and slash-and-burn land 
clearance have gradually pushed out the 11 tribes that make up this community 
from Jambi’s Bukit Duabelas national park, which has shrunk by an estimated 30% 
in the last decade, according to Indonesian anthropologist Butet Manurung, who 
is a specialist in the Orang Rimba and their habitat.

“The government tries to blame indigenous peoples and fails to punish the 
companies that provoke fires,” says Rukka Sombolinggi, deputy secretary general 
at theIndigenous People’s Alliance of the Archipelago <http://www.aman.or.id/>
 (Aman in Bahasa).

In October, President Joko Widodo announced new housing 
<http://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2015/12/17/jambi-set-provide-residences-orang-rimba.html>
 for the Orang Rimba on 2,500 hectares of forest in Jambi following a meeting 
with tribal leaders – the first one organised by an Indonesian head of state.

But Bepak Pengusai says the housing will not solve the existential challenges 
facing his people, and argues that overexploitation of the rainforest is the 
root cause of the fires.


“We don’t refuse assistance from outside if it benefits us, because we know we 
can’t fight modernity ourselves and alone. But the jungle belongs to the Orang 
Rimba,” he says.

Related: Leading brands unsure if palm oil in products comes from rainforest 
land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/04/leading-brands-unsure-if-palm-oil-in-products-comes-from-rainforest-land>

Sombolinggi rejected the president’s offer of housing.

“The majority of Orang Rimba do not wish for a ‘house’ by Indonesian standards 
[...] Their home is the forest. Their landscape must be restored for their very 
survival. Otherwise, history will record that the government ofIndonesia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia> successfully pushed the Orang 
Rimba to extinction.”

According to a recent World Bank 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2015/12/15/indonesia-economic-quarterly-december-2015>
 study, the forest fires will cost Indonesia an estimated $26bn – 1.9% of its 
gross domestic product,or more than twice the post-2004 tsunami reconstruction 
costs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/15/indonesia-forest-fires-cost-twice-as-much-as-tsunami-clean-up-says-world-bank>
.


Neither the sustainable palm oil initiative 
<http://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/ourwork/environmentandenergy/projects_and_initiatives/green-commodities-programme/projects/palm-oil.html>
 nor repeated – and breached – moratoriums on land clearance have sufficiently 
protected Indonesian natural resources.







Aman says the Orang Rimba are already on the brink of extinction mainly 
because of the exploitation of their traditional lands.

Vast areas of rainforest have been converted into monoculture plantations. 
Beginning with concessions granted by former President Suhartoto fuel political 
patronage <https://www.iisd.org/pdf/2002/envsec_conserving_2.pdf> (pdf), 
forests were used as industrial plantations for timber, rubber and palm oil 
once the hardwoods had been depleted.

Indonesia is the world’s largest palm oil exporter and has doubled its 
production to 23m tonnes in less than a decade, according togovernment records 
<http://www.ispo-org.or.id/images/Number-2012--.pdf> (pdf). The sector is an 
important source of government revenue,generating $12.4bn in foreign exchange 
from exports 
<http://blog.cifor.org/17798/fact-file-indonesia-world-leader-in-palm-oil-production?fnl=en>
. However,only 0.5% of the 10m hectares of palm oil plantations belong to the 
state <http://www.ispo-org.or.id/images/Number-2012--.pdf> (pdf), while the 
rest is owned by smallholders and the private sector.

“We noted more than 730 conflicts between palm oil companies and communities 
[since 1998],” says Agustinus Karlo Lumban Raja, head of the environmental 
department atSawit Watch <http://sawitwatch.or.id/>, a national network of 
smallholders and communities that advocates stopping palm oil expansion, 
especially in Sumatra, where most of the concessions are located.

“Most of them are related to unclear and unfair land acquisition, land 
grabbing, criminalisation, unfair partnerships and labour issues,” Lumban Raja 
added.

Related: Indonesia forest fires: how the year's worst environmental disaster 
unfolded - interactive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/ng-interactive/2015/dec/01/indonesia-forest-fires-how-the-years-worst-environmental-disaster-unfolded-interactive>

In 2013, Indonesia’s constitutional court ruled in favour 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Internet%20Downloads/indonesian_constitutional_court_ruling_16_may_2013.pdf>
 (pdf) of indigenous peoples’ rights over the forests where they lived. But 
Sombolinggi says the government continues to award concessions to private 
companies without the consent of indigenous peoples, while evicting tribes from 
protected areas.


“Many indigenous peoples have been evicted from national parks, protected 
forests and other conservation areas. [In] most cases, indigenous peoples face 
charges and end up in prison. They are criminalised just because their 
ancestral land happens to be a conservation area.”

As well as being neglected by the government, the Orang Rimba are preyed upon 
by corporations that take advantage of widespread illiteracy. Organisations 
including Warsi have recorded instances of Orang Rimba being encouraged to sign 
land agreements that they could not read.

In the forest, 51-year-old Celitai explains how he sees the problem: “The 
government doesn’t protect the national park. Some Orang Rimba sell their land 
and we can’t stop that. But land should go back to the community.”

Widodo has promised to pass a long-delayed draft law 
<http://iva.aippnet.org/indonesia-indonesian-president-pledges-to-accelerate-long-delayed-indigenous-rights-law/>
 on indigenous rights. But until then, the Orang Rimba face the prospect of 
struggling alone against corporate interests.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jcyf%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jcyf%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe375d56903fba2ac399c97403031ec466cd18f69%2F0_323_4842_2905%2F4842.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Indonesia's%20forest%20fires%20threaten%20Sumatra's%20few%20remaining%20Orang%20Rimba&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jcyf%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Indonesia%27s+forest+fires+threaten+Sumatra%27s+few+remaining+Orang+Rimba&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jcyf%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe375d56903fba2ac399c97403031ec466cd18f69%2F0_323_4842_2905%2F4842.jpg>
 Workers load palm oil into a truck in Jambi. 
“Palm oil workers burned the house of an Orang Rimba a couple of years ago. So 
500 members ran away and were found hiding in the forest,” recalls 27-year-old 
Pengendum Tampung, leader of the United Makekal Group (KMB, in Bahasa). KMB has 
mapped the jungle and prevented the expansion of plantations in certain areas 
by denouncing illegal practices.

Tampung’s organisation is made up of current and former students from Sokola 
Rimba (Rimba School), an innovative project that educates indigenous people to 
help them cope with modernity.

Set up by Manurung, the initiative has spread literacy to more than 300 Orang 
Rimba, with the aim of preventing them being cheated of their land.

Tampung, who thinks improvements in transport links would be more useful for 
Orang Rimba than housing, says the rights of his people must be protected.

“The decision from the constitutional court must be followed by all parties 
and the government should allow us to maintain our own customary traditions 
inside the jungle, including prohibition of logging and land clearing. 
Otherwise, we are fighting a losing battle.”
