
The vast majority of people want to be consulted before their children’s 
school is converted into an academy, a survey of 1,350 parents suggests.

Some 97% agreed with the statement “Parents and the local community should be 
consulted when big changes are made to how a school is run. (For example, when 
a school becomes an academy or there is a forced change in academy sponsor.)” 
Nearly 80% agreed strongly.

The finding comes from a poll carried out this summer by the body representing 
more than half of England’s parent teacher associations, PTA UK, which has been 
disclosed to Education Guardian.

“Parents do want to be more involved in education but are concerned about what 
opportunities there may be to do so,” says Emma Williams, PTA UK’s executive 
director. This may seem unsurprising: don’t most of us want a say in how our 
children’s school is run? But it seems to pose a challenge to government 
policy, as legislation going through parliament will allow ministers to force 
through academisation under particular sponsors without parental consultation 
when a school is deemed to be underperforming.

Last week, Nick Gibb, schools minister, suggested during the passage of the 
education and adoption bill that consultations could beunnecessary 
<http://www.theyworkforyou.com/pbc/2015-16/Education_and_Adoption_Bill/08-0_2015-07-09a.2.0?d=2015-07-09>
. He may be in the minority.

Academy chain told to change admissions tests

An academy chain has been ordered to make changes to proposed admissions 
arrangements at four of its schools, including the banning of a literacy test 
that could discriminate against children with English as a second language.

The Aspirations Academies Trust – which first featured here in March 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/mar/31/academies-school-governors-skills-qualifications>
 with the revelation that a husband-and-wife team in senior positions were paid 
nearly £400,000 between them in 2013-14 – has received a string of adverse 
judgments from England’s schools adjudicator.

Related: The academies couple who contribute - and take out – a lot 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/mar/31/academies-school-governors-skills-qualifications>

The adjudicator has instructed the change to make nine changes to its 2016 
admissions arrangements forBanbury academy 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/banbury-academy> in Oxfordshire. 
These include directing it not to introduce a literacy test as part of a 
“banding” system that is meant to produce a comprehensive intake, as this could 
disadvantage pupils still learning English. The trust will introduce more 
general “cognitive ability” tests instead.

Rivers academy <https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/rivers-academy>, a 
comprehensive in Hounslow, west London, was told to make six changes, including 
scrapping identical proposals for the literacy tests and abandoning a move to 
guarantee places to pupils at two Aspirations “feeder” primary schools – Oriel 
and Oak Hill. These two primary schools were themselves ordered to make minor 
changes to their admissions criteria.

The trust said it accepted the rulings, apart from the adjudicator’s decision 
on feeder schools at Rivers, which it would be challenging at judicial review. 
The chain has had three Ofsted visits this year, it added, and all had produced 
“outstanding” verdicts for Aspirations schools, including Rivers.

2020: academies for all

Some of us did a double-take on hearing Lucy Powell 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/nov/14/lucy-powell-mancunian-streetfighter-taking-key-role-labour-campaign>
, Labour’s new shadow education secretary, make her first comments on academies 
last week. “In 2020 we are going to face a very different ecology and landscape 
in terms of education. Nearly every school by 2020 will be an academy or a free 
school,” she told Radio 4’s PM programme.

Really? Even the DfE would not make that statistical claim, we mused, with 
five out of six primaries and almost four in 10 secondaries, among state-funded 
schools in England, currently not classed as academies or free schools. Our 
data analysis suggests the proportion of secondaries that are academies – 
currently 64% – grew only 4.5 percentage points last year and the rate of 
increase has fallen every year since 2011. The proportion of primary academies 
also rose by only four percentage points in 2014-15, to 16%, and at a slower 
rate than the previous year.

So is academy status inevitable for all, or almost all, in the next five 
years? Powell’s office tells us she meant only to talk about secondary 
academies, but even in the secondary sector, there is a long way to go.

When does parental consultation count?


Another radio appearance, this time by Dame Rachel de Souza, chief executive 
of the Norwich-based Inspiration Trust academy chain, must have caused a few 
raised eyebrows among parents in Norfolk. Speaking on the Today programme, De 
Souza defended proposals to give parents the right to trigger a process that 
could lead to a headteacher’s sacking.

Related: Academy trust head ‘sick’ at school’s good Ofsted rating 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jul/28/academy-trust-sick-hewett-school-norwich-ofsted-inspiration-trust>

A large majority of parents responding to a consultation objected to DfE plans 
to force theHewett comprehensive 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jun/10/labour-mp-norwich-south-academy-maiden-speech>
 in Norwich into the arms of the Inspiration Trust. As readers ofthis column 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jul/28/academy-trust-sick-hewett-school-norwich-ofsted-inspiration-trust>
 will know, the takeover happened anyway. Reacting to that, De Souza said only 
a “small number” of Hewett parents – 105 out of about 1,200 – had taken part in 
the consultation. So when do parental views become numerous enough to be 
influential, we wonder?

An Inspiration spokesman did not see any paradox. “The proposals … are to give 
parents a mechanism for flagging concerns that can then be expertly assessed. 
[This] is absolutely in line with the Hewett consultation process.”

War of words over Gatwick free school

A Conservative MP and a Labour council leader have been feuding in the local 
press about the handling of a free school’s application to turn its temporary 
site on an industrial estate into its permanent home.

Tory MP Henry Smith <http://www.henrysmith.info> said Crawley council’s 
rejection of Gatwick free school’s application 
<http://www.crawleyobserver.co.uk/news/local/second-plan-for-gatwick-school-1-6930374>
 last month “seemed based on Labour councillors’ ideological objections”. The 
school, which opened a year ago, is operating from the site without long-term 
planning approval.

In a long letter to the Crawley Observer, headlined “Disgraceful suggestion”, 
the council leader, Peter Lamb, hit back. “Sussex police and West Sussex county 
council (hardly a bastion of socialism) had objected to the planning 
applications on various grounds including pedestrian (ie pupil) safety,” he 
writes. “When I met the school’s representatives … two years ago, I stressed 
that the site was probably the worst possible location in the whole of Crawley 
for a free school. Rather than throwing political mud, Mr Smith’s time would be 
better spent working with us to find a way to ensure the school can remain 
open, while addressing the very real problems involved in opening a school on 
an industrial site.”

The school did not respond to requests for comment.
