
New controls on trade unions that could cut Labour’s funding by £8m a year may 
be delayed, as peers are expected to recommend more progress on changes to 
party funding before some changes go ahead.

A House of Lords committee is set to publish a report on Wednesday morning 
that is likely to seek a brake on elements of the trade union bill,which would 
be particularly damaging to Labour’s finances 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/04/labour-predicts-trade-union-bill-cut-funding-8m>
.

Westminster sources told the Guardian the peers would suggest the amendments 
should not be imposed on existing trade union members until progress on 
cross-party funding changes had been made.

Under the current proposals, trade unionists would have to agree in writing 
every five years to pay 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jul/15/trade-unions-conservative-offensive-decades-strikes-labour>
 into the political fund, rather than the current system of automatically 
contributing unless they opt out. The bill gives the unions only three months 
to get a member’s signature assenting to the payment of the levy.


The committee is expected to recommend that the 4 million trade unionists who 
pay into the political fund are exempted for now, handing a temporary reprieve 
toLabour <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour>.


Tim Farron, the Liberal Democrat leader, will write to the leaders of the 
other political parties, including the Conservatives, Labour and the Scottish 
National party, to ask them to “commit to taking part in renewed cross-party 
talks as part of our collective response to the select committee’s report”.

“I propose that we should aim to have the first discussion as soon as possible 
and that clause 10 of the trade union bill should be put on hold pending those 
talks taking place,” he said.

As it stands, Labour has estimated that the legislation could cost it at least 
£35m 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/10/labour-expecting-6m-loss-in-funding-through-trade-union-bill>
 in income across a five-year parliament, and potentially up to £8m a year.

Members of the committee have also been considering whether to recommend a 
so-called sunrise clause to delay implementing the trade union funding changes 
until cross-party talks on funding reform have concluded or reached a 
meaningful point.

That option is supported by much of the committee, but Conservative members 
were taking advice on Tuesday afternoon about whether it is an appropriate 
procedural option.

The committee is expected to present a majority report, so the changes will 
have to be approved by every member of the group, which is chaired by the 
crossbencher Lord Burns.

The peers are scrutinising the changes because of a rebellion against the 
party funding changes 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/20/house-of-lords-agrees-to-further-scrutiny-of-proposed-trade-union-bill>
 in the bill by Labour, Lib Dem and crossbench peers.

Labour proposed a motion to set up a committee on trade unions and party 
funding, which attracted 327 peers in favour and 234 against.

It will be up to the Lords, where the Tories have no majority, to consider how 
to take the committee’s recommendations forward.

The loss to Labour in annual union affiliation fees and grants would come at a 
particularly damaging time as there are alsoplanned cuts to state funding of 
opposition parties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/25/spending-review-2015-small-print-tax-credit-cuts-student-loans>
, known as Short money, introduced by George Osborne in November.


Labour argued that the trade union bill was not being conducted in the spirit 
of a report by the committee on standards in public life, which urged 
cross-party talks to get a consensus on overhauling party funding.


Paul Bew, the chair of that committee, said it was wrong for the trade union 
bill to “extract one element” of party funding to change without examining it 
in the round.
