
There is a problem of sexual violence in the humanitarian community. It is 
something that is whispered about at parties, in meetings and in our 
accommodation. Everyone has a story, knows someone who has a story, or has 
heard of someone who has a story. It extends across many conflict zones and 
many organisations.

Related: Aid worker: I was drugged and raped by another humanitarian in South 
Sudan 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jul/29/aid-worker-rape-humanitarian-south-sudan-sexual-violence>

My first goal when I decided to come forward with my story 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jul/29/aid-worker-rape-humanitarian-south-sudan-sexual-violence>
 was to encourage other people who have experienced sexual violence to speak 
out. I believe that this goal has been accomplished. To all the people who 
shared their stories publicly with the Guardian, you are courageous. To all the 
people who shared privately with me, thank you for your trust and I hope 
speaking helps you with your own healing processes.

My second goal is to initiate questions within the humanitarian community to 
develop an understanding of the extent of the problem, and to bring about an 
end to it.
 Megan Nobert 
How many humanitarians have experienced incidents of sexual violence? How many 
cases are sexual harassment and how many involve sexual abuse? What percentage 
are men and what percentage women? Are local women more likely to be targets 
than international women? Does the LGBT community face particular harassment? 
Are incidents more prevalent in certain conflict zones? Are humanitarians 
comfortable reporting incidents? And what is the reaction to reporting?


The depth of the issue can only be determined once we have the answers to 
these questions and more. That is why I have teamed up with theInternational 
Women’s Rights Project <http://iwrp.org/>, and several generous activists and 
volunteers to develop a survey that will help us to track the frequency, type 
and location of incidents. It will allow us to create advocacy materials, 
inform further research and help to track whether organisations are improving 
their own practices. Most importantly it will give support to those who have 
come forward to speak about their experiences.


To do our work properly we must ensure we are taking care of ourselves and 
being taken care of by our organisations

I ask my fellow humanitarians to fill out the survey 
<http://reporttheabuse.org/the-survey/> – whether you are willing to speak on 
the record or anonymously, your story is important.


Advocating for change within the humanitarian community will take time. It may 
very well be a slow and arduous process but it is an important goal. Ensuring 
that our policies and practices do not allow for sexual violence to occur and 
for impunity to exist when crimes do occur is incredibly important.

Our internal policies should reflect our external policies. If we are trying 
to prevent or reduce incidents of sexual violence against beneficiaries, why 
are we not doing the same for humanitarians?

Related: Sexual assaults against aid workers: how serious is the situation? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/aug/06/sexual-assaults-against-aid-workers-how-serious-is-the-situation>

In order to do our work properly we must ensure that we are taking care of 
ourselves and being taken care of by our organisations. This includes ensuring 
that our rights are protected and that we are not exposed to unnecessary risks. 
It includes the acknowledgement that there are systemic changes that need to be 
made, that misogyny and homophobia have not been eliminated, and that there are 
gaps in the legal accountability of the perpetrators of sexual violence and 
harassment.

We all deserve a safe environment in which to do our work. There are so many 
issues to be worked on as humanitarians, with new conflicts and protracted 
conflicts emerging. We cannot allow sexual harassment and abuse in our 
workspaces to make it even more difficult to deliver aid and humanitarian 
services throughout the world.

 If you would like to contribute to the survey find out more information on the
reporttheabuse <http://reporttheabuse.org/about-2/> website or email 
iwrp.humanitarians@gmail.com <mailto:iwrp.humanitarians@gmail.com>.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
