
Nicola Sturgeon has said a second independence referendum will be “off the 
table” until there is a clear majority in favour of a fresh vote, as she faced 
a barrage of attacks from her rivals.

The Scottish National party leader was accused of misleading voters by 
breaking her pledges to respect the result of the 2014 vote, coming under 
sustained pressure from Labour, the Tories and Liberal Democrats over her 
planned drive this summer to build support for a new referendum.

Related: Sturgeon accused of breaking independence promise at Scottish leaders 
debate - Politics live 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/may/01/scottish-election-leaders-debate-bbc-scotland-politics-live>

During a frequently ill-tempered debate televised by the BBC, the last before 
Thursday’s Holyrood election, the leaders clashed over the future of defence 
ship-building jobs on the Clyde, whose safety had been guaranteed during the 
referendum, and over health spending.

But the clash over independence drew the loudest cheers from the audience. 
Sturgeon was accused by Kezia Dugdale, the Scottish Labour leader, of “trying 
to pull the wool over the eyes of the people of Scotland” by resurrecting the 
chances of a further referendum in the SNP’s manifesto for Thursday’s Scottish 
parliament election.

With opinion polls showing that support for independence remains just under 
50%, despite the surge in overall support for the SNP and the pro-independence 
Scottish Greens to a total of around 60%, the SNP’s manifesto takes a cautious 
stance on the prospects of a second vote.

Unlike its clear pledge to stage one in the 2011 Holyrood manifesto, it does 
not commit the SNP to stage a referendum in this parliament: instead, it says 
one could be held if there is a material change in Scotland’s circumstances, 
such as vote to leave the EU against the wishes of Scottish voters, when or a 
clear popular demand for a further vote.

Sturgeon insisted, however, that the SNP was respecting voters’ wishes. “If 
there’s no change in opinion, then it will be off the table,” the first 
minister said.

But, she added, “if there’s clear and sustained evidence that the majority of 
people inScotland <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> do want a 
referendum, then no politician has the right to stand in the way of the way of 
the democratic wishes of the Scottish people”.

Sturgeon had repeatedly told voters before the 2014 referendum it would be a 
once in a lifetime, once in a generation, event. But now, Dugdale said: “It’s 
mebbes if, mebbes aye and mebbes no; trust me and I will ask the pollsters.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tnb8%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tnb8%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F949a6319e17d5fb3055a585a58b921ebdd2dcf97%2F0_21_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Second%20Scottish%20independence%20vote%20not%20yet%20on%20table%2C%20says%20Nicola%20Sturgeon&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tnb8%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Second+Scottish+independence+vote+not+yet+on+table%2C+says+Nicola+Sturgeon&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tnb8%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F949a6319e17d5fb3055a585a58b921ebdd2dcf97%2F0_21_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Scottish leaders, from left to right: Scottish Green party co-convener Patrick 
Harvie, Scottish Labour party leader Kezia Dugdale, BBC presenter Sarah Smith, 
leader of the Scottish National party Nicola Sturgeon, Scottish Conservative 
leader Ruth Davidson and Scottish Liberal Democrat leader Willie Rennie. 
Photograph: Andrew Milligan/PA 
Ruth Davidson, the Scottish Tory leader, whose party are nearly neck and neck 
with Labour in election opinion polls, said Sturgeon had signed a pledge in the 
Edinburgh agreement in December 2012 to set up the referendum which said she 
would respect its result.

“Her responsibilities are to the whole of the country, not just the SNP,” 
Davidson said. “Her responsibilities mean that she shouldn’t be keeping this 
wound open.”

Willie Rennie, the Scottish Liberal Democrat leader, said the priority of 
politicians now was to use the country’s new tax and welfare powers to focus 
solely on domestic policies. “We will not achieve that by having a groundhog 
day on independence if your disrespect the result [of the 2014 referendum],” he 
said.

Clearly exasperated with being defended only by Patrick Harvie, the Scottish 
Green party leader, Sturgeon told her opponents: “What I struggle with are 
politicians who clearly have a difficulty saying if a majority of people in 
Scotland want something, then they will stand in the way of that.”

The debate at Hopetoun House, a stately home outside Edinburgh, came after the 
latest poll by Panelbase for the Sunday Times and Real Radio confirmed the 
SNP’s dominance with only five days to the election. It gave the SNP 49% of the 
constituency vote, 26 points ahead of Labour, and 44% on the regional list 
vote, 22 points ahead of Labour.

Prof John Curtice, the elections expert at the University of Strathclyde, has 
said Labour has a marginal lead of only two points over the Scottish 
Conservatives on the regional list vote, in an average of six polls carried out 
during the main campaign before.

While these polls show Labour is on average three points ahead at 20 to 17 in 
the first-past-the-post constituency vote, Labour is on course to lose all or 
the vast majority of its 15 constituency seats, leaving it heavily dependent on 
winning as many of Holyrood’s 53 list seats as possible.

There were angry clashes over the fate of thousands of defence jobs at BAE’s 
shipyards on the Clyde, where eight Royal Navy frigates are due to be built, 
after Ruth Davidson insisted the Ministry of Defence had guaranteed the 
contracts would go ahead.

To cheers from the audience, Sturgeon said that BAE wanted the construction 
timetable to slip, risking jobs. Dugdale accused Davidson of “telling porkies” 
because the destroyers were facing an 18-month delay. She said the Tories had 
to “make sure that [they] honour the promise that they made during the 
referendum”.

Dugdale was later accused by Sturgeon of being “simply dishonest” about her 
party’s manifesto pledge on NHS spending, after the Labour leader claimed that 
her party’s spending promises were the same as the SNP’s pledge to increase 
health funding by £500m above inflation by 2021.

Sturgeon insisted that Labour’s manifesto only increased NHS spending by at 
least inflation, a rate which would be lower than Scotland’s forecast share of 
UK health spending in future. “I think it’s shocking for a Labour party to say 
that when it’s not true,” she said.

Dugdale said Sturgeon was ignoring the fact that the SNP’s taxation plans 
would see £3bn cut from public spending. That would not happen under Labour’s 
plans to increase income tax revenues by up by £1.2bn by 2021 – a figure four 
times greater than the SNP’s plans.
