
The Times <http://www.theguardian.com/media/thetimes> has boldly gone where 
few newspapers - and very, very few politicians - have ever dared to go before 
by declaring itself in favour of legalising drugs in Britain.

In a leading article, “Breaking Good 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/comment/breaking-good-svkvggj2k>”, the paper 
has supported a call on the government by the Royal Society for Public Health 
(RSPH) to decriminalise both the possession and use of all illegal drugs.


Accepting that it “is radical advice”, the Times thought it “sound” and urged 
ministers to “give it serious consideration”.

Newspapers have usually shied away from adopting such a stance. In 1997, the 
Independent on Sunday, then edited by Rosie Boycott,came out in favour of 
decriminalising cannabis 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/why-we-believe-it-is-time-to-decriminalise-cannabis-1241574.html>
. The following year, thousands gathered in London’s Hyde Park in support of 
her campaign to change the law.

But 10 years later, long after Boycott had departed, the paper changed its 
mind. 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/health-and-families/health-news/were-we-out-of-our-minds-no-but-then-came-skunk-5332410.html>
 It argued that new strains of cannabis, notably skunk, were dangerous, causing 
disorders such as psychosis and schizophrenia.

Although the Observer and the Guardian have raised questions about potential 
changes of laws within countries that produce drugs neither have advocated 
decriminalisation in Britain.

The Observer noted in 2011 that the war on drugs had failed and argued that 
“when policies fail it is incumbent on our leaders to look for new ones.” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/nov/13/drugs-cameron> 

The Times has adopted the logic of that position. Even so, its initiative, 
especially going beyond cannabis to embrace all illegal drugs, is something of 
a first.

Its front page news story 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/news/make-all-drug-use-legal-say-experts-m89gp9p37>
 reported on the “landmark intervention” by the RSPH and the Faculty of Public 
Health as “the first leading medical organisations to come out in favour of 
radical drugs reform.”

Both bodies believe that addiction to all drugs – ranging from heroin and 
cocaine to cannabis and so-called legal highs – should be regarded as a health 
problem rather than a crime.

The Times’s editorial, while agreeing that decriminalisation would put Britain 
in the company of a small group of countries that have made such a policy 
switch, supported that change of direction.

It is not “to be taken lightly”, it said, “yet the logic behind it and 
evidence from elsewhere are persuasive”. It added:

“The government should be encouraged to think of decriminalisation not as an 
end in itself but as a first step towards legalising and regulating drugs as it 
already regulates alcohol and tobacco.”

It pointed to the situation in Portugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/portugal>, where drug decriminalisation has 
existed for 15 years. Possession there “does not earn the user a criminal 
record” and “the country’s drug-related death rate was three per million 
citizens compared with 10 per million in the Netherlands and 44.6 in Britain.”

The Times said: “Recreational drug use [in Portugal] has not soared, as 
critics of decriminalisation had feared. HIV infection rates have fallen and 
the use of so-called legal highs is, according to a study last year, lower than 
in any other European country.”

It contended: “It may be politic not to rush discussion of full legalisation 
but that should still be the ultimate goal. In the long term it is not tenable 
to decriminalise possession of a substance while preserving the profit motive 
of the criminal gangs that supply it.”

And the paper concluded, again like the Observer, that international drug wars 
have “proved unwinnable”. Instead, it urged the government “to move gradually 
towards legalised supply chains such as those allowed for cannabis in Uruguay 
and a minority of US states.”
