
This week our experts 
<http://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/mar/15/small-business-owners-eu-referendum-expert-panel>
 discuss the EU’s influence on UK holiday allowances and maternity and 
paternity rights, plus whether a vote for Brexit could potentially change them.

Could a vote for Brexit potentially change required holiday allowances and 
maternity and paternity rules?

If you have a question about the impact of the EU referendum on small 
businesses, you cansubmit it here. 
<http://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/mar/15/question-brexit-ask-expert-panel-eu-referendum>

Rachel Suff
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jfzv%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jfzv%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe67f87e0ee5506d7d95cc0bb584b782e5c0592cf%2F1097_0_2590_3238%2F2590.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20would%20Brexit%20mean%20for%20annual%20and%20parental%20leave%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jfzv%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What+would+Brexit+mean+for+annual+and+parental+leave%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jfzv%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe67f87e0ee5506d7d95cc0bb584b782e5c0592cf%2F1097_0_2590_3238%2F2590.jpg>
 Photograph: PR handout 
Policy adviser for employment relations and diversity at CIPD (Chartered 
Institute of Personnel and Development). Her role includes building a strategic 
network of EU officials and other stakeholders to increase the CIPD’s profile 
on key public policy objectives and also working closely with CIPD members, 
particularly those with global and European responsibilities, to ensure that 
their views inform CIPD policy thinking on EU issues such as migration, youth 
employment and employment relations.

The future of EU-derived employment law in the event of Brexit will depend on 
the political and economic relationship that the UK negotiates with the EU; 
trade agreements such as theEuropean Free Trade Association  
<http://www.efta.int/>(Efta) or joining the European Economic Area 
<http://www.efta.int/eea/eea-agreement> (EEA) could require the UK to still 
accept the majority of EU regulations.

Rights relating to annual holiday entitlement and aspects of maternity and 
paternity provision are two areas where Brussels has directly influenced the UK 
legal framework. TheWorking Time Directive 
<http://ec.europa.eu/social/main.jsp?catId=706&langId=en&intPageId=205> gave UK 
workers the statutory right to paid annual holiday for the first time. It 
specified at least 20 days of paid annual holiday, but in the UK this has risen 
to28 days <https://www.gov.uk/holiday-entitlement-rights/entitlement> including 
bank holidays for full-time workers. The contentious aspect of that directive – 
limiting a worker’s working week to48 hours 
<https://www.gov.uk/maximum-weekly-working-hours/calculating-your-working-hours>
 – is subject to anopt-out by 
<https://www.gov.uk/maximum-weekly-working-hours/weekly-maximum-working-hours-and-opting-out>
 workers in the UK.


Given that the UK has “gold-plated” the holiday allowance afforded to workers, 
it’s hard to imagine why any future negotiations would target this particular 
right. Similarly formaternity leave 
<https://www.gov.uk/maternity-pay-leave/leave>, the domestic rights already 
exceed the minimum required underEU law 
<http://ec.europa.eu/justice/gender-equality/rights/work-life-balance/index_en.htm>
. For years, the direction of travel in the UK has been to extend 
family-friendly laws and it’s hard to see that repealing legislation in this 
area will be a priority.


Sebastian Dullien
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jfzv%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jfzv%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbec6ceda03dd627a798451c86dc62c7b43ea2004%2F0_135_1449_1811%2F1449.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20would%20Brexit%20mean%20for%20annual%20and%20parental%20leave%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jfzv%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What+would+Brexit+mean+for+annual+and+parental+leave%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jfzv%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbec6ceda03dd627a798451c86dc62c7b43ea2004%2F0_135_1449_1811%2F1449.jpg>
 Photograph: Jakob Lessin 
Senior policy fellow at the European Council on Foreign Relations and 
professor of international economics at HTW Berlin, University of Applied 
Sciences. His research focuses on European integration, international 
macroeconomics and financial market regulation.

A Brexit vote would not directly change holiday allowances and maternity and 
paternity rules for UK businesses. However, it would open the possibility for 
the government to make these provisions less generous. In1991 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/blair-dishonest-over-social-chapter-opt-in-1316670.html>
, before theMaastricht treaty 
<http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=uriserv:xy0026> was signed 
in 1992, Britain asked for an opt-out from the Social Chapter.

As a consequence, for most of the 1990s, Britain did not have to implement 
social protection rules decided upon by the EU institutions. In1997 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/332524/review-of-the-balance-of-competences-between-the-united-kingdom-and-the-european-union-social-and-employment-policy.pdf.>
 (pdf), however, the government of Tony Blair cancelled the UK’s opt-out and the
Social Chapter 
<http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_MEMO-97-13_en.htm?locale=en> was moved 
back into the main text of the European treaties, making EU social standards 
also binding for Britain.

Nowadays, EU provisions for minimum holiday allowances and maternity and 
paternity rules have been adapted into British law. If Westminster wanted to 
cut national provisions below the standards set by the EU, it would not be 
allowed to do so as Britain would thereby violate its EU commitments.

Once Britain leaves the EU, these minimum standards are not binding any more 
and the British government could cut holiday allowance and maternity and 
paternity leave below the minimum European standards again. Whether it would do 
so, however, would remain a domestic political question.

Philip Landau
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jfzv%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jfzv%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffdd2dd93e7a0264c182bb3958b4a33d9a5d2d843%2F0_36_903_1129%2F903.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20would%20Brexit%20mean%20for%20annual%20and%20parental%20leave%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jfzv%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What+would+Brexit+mean+for+annual+and+parental+leave%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jfzv%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffdd2dd93e7a0264c182bb3958b4a33d9a5d2d843%2F0_36_903_1129%2F903.jpg>
 Photograph: KarlAttard2014 
Founder member of Landau Law, specialist London-based employment law solicitor 
firm. He writes regularly for the Guardian on topical employment law matters, 
including how European judgments impact on the UK. He advises daily on 
employment law matters, most of which derive from Europe.

There is unlikely to be a change to holiday allowances or maternity and 
paternity rules following a vote to leave. Maternity provisions in the UK 
generally either meet, or are more generous than, the minimum requirements of 
the EU. In addition, the UK has enhanced such rights, such as the right to
shared parental leave 
<https://www.gov.uk/shared-parental-leave-and-pay/overview> and to request 
flexible working <http://www.acas.org.uk/index.aspx?articleid=1616>. It is 
unlikely that such rules would be rolled back.

 The same goes for holiday allowances, which were adopted following the EU’s 
Working Time Directive 
<http://ec.europa.eu/social/main.jsp?catId=706&langId=en&intPageId=205> and 
provide for a minimum 5.6 weeks paid holiday a year (which can include bank 
holidays). Although the rules emanated from the EU, it would be politically 
unthinkable for the government to reduce these allowances.

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
