
It was the summer of 1957 and I was six, happy to be playing my best friend’s 
favourite game with her; hiding behind the stone wall which surrounded her 
family’s estate in Vevey, Switzerland.

We crouched there, Victoria and I, giggling, and when the first tourists of 
the day arrived to gawk at the mansion of Victoria’s father, the greatCharlie 
Chaplin <https://www.theguardian.com/film/charliechaplin>, we leapt out of our 
hiding place and flung mud and stones at them. The terrified tourists scuttled 
off while we roared with laughter.

When we went up to the house again looking like little urchins, covered from 
head to foot in mud, Kay-Kay, the nanny, said, “Ooch, not again,” and put us 
straight into the ornate bathtub. When we emerged shiny and clean, she let us 
play with Victoria’s brand new doll, only lately dispatched from America and 
clad in a real mink coat and diamonds.

That evening, my parents arrived to take me home from my weekend with the 
Chaplins and had drinks with them. “You know, when I’m in London, I always stay 
at the Savoy because they serve free peanuts with the drinks,” I heard Charlie 
explain to my father.

Then Michael, Charlie’s eldest son by his wife Oona, burst into the room to 
discuss the plans for his upcoming trip to America. Sternly, Charlie insisted 
that he take an economy flight which included a stop in Iceland, rather than 
travelling first class.

Victoria and I had first met at Great Fosters Hotel 
<http://www.greatfosters.co.uk/default.aspx> in Egham, Surrey, where Charlie 
and the family were staying while he madeA King in New York 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0050598/> that same spring. She introduced me to 
her father, a silver-haired old man ensconced in a red velvet wing chair, 
dressed in a green smoking jacket. He lifted me on to his lap, smoothed out the 
skirt of my blue party dress and said: “What a pretty dress. What do you want 
to be when you grow up?”

“An actress,” I lisped.

“Well, my child, become an actress, but never marry an actor,” he replied.

In the hotel’s Elizabethan dining room, the band struck up the theme to 
Limelight <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0044837/>, the Charlie Chaplin film 
about an elderly clown who fell in love with a much younger dancer. Chaplin led 
his wife Oona, 36 years his junior, on to the dance floor. As they danced 
together, tears of emotion poured down his cheeks.
