
St Valentine’s Day is upon us again, with the usual vanilla menu 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/feb/12/valentines-day-food-aphrodisiacs-cooking>
 ranging from the vaguely phallic (asparagus, figs, god-help-us sausages) to the
 alleged aphrodisiacal 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2011/feb/11/aphrodisiacs-food-of-love>
 (oysters, chillies) via the slightly depressing idea that you can buy love, or 
at least the pretence of it, with fillet steak and rosy red berries from the 
other side of the world.

Call me hopelessly unromantic, but I believe you don’t win someone’s heart 
with pricey ingredients, or even generous helpings of potassium, but with the 
food they love, whether that happens to be dal 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/jun/02/how-to-cook-perfect-dal>, 
dumplings 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/jul/10/how-to-make-the-perfect-gnocchi>
, or even spotted dick 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/nov/29/steamed-recipes-chinese-egg-custard-buns-spotted-dick-recipe-ruby-tandoh>
 and custard. But if you’re not entirely sure what they like at this stage, 
chocolate, whatever its rumoured effect on serotonin production, is a fairly 
safe bet.

Not that that narrows the options much: chocolate is not only universally 
popular, but incredibly versatile. But, assuming that fancy tarts 
<http://www.nigella.com/recipes/view/salted-chocolate-tart> and voluptuous 
souffles 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2006/aug/19/foodanddrink.shopping4> 
are not an option (who wants to risk serving up a defiantly unsexy brown puddle 
on this of all days?), and you’re not brave enough to chance a fondant 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2011/feb/10/how-cook-perfect-chocolate-fondants>
, I’d recommend minimising stress, and maximising the amount of time you can 
spend ironing your pants/putting the kids to bed, with a chocolate pot.

Smoother and richer than a mousse 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2010/jul/22/how-to-make-chocolate-mousse>
, and even easier to make in advance, it’s an almost failsafe way to win their 
heart. (And if it’s not their heart you’re after, it pairs excellently with a 
banana lewdly spurting whipped cream 
<http://vintagerecipecards.com/2012/12/25/christmas-candle-salad/>. Just 
saying.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ghvj%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ghvj%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef91d551c02466b5a66085cbdc650a537448a78e%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20chocolate%20pots&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ghvj%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+chocolate+pots&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ghvj%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef91d551c02466b5a66085cbdc650a537448a78e%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
 Hotel Chocolat’s chocolate pot. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
The chocolate

As with all chocolate dishes with any pretensions to sophistication, the 
chocolate pot is almost always made with dark, rather than milk chocolate, 
though rarely with one as punchy as the 100% cocoa variety demanded by Hotel 
Chocolat 
<http://www.hotelchocolat.com/uk/recipes/spiced-dark-chocolate-pots-recipe> 
which, in the absence of any added sugar, proves inedible for my tasters, who 
throw down their spoons in appropriately bitter disappointment. (Lucky I’m not 
trying to woo any of them.)

Margot Henderson, writing in You’re All Invited, Simon Hopkinson in Roast 
Chicken and Other Stories, and chef Tom Kerridge 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/food/article-2993777/Tom-s-time-favourites-Easy-chocolate-pots.html>
 all call simply for dark chocolate (“at least 70% cocoa”) while Sylvain Jamois’
 <http://www.greenandblacks.co.uk/recipes/5-Minute-Chocolate-Pot?r=45251>s 
recipe for Green & Black’s uses its 70% cooking chocolate, and Chantal Coady of 
Rococo goes for a mix of its 61 and 70% cocoa solid bars in her book of the 
same name.

Because I’d like a certain cocoa heft to mine, I’m going to use an 85% cocoa 
version, which I try in Hopkinson’s recipe to some success, and balance it with 
sugar, though if you would prefer it milder, feel free to use a lower cocoa 
content and adjust the sweetness accordingly.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ghvj%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ghvj%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F98028c8f2b495ea1979ca7cf0909811be8a4b65b%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20chocolate%20pots&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ghvj%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+chocolate+pots&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ghvj%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F98028c8f2b495ea1979ca7cf0909811be8a4b65b%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
 Sylvain Jamois’s chocolate pot. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
The sugar

Henderson and Hopkinson use icing sugar, Kerridge uses dark muscovado, and 
Coady, Jamois and Hotel Chocolat eschew it altogether, which makes sense if you 
are using a fairly sweet chocolate to start with. Icing sugar melts easily, but 
the panel is very taken with the dark caramel overtones of Kerridge’s choice, 
which echoes the bittersweet flavour of the chocolate itself.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ghvj%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ghvj%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8878d5cc1f1e2a4d7b505e9cc27ae057964d34b%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20chocolate%20pots&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ghvj%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+chocolate+pots&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ghvj%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8878d5cc1f1e2a4d7b505e9cc27ae057964d34b%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
 Tom Kerridge’s chocolate pot. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Dairy

I am gratified, though somewhat surprised to discover that there is no strict 
need to use any dairy at all in a chocolate pot; Coady’s spring water ganache 
is, as the name suggests, made with boiling water, though she suggests this can 
be substituted with a “light fragrant tea” or even Champagne “though I think 
it’s a bit of a waste”. Vegans: feel free to push the boat out.

That said, although the water allows the bright acidity of the chocolate to 
shine through, this is a special-occasion dish, and deserves the richness of 
dairy – though perhaps not quite as much richness as Kerridge’s 
all-double-cream version, which feels a bit heavy and dense in comparison with 
those recipes that use milk as well, or even water and whipping cream, as 
Jamois recommends.

A ratio of about two-parts cream (whipping, on the grounds that the 13% fat 
saved from double will no doubt be the thing that stops you both falling asleep 
on the sofa afterwards) to one-part milk is fairly standard. Hotel Chocolat 
whips the cream before use, but this makes it hard to combine with the other 
ingredients, and in any case, there seems little point when we are aiming for a 
smooth, rather than airy texture.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ghvj%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ghvj%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6aa46928d799dc2eac9183aa47ac9b920c0501f7%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20chocolate%20pots&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ghvj%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+chocolate+pots&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ghvj%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6aa46928d799dc2eac9183aa47ac9b920c0501f7%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
 Margot Henderson’s chocolate pot. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Eggs

Coady’s vegan version is predictably egg-free, as is Jamois’s recipe, while 
Henderson, Hopkinson and Kerridge use the yolks alone. Hotel Chocolat whips the 
egg white to soft peaks before adding it to the yolk and chocolate mixture, 
which along with the aforementioned whipped cream, gives their pots a lovely 
fluffy texture quite distinct from the rest.

Silky richness is the name of the game here, though, and the winner on that 
count is Henderson, who beats her yolks and sugar together until voluminous 
before stirring in the melted chocolate and dairy. This traps just enough air 
to save the pots from the claggy denseness that afflicts some of the others, 
but not quite enough to turn them into a mousse; they are still smooth and 
rich, rather than bubbly and light.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ghvj%2Fsfb%23img-6&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ghvj%2Fsfb%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c876579cb9d4973f4a154f0147c247f1f1a7aa4%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20chocolate%20pots&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ghvj%2Fstw%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+chocolate+pots&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ghvj%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c876579cb9d4973f4a154f0147c247f1f1a7aa4%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
 Simon Hopkinson’s chocolate pot. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Flavouring

The world is your saucy oyster if you fancy getting fancy with some 
complementary spicing: Jamois and Hopkinson infuse their milk with vanilla, and 
Hotel Chocolat uses cardamom and orange, but cinnamon and nutmeg, or ginger, or 
even a pinch of salt on top, would all float my boat … as would plain and 
simple chocolate.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ghvj%2Fsfb%23img-7&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ghvj%2Fsfb%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65ad5a052da8273559f0bb3d43141bd306cb49b0%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20chocolate%20pots&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ghvj%2Fstw%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+chocolate+pots&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ghvj%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65ad5a052da8273559f0bb3d43141bd306cb49b0%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
 Chantal Coady’s chocolate pot. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Method

Many of the recipes call for the chocolate to be melted in a bain marie, but 
this creates unnecessary washing up – it’s much easier to melt it in the hot 
cream before you add it to the yolks and sugar. (You’ll thank me when you’re in 
your glad rags, trust me.)

Hopkinson is the only one to bake his chocolate pots, in a low oven, its 
gentle heat tempered by a protective bain marie. This gives them a delicious 
crust on top, but otherwise, I don’t think the (admittedly minimal) effort 
required is worth it when they can be set much more easily in the fridge. Take 
the time to have a shower instead. Valentine’s Day comes but once a year, after 
all.


The perfect chocolate pot
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ghvj%2Fsfb%23img-8&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ghvj%2Fsfb%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5835b5cb268e06dee21abee3b982917f6bb543b5%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20chocolate%20pots&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ghvj%2Fstw%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+chocolate+pots&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ghvj%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5835b5cb268e06dee21abee3b982917f6bb543b5%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
 Felicity Cloake’s perfect chocolate pot. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the 
Guardian 
(serves 4; for a romantic two, use 2 egg yolks and halve the rest of the 
ingredients)

250ml whipping cream
100ml whole milk
150g dark chocolate, about 85% cocoa
40g dark muscovado sugar
3 egg yolks

Slowly bring the cream and milk to a simmer in a smallish pan. Meanwhile 
coarsely chop the chocolate or, more satisfyingly, whack it, still in its 
packaging, several times against a hard surface. (Pretend it’s a particularly 
offensive ex, if that helps.)

Put the sugar and yolks in a medium heatproof bowl and whisk them, preferably 
with electric beaters if you have them, until pale and voluminous.

Add the chocolateto the pan and remove from the heat. Allow it to sit for a 
minute, then stir vigorously until the mixture is an even brown colour and the 
chocolate has all melted.

Pour the hot chocolate cream on to the yolks and sugar, whisking vigorously as 
you do so, then divide between ramekins and allow to cool completely. Cover and 
chill for at least an hour before serving.

Chocolate pots: the obvious choice, or just plain obvious? If you’re planning 
to cook a romantic meal this weekend, what’s on the menu – or are you planning 
a bah-humbug Pot Noodle instead?
