
Holly and I are breaking all the rules. Over drinks, not long after we meet 
for the first time (both running a good 15 minutes late), we talk aboutall the 
things we shouldn’t 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/04/dont-talk-politics-sex-ex-10-ways-ruin-a-date>
: our exes, laser buttplugs, doing “background research” before meeting a date 
and, most controversially, the EU referendum. But this is BumbleBFF, an 
offshoot of dating appBumble <https://bumble.com/>, often dubbed the “feminist 
Tinder 
<http://www.ibtimes.com/bumble-feminist-tinder-women-reach-out-first-within-24-hours-1858772>
”, designed to help forge platonic relationships with people of the same 
gender. None of the usual rules apply.

Or, at least, I don’t think they do. BumbleBFF, which launched in March, is 
just a toggle away from the regular dating app, and appears to have plenty in 
common with its more amorous counterpart. Users swipe through the photo-heavy 
profiles of Bumblers nearby; right to connect, left to forget: a method 
arguably even more shallow for friendship-making than it has beenaccused of 
being for dating 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/nov/23/tinder-shallowest-dating-app-ever>
. If you both swipe right, you have 24 hours to make a move.

You are not shown those looking for romance, although, as demonstrated by some 
of the selfies I swipe past, it’s not possible to craft separate profiles, 
appealing to potential friends and lovers respectively. Perhaps it’s more 
honest that way; it’s a useful check on the cringe factor of your dating 
profile.

Even so, I can’t help being judgmental about the “profile crimes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/26/tiger-hugging-baby-photos-worst-tinder-profile-dating-apps>
” that would put me off a date. Constantly hidden behind reflective aviators? 
Nope. Posing with an animal, be it a gap-year tiger or a cutesy pug? Probably 
not. Tricolour filter? I’m still swiping left. In comparison with other dating 
apps, the wedding-day pics on BumbleBFF should be perfectly permissible, but 
it’s still a no from me.

Perhaps it’s the rightwards swiping that varies a little more. HD brows? 
You’re in. Eating a giant slice of pizza? We’re probably soulmates. It’s not 
all photographs, of course. Holly’s a lingerie designer (“fancy silk stuff”) 
and big on brunch. I can chat about pants and pancakes for a bit, I thought. 
Sure.

And so we meet. It’s a Tuesday night and the bar is, initially, almost empty. 
She seems disappointed and I wonder if I was set to be more of a one-time 
wingman than a long-term BFF. It’s a misjudgment; once we’re chatting, Holly 
appears interested and observant, properly listening as I waffle on, bringing 
her up to speed (the way you don’t have to with old friends). It’s almost as if 
she isn’t preoccupied with whether or not I fancy her, or if I’m still chatting 
to “other people”. It’s pleasant.

I wouldn’t, incidentally, recommend telling those IRL mates about your 
adventures in BumbleBFF as they’re likely to be a bit miffed. The first time we 
were supposed to meet, I postponed , as I had family visiting, then turned down 
an invite from another friend on the day Holly and I did finally get together. 
It highlighted, if nothing else, existing friendships that are too easily 
neglected. More of those than I realised, perhaps.

But can BumbleBFF’s mission of “social pollination” combat the loneliness 
epidemic sweeping the nation 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/jul/20/loneliness-britains-silent-plague-hurts-young-people-most>
? A recentstudy <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4852646/> suggests 
we hit “peak friendship” at the age of just 25. It’s certainly not the first 
app to attempt it. In January, I signed up toVina <http://heyvina.com/>, an app 
that allows women to “tap into the power of your extended network to make new 
offline connections when you travel, move to a new city, transition life 
phases, or simply want to grow your social circle”. The problem, aside from it 
all sounding a little bitLinkedIn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/linkedin>, was that no one nearby was 
using it, and no one in the UK appeared to be, either: the San Francisco 
startup only moved London-based users to a beta group in April. What’s more, 
the firm refers to “new girlfriends” as “vinas”, which I just can’t.

Going by the number of non-Brits on BumbleBFF, friendship apps are bigger 
abroad, or are more widely used within expat communities. Holly is from the US, 
but that’s not really why she uses the app. It’s because so many of her friends 
have been priced out of the area in which she lives, as have many of mine. East 
London is full of places to go for brunch, but fewer and fewer people to go 
with.

Yet when it comes to making new mates online, the stigma that once hovered 
over internet dating still seems to apply and, unlike online matchmaking, this 
embarrassment is unlikely to be placated by the prospect of dining out on your 
latest dating horror story.

Both Holly and I have found that Bumble girls are (generally) nice. In-app 
convos are full of compliments, minus any lascivious intent. In person, we have 
just two drinks, but chat for a good couple of hours and don’t try a sip of 
each other’s cocktails (it feels strange, somehow, to share drinks with a 
complete stranger when there is no prospect of swapping saliva at a later date).

But is she my new BFF, or merely a friendship fling? In our last half-hour 
together, I feel as though her guard drops (mine too, maybe) and I suddenly 
like her a lot more. She reveals an intriguing love ofescape rooms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/24/would-you-attend-a-live-action-video-game-on-a-first-date-i-did>
 that I never saw coming, and I enjoy attempting to explain the concept of 
Center Parcs to someone who has never heard of it (“That sounds cool!” “Yeah! 
Well. Sort of.”)

A few days later, we’re swapping links for sample sales and by Saturday, we’re 
in the queue for Meadham Kirchhoff (and I’m glad, at the very least, to have 
met someone willing to give me a heads-up on these things). The following week, 
we head to an immersive theatre show, and I find there’s nothing quite like the 
hysterical terror of being pressed together in the pitch black of an imitation 
lift that has “broken down”, while ghoulish noises emanate from every wall, to 
cement a friendship. I am mildly terrified and genuinely glad she is there.

I also find she remembers, in impressive detail, almost everything about which 
we had previously spoken and it feels good, already, to catch up: yes, I had a 
good time visiting my hometown; yes, I enjoyed watching that play; yes, I still 
hate Ikea.

I suspect that it’s a minority of people who walk away from a Tinder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/tinder> date feeling they have met the 
love of their life, and the same applies here. A friend recently described 
app-dating as like squeezing mangoes in supermarket – literally, finding the 
best of a bad bunch. Holly was not the first person I had spoken to via 
BumbleBFF, but she was the first (and so far, only) person I met up with. Could 
I have clicked with someone that easily? Got lucky using an app explicitly 
designed not to facilitate getting lucky? I suspect it is too soon to call. But 
at least no one has sent any unsolicited dick pics yet.
