
Over 50% of women would like to be having more sex 
<http://mic.com/articles/125260/science-proves-that-women-want-sex-just-as-much-as-men-do>
, according to a recent survey of users of the fertility app Kindara 
<https://www.kindara.com/home>. Contrary to popular stereotypes about men 
having higher sex drives than women, 75% of the 500 women polled would like to 
be having sex more than three times a week, and 13% would prefer six times per 
week.

The survey comes hot on the heels of a new Tumblr called ‘How to make me come’ 
<http://howtomakemecome.tumblr.com/>, which has been making waves 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2015/09/01/how-to-make-me-come-tumblr_n_8071698.html>
 by sharing women’s intimate accounts of sex and orgasm, in their own words.

“Kissing me will make me feel like I am more than a vagina (which I am)”, 
begins one essay.

Another says: “Giving the direction ‘fingers inside me with clitoral 
stimulation’ seemed to cause as much confusion as telling him to look behind 
something to find the milk.”

It might seem like the idea of women enjoying, demanding and taking the lead 
in sex is hardly a revolutionary concept in 2015, but it could be argued that 
the advent of online pornography has turned back the clock on the sexual 
revolution, at least from a feminist perspective. I speak to girls at school 
who have seen porn on boys’ mobile phones and think that sex is something at 
best aggressive, at worst violent; something that will be done to them when 
they ‘give in’; something that men initiate and perform for their own pleasure 
while women submit. I have spoken to boys who have seen it and are confused and 
bewildered by the role they feel will be expected of them. One young woman who 
wrote to me had been having sex with her boyfriend for the first time when, 
with no warning, he started trying to throttle her. Shocked and scared, she 
managed to push him away. But it was he who broke down in relief, asking her: 
‘Wasn’t that what you were expecting?’

Sexual empowerment and feminism remain closely linked in a world in which 
women are expected to perform sexually but not necessarily to make their own 
demands. The idea of the personal space as political remains deeply relevant 
while we still battle to extend the popular understanding of rape beyond the 
mythical shadowy stranger in a dark alleyway, despite the fact that90% of 
victims already know their rapists <http://rapecrisis.org.uk/statistics.php>. 

As we debate consent at university and contend with the deliberately obtuse 
who suggest it is unfair to expect a man to explain how he knew a woman 
consented, the notion of consensual, empowered female pleasure is one we need 
to shout about.

The reclamation of sexual control is complex, particularly in light of the 
centuries-oldexotification and colonisation of the bodies of women of colour 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.ca/eternity-e-martis/black-women-exoticized_b_3646830.html>
, the erasure of sexual orientations and gender identities that fall outside 
the heteronormative, gender essentialist mainstream, and theprejudice and 
violence faced by sex workers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/jun/23/sex-workers-whorephobia> 
andtrans women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/04/transgender-violence-lgbt-rights-activists>
.

What feels like sexual empowerment to one woman doesn’t necessarily look the 
same to another 
<http://www.stanforddaily.com/2014/11/04/how-to-ace-sex-why-enthusiastic-consent-doesnt-cut-it/>
. For example, the idea of a woman instructing a partner in the specifics of 
how to turn her on might feel different for women who are already battling 
sexual stereotypes associated with their race, profession, sexuality or gender 
identity. But it is exciting and important that spaces are opening up for women 
to speak out in their own words, publicly (and sometimes anonymously), about 
what was once considered stigmatised and taboo.

We still desperately need to shout about the importance of female pleasure and 
sexual agency in a world where our hyper-sexualised media equates ‘sexy’ with 
one young, thin, white, large-breasted, long-legged, submissive, heterosexual 
stereotype.

 ‘How to make me come’ isn’t the only platform offering women a space to speak 
openly about their sexual experiences – the sharing of personal stories is also 
an integral part of Pavan Amara’sMy Body Back Project 
<http://www.mybodybackproject.com/>, which supports survivors of sexual 
violence to reclaim their bodies. For some women, taking back the narrative of 
sex is a crucial part of regaining control. Alongside itsCafé V workshops and 
health clinics <http://www.mybodybackproject.com/services-for-women/>, My Body 
Back also offers freepoetry and creative-writing workshops 
<http://www.mybodybackproject.com/free-poetry-and-creative-writing-workshops/>, 
which aim to help women reclaim their physicality through their own words. 
Amara says: “After any sort of sexual violence, the way you think about sex and 
your body changes, so you think it’s not under your control or you have to go 
with somebody else’s likes and dislikes and you lose that connection to 
yourself. We looked at taking that back.”

We live in a world in which the ubiquity of the male gaze constantly packages 
women for sexualised consumption, yet the notion of women enjoying their own 
sexuality remains startling to some. The victim-blaming responses to some of 
the hacked nude photographs of celebrities demonstrated the extent to which our 
society is still unwilling to allow women sexual agency, even as itprojects 
acceptable ‘sexiness’ on to them 
<http://time.com/3256628/jennifer-lawrence-nude-selfies-hack-victim-blaming/>. 
It doesn’t help that we still have to contend with nonsense such asGlamour 
magazine’s recent (now infamous) advice 
<http://www.glamour.com/sex-love-life/blogs/smitten/2015/07/how-to-make-a-man-fall-in-love>
 about opening the door naked and satisfying our partners’ every frat-boy 
fantasy.

The fact that so many women disclosed their sexual desires to an app doesn’t 
necessarily mean that they feel similarly confident relaying them to their 
sexual partners – in fact, their reported dissatisfaction might suggest 
otherwise.

In the age of online porn, which shows women going from 0 to panting with next 
to no foreplay and having suspiciously regular screaming simultaneous orgasms 
with very little apparent effort from their partners, for women to share their 
stories about sex and climax isn’t just powerful. It’s a public service.
