
In his budget speech, George Osborne said average earnings have risen by 11%, 
butmost benefits have risen by 21% 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/chancellor-george-osbornes-summer-budget-2015-speech>
.

According to the Office for National Statistics 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/office-for-national-statistics>, wages have 
risen by more like 12% between April 2008, when they were £440 a week, and 
April 2015, when they were £493 a week.

And a quick look at historical rates of benefits collected by the Institute 
for Fiscal Studies <http://www.ifs.org.uk/tools_and_resources/fiscal_facts/> 
shows a mixed picture on which welfare payments have risen in value over that 
time.


For example, both jobseeker’s allowance and housing benefit for a single 
person over the age of 25 has gone up from £60.50 a week in 2008 to £73.10 this 
year – a rise of 21%. Incapacity benefit has risen by about 25%, from £63.75 a 
week in 2008 to £79.45 a week this year.


Related: George Osborne introduces new 'living wage' but cuts working-age 
benefits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jul/08/budget-2015-uk-gdp-other-rich-nations-george-osborne>

However, other benefits have not gone up by anywhere near that amount. The 
basic element of working tax credit for a single person has risen just 9%, from 
£1,800 a year in 2008 to £1,960 this year. Child benefit has also only risen by 
10%, from £18.80 a week in 2008 to £20.70 this year. And maternity pay is not 
quite there, having gone up from £117.18 a week in 2008 to £139.58 this year – 
a rise of 19%.

Osborne has a little bit of wriggle room, given that he was careful to say 
“most” benefits have gone up by 21% but looking at individual types of payment 
tells a more complex story.


Asked which benefits the chancellor had included in his claim, the Treasury 
said the chancellor was looking very specifically at working-age welfare 
payments, including housing benefit, income support, jobseeker’s allowance and 
employment support allowance (which was only introduced in 2009).

Related: Budget 2015: 25 key points at a glance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jul/08/july-budget-2015-key-points-at-a-glance>

A wider point to make is that inflation has gone up by closer to 24% 
<http://www.thisismoney.co.uk/money/bills/article-1633409/Historic-inflation-calculator-value-money-changed-1900.html>
 on the retail prices index (RPI) measure that takes housing costs into 
account. So neither wages nor benefits have kept pace with inflation, leading 
to the squeeze on the cost of living that people have experienced since the 
banking crash of 2008 and subsequent recession.

In that light, Osborne’s suggestion that benefit rises should be kept down to 
the level of wage increases looks very much like a policy of levelling down.

• This article was amended on 9 July 2015. An earlier version had the figure 
£177.18 where £117.18 was meant.
