
Can I just talk about James Norton, oooh, I so, so would, wouldn’t you? Those 
breeches. And he’s not even married as well? I know, cheekbones, total ten. And 
you know what they say about Catholic boys. If I had to choose? Well it’s not a 
fair question really because they haven’t put Norton in a towel yet, or made 
him do scything, but imagine they are both semi-naked like in the Agatha 
Christie thing, how hot was Aidan Turner in that, I guess I’d go Aidan first, 
he’s still my home screen because he definitely proved he has abs as well as 
the face, which makes him an 11 really. Don’t know about Norton’s chest once 
he’s out of uniform, don’t they ever do naked or wet in War And Peace? I mean 
get your kit off for Christ’s sake, or what’s the point.

Colin Firth, are you joking? Has he had work done? Well he should. No, 
Vladimir Putin is my number three. Yes I am serious. It’s those mean eyes, no 
it’s not pervy, being a world leader justis quite sexy, if you know how to pull 
it off, so that makes Obama equal third, bit skinny, cute bum though, can you 
imagine him in breeches? I can’t choose, well if they were both begging me, 
maybe Obama. So four, Damian Lewis, something about the red hair plus poshness, 
then Tom Hiddleston, just adorable, Prince Harry – the motherless boy thing 
gets me all hot and bothered for some reason, then Jeremy Corbyn. Come on, he 
knows exactly what he’s doing, his grizzled old seadog routine – in that cap? 
Don’t tell me he’s not totally up for it, look at all those wives. Plus I 
actually have this weird thing for woman-hating peaceniks.


Related: Modern tribes: the Facebook late adopter  
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/05/modern-tribe-social-media-grandmother>

Then Bradley Cooper, yum yum yum, Alex Salmond – honestly, the accent gets me, 
every time – then number 10. Hmm. I’d make it Kit Harington, except isn’t he 
all oh I want to be taken seriously as an artist? I mean, if you don’t want to 
be objectified, love, don’t do your smouldering thing on my telly, am I right?
