
I’ve scuba-buddied some remarkable individuals in my time, from manta ray 
experts to nudibranch nuts. But this is a first: I’m diving the Indian Ocean 
with an eel whisperer.

Most divers – myself included – are wary of morays. They’re jazzy looking 
beasts, but if one pops its head out of a crevice, eyes staring and jaws agape, 
it’s best to avoid its bite. So when Mauritian diving expert Hugues Vitry 
coaxes a giant moray from its hiding place and lets it swirl around his 
shoulders like a feather boa, I’m so amazed, I practically choke on my bubbles. 
It’s two metres long and thicker than my thigh.

Related: Hiking in Mauritius: more than a walk in the (national) park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/ba-guide-to-mauritius-2016/2016/apr/29/hiking-in-mauritius-more-than-a-walk-in-the-national-park>

Later, Hugues explains how he discovered his unusual rapport with these 
creatures. “When I was a kid, still young enough to be stupid, I would go 
spearfishing – it was legal back then – and a honeycomb moray would follow me 
about. If a fish I’d speared escaped, the moray would grab and eat it. I 
thought this was cool, so if I went fishing and it wasn’t around, I’d call for 
it underwater” – he makes a little barking noise to demonstrate – “and it would 
appear.”

Giant morays are among the more docile of the 20-odd eel species found in 
Mauritian waters, but most locals can’t abide them. Hugues, whosedive centre 
<http://www.bluewaterdivingcenter.com/> at Trou-aux-Biches is among the 
island’s best, grew up on the south coast, where fishermen sometimes catch 
morays by mistake. “Their first instinct is to kill them,” says Hugues. “I do 
my best to teach kids that it’s better to let them go.”

With strong currents, cyclone damage and overfishing affecting some areas, 
Mauritius is not as obvious a diving destination as its nearish neighbours the 
Seychelles and the Maldives, but there are sites to explore on every coast, 
including coral reefs, rock formations and shipwrecks – some dating back 
centuries. Wildlife-wise, the underwater world has several tricks up its 
sleeve. As well as friendly morays, there are shark pits – underwater caverns 
where harmless reef sharks gather in large numbers, seemingly attracted by the 
water’s high oxygenation, caused by the surf above.

“At first, I didn’t realise how remarkable these caverns are,” says Hugues. 
“I’ve seen many rare things – like tiger sharks lying on the seabed to give 
birth – so to me, the extraordinary has in a way become normal.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkhb%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkhb%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d3181090ee9ae3d3f6fca4d8eb8cec5ab4c6310%2F0_65_3854_2312%2F3854.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dive%20like%20a%20local%3A%20exploring%20Mauritian%20waters&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkhb%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dive+like+a+local%3A+exploring+Mauritian+waters&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkhb%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d3181090ee9ae3d3f6fca4d8eb8cec5ab4c6310%2F0_65_3854_2312%2F3854.jpg>
 Tracking sperm whales off the west coast. Photograph: Emma Gregg 
A couple of days after our eel encounter, I join Hugues on a research 
expedition on the west coast. He’s one of a team of naturalists conducting the 
world’s first deep-water sperm whale study, tracking eight whales by satellite 
and monitoring pods in the field.

Paying volunteers can take part by spending a morning with Hugues and his crew 
as they cruise the best hunting grounds – 2,000-metre drop-offs where the 
whales feed on giant squid. We take turns to listen for clicking vocalisations 
with a hydrophone and grab every opportunity to fin up and slide in. Instead of 
using scuba gear, we snorkel at a safe distance, capturing underwater images of 
the whales if we can. Their skin patterns serve as ID.

It’s an extraordinary experience. Each time I enter the water, my heart is in 
my mouth, but when the whales appear, like statues in the blue, I’m intensely 
moved. Just a few weeks after a worrying number of sperm whales were beached on 
European shores, it’s a privilege to have such an intimate encounter with their 
African cousins.

Whale-watching in Mauritius is still in its infancy; and Hugues believes that, 
with careful management, it could make a major contribution to conservation. 
This year, the government plans to declare part of the west coast a marine 
park. “There are female sperm whales here all year round, often with young,” 
says Hugues. “We only head out when conditions are perfect, but when we do, we 
have a 90% chance of finding a pod within a couple of hours.”

British Airways flies direct three times a week from Gatwick to Mauritius. For 
more information and to book, visitbritishairways.com/mauritius 
<https://ad.doubleclick.net/ddm/clk/302966546;130080452;z>
