
Never underestimate the power of visualisation. It may sound like a self-help 
mantra, but a growing body of evidence shows thatmental imagery 
<http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/mental-imagery/> can accelerate learning and 
improve performance 
<http://bmcmedicine.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1741-7015-9-75> of all 
sorts of skills. Forathletes 
<http://www.f.waseda.jp/kanosue/content/paperlist/paperdata/68%20mizuguchi2013_motor%20imagery%20and%20sport%20performance.pdf>
 andmusicians <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3680781/>, “going 
through the motions,” or mentally rehearsing the movements in the mind, is just 
as effective as physical training, and motor imagery can alsohelp stroke 
patients regain function of their paralysed limbs 
<https://jsmf.org/meetings/2008/may/de%20Vries%20&%20Mulder%202007.pdf>.


For most of us, visual imagery is essential for memory, daydreaming and 
imagination. But some people apparently lack a mind’s eye altogether, and find 
it impossible to conjure up such visual images – and their inability to do so 
may affect their ability to learn and their educational performance.

Firefox co-creator Blake Ross recently described how it feels to be blind in 
your mind 
<https://www.facebook.com/notes/blake-ross/aphantasia-how-it-feels-to-be-blind-in-your-mind/10156834777480504/>
, and his surprise at the revelation that other people can visualise things. “I 
can’t ‘see’ my father’s face or a bouncing blue ball, my childhood bedroom or 
the run I went on ten minutes ago,” he wrote on Facebook. “I thought ‘counting 
sheep’ was a metaphor. I’m 30 years old and I never knew a human could do any 
of this. And it is blowing my goddamned mind.”

Neurologists believe aphantasia affects approximately 2% of the population, or 
one in 50 people

We’ve known that some people cannot visualise things in their mind’s eye since 
the 1880s, when the controversial psychologist Francis Galton – one of the 
pioneers of eugenics – published a paper calledStatistics of Mental Imagery 
<http://psychclassics.yorku.ca/Galton/imagery.htm>. Galton set out to “define 
the different degrees of vividness with which different persons have the 
faculty of recalling familiar scenes under the form of mental pictures”.

He asked his scientific colleagues to think of their breakfast table and 
describe to him the vividness of their impressions, and found this ability 
varied markedly – some individuals could draw up a mental image just as 
brilliant as the scene itself, whereas others could only conjure up an 
extremely dim image, or none at all.

Today, neurologists refer to this inability to form mental images as 
“congenital aphantasia” 
<http://www.eugencpopa.ro/wp-content/uploads/Afantazia-.pdf> – from the Greek 
words a, meaning “without”, and phantasia, meaning “a capacity to form mental 
images” – and they believe it affects approximately 2% of the population, or 
one in 50 people. Remarkably, though, aphantasics doexperience visual imagery 
in their dreams 
<http://blogs.exeter.ac.uk/exeterblog/blog/2015/08/26/aphantasia/>, so it seems 
that only voluntary visualisation is affected.

In the classroom, mental imagery seems to be especially important for reading 
comprehension and learning word meanings, and, according to at least to one 
theory, is a cornerstone for literacy.


Related: Where does 'creativity' happen in your brain? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/dec/28/where-does-creativity-happen-in-your-brain>

Dual-coding theory 
<https://www.researchgate.net/publication/238317055_A_Dual_Coding_View_of_Vocabulary_Learning>
, put forward by Allan Paivio of the University of Western Ontario in 1971, 
distinguishes between verbal and non-verbal thought processes, and places 
mental imagery as the primary form of non-verbal representation. Thus, 
information is stored in two different ways – verbally and visually – and 
although these two codes are independent of one another, and can each be used 
alone, they can also interact to enhance learning and recall.

Dual-coding theory has its limitations, the main one being the assumption that 
thought processes are based on nothing but words and images. Nevertheless, 
numerous studies published since the early 1970s confirm that mental imagery 
does indeed play an important role inhow schoolchildren acquire literacy skills 
<http://digitalcommons.uconn.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1031&context=nera_2009>
.

The work shows, for example, that mental imagery helps eight-year-olds 
remember what they read 
<http://www.fatih.edu.tr/~hugur/love_to_read/Mental%20Imagery%20Helps%20Eight-Year-Olds%20Remember%20What%20They%20Read.pdf>
, and that students who are asked to create mental images during word memory 
taskslearn two and a half times  <http://psycnet.apa.org/journals/xge/91/2/338/>
 as much as those who are told merely to repeat the words they need to 
remember. Verbal recall and visual images do appear to be separate but related, 
and while the ability to use imagery is not directly related to measures of 
intelligence, vocabulary, and reading comprehension, thespontaneous use of 
imagery helps children to learn 
<http://jlr.sagepub.com/content/22/1/55.full.pdf> and understand prose 
<http://jlr.sagepub.com/content/6/1/23.full.pdf>.

More recently, other studies have shown that mental imagery can help students 
grasp abstract concepts, and that encouraging students to use imagery can 
improve their understanding of such concepts.

One study shows that using mental imagery helps primary school pupils learn and
understand new scientific words 
<http://drum.lib.umd.edu/bitstream/handle/1903/9551/Jenkins_umd_0117E_10579.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y>
, and that their subjective reports of the vividness of their images is closely 
related to the extent to which imagery enhances their learning. Visualisation 
techniques are also helpful for theteaching and learning of mathematics 
<http://www.kaputcenter.umassd.edu/downloads/symcog/bib/pmeVisualizationFinalAPA.pdf>
 andcomputer science 
<http://www.lsv.ens-cachan.fr/Publis/PAPERS/PDF/AF-ijmest10.pdf>, both of which 
involve an understanding of the patterns within numbers, and creating mental 
representations of thespatial relationships between them 
<http://ideal-group.org/visualization-research/Spatial-Visualization-Visual-Imagery-and-Mathematical-Problem-Solving-of-Students-with-Varying-Abilities.pdf>
.

Related: The way you're revising may let you down in exams – and here's why 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/07/the-way-youre-revising-may-let-you-down-in-exams-and-heres-why>

Aphantasia could possibly affect how students revise for exams, too. Using 
mind maps <https://www.examtime.com/gcse/resources/mind-maps/> is one common 
strategy, which has been shown to effectivelyhelp them retain and recall 
information <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12028392>, and merely 
visualising the appropriate page of their revision notes can also help them to 
recall the information on it. It follows, then, that an inability to create 
mental images would hinder students’ abilities to use such strategies.

Although aphantasia was first recognised more than one hundred years ago, 
there has been very little systematic research on the phenomenon, and so we 
still know very little about it.

For example, are people with aphantasia able to imagine sounds or touch 
sensations, or does the condition affect imagery in senses other than vision? 
Galton alluded to this in his original 1880 paper, concluding that “the missing 
faculty seems to be replaced so serviceably by other modes of conception... Men 
who declare themselves entirely deficient in the power of seeing mental 
pictures can nevertheless give life-like descriptions of what they have seen.”

Regardless, research into visual imagery would seem to suggest that students 
with aphantasia are likely to experience difficulties with learning, but as yet 
there is no research confirming that this is the case.

“We know that children with aphantasia tend not to enjoy descriptive texts, 
and this may well influence their reading comprehension,” says neurologistAdam 
Zeman 
<https://medicine.exeter.ac.uk/about/profiles/index.php?web_id=adam_zeman&tab=research>
 of the University of Exeter who, together with his colleagues, gave the 
condition its name last year. “But there isn’t any evidence directly linking it 
to learning disabilities yet.”

Zeman adds that people with aphantasia may be able to form visual images, but 
just don’t have conscious access to them. “The story really is still at the 
early stages, so the implications for education haven’t been explored,” he says.

Researchers use questionnaires 
<http://socrates.berkeley.edu/~kihlstrm/MarksVVIQ.htm> to determine the 
vividness of mental images, and people’s scores on these tests are closely 
correlated to measures ofactivity in visual brain regions 
<https://med.uth.edu/nba/files/2015/08/Cui_VividImagery.pdf>. 

Thus, it may be possible to objectively measure individual differences or 
variations in the vividness of people’s mental images, and to identify students 
who have aphantasia. If it becomes clear that the condition does in fact 
impinge on children’s ability to learn, it may then be possible to devise 
alternative learning strategies for them.

Get involved with the Use your head 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/series/use-your-head> series by joining 
the discussion on #useyourhead
