
Rebekah Brooks’s expected return to Rupert Murdoch’s UK company 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/aug/28/phone-hacking-cps-may-bring-corporate-charges-rupert-murdoch-publisher>
 may not be a surprise becauseMedia Guardian predicted it back in June. 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jun/12/news-uk-mike-darcey-departure-rebekah-brooks-return-speculation>
 But it’s a very controversial appointment all the same.

Within the Sun newspaper in particular, there will be mixed feelings about 
their former editor and former chief executive assuming power once again.

That said, my hunch is that the editorial staff will do what they have done 
throughout the past four years of turmoil by accepting their fate, keeping 
their heads down and getting on with the job.

Much more significant for them will be the identity of the editor chosen to 
succeedDavid Dinsmore <http://www.theguardian.com/media/david-dinsmore>, who 
has been well liked by most of the journalists.

The name in the frame (and said by a reliable inside source to be the only 
name) isTony Gallagher <http://www.theguardian.com/media/tony-gallagher>, 
currently one of the deputy editors of the Daily Mail and the former editor of 
the Daily Telegraph.

He is cut from a different cloth from Dinsmore and, if he does take the chair, 
then he is likely to introduce a harder edge to the editorial floor. He is 
regarded as abrasive and confrontational, but is well respected for his news 
sense, attention to detail and passion. He is acutely intelligent too.

But is he right for the Sun? Would he really want to edit a red-top? It would 
be one helluva big jump. And why should he leave the Mail, once again, to work 
for a proprietor who (unlike the Mail’s Lord Rothermere) cannot help but 
interfere with the paper’s content?

Doubtless, if reports of him being offered the job are true - and he is said 
to have denied them - then he has had a lot on his mind while on holiday in 
Whitstable this week.

Gallagher may recall that his Mail editor, Paul Dacre 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/pauldacre>, famously turned down an offer 
from Murdoch to edit the Times and went on to prosper. Could he do the same?


Then again, if Gallagher turns it down, where do Murdoch/Brooks go next? There 
are no clear seasoned successors within the newspaper.

I am told by my source that Dinsmore is not distressed by leaving the 
editorship. Indeed, he is happy about taking on the mooted senior management 
role.

He cannot be said to have a done a bad job at the paper, even if many of the 
major calls on strategy - from the introduction of a hard paywall through the 
abolition of page 3 and on to the re-hiring ofKelvin MacKenzie 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/kelvin-mackenzie> as a columnist - were made 
by Murdoch.


For all that, Dinsmore will be remembered for running a civilised office in a 
post-Leveson climate in which the paper has undergone a notable change of 
culture. He is, quite frankly, a nice guy.
