
Take me there: Hotel Ion, Iceland


Reykjavík has no shortage of hip hotels, but beyond the city stylish 
accommodation is thin on the ground. So the recent opening of the Hotel Ion (
ioniceland.is <http://www.ioniceland.is/>) is great news. It has contemporary 
rooms and a northern lights bar with floor-to-ceiling windows, but the real 
star of the show is the location. Situated on the edge ofThingvellir National 
Park <http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/1152>, it's the perfect base for exploring 
Iceland's hot springs and glaciers, or just soaking up the views from the 
outdoor hot tub. A three-night package with Discover the World (
discover-the-world.co.uk <http://www.discover-the-world.co.uk/en/>) costs from 
£781pp, including flights, a Superjeep midnight sun safari, lava-caving and a 
lobster dinner.

It's a good time to… enjoy the great outdoors

 Green and pleasant: the Peak District's rolling hills and valleys. 
Photograph: Alamy 
Let's ignore the fact that as I write this the rain is bouncing off the 
pavements, washing away the snow from last week's blizzards, and salute the 
optimism (or should that be bloody-mindedness?) of the brave souls at tourist 
boards across the nation who have come up with the idea of promoting Britain's 
great outdoors in a series of spring festivals.

First up is Cornwall's Outsid'er Festival (5-7 April, st-agnes.com/outsider 
<http://st-agnes.com/outsider>), a brand-new event in the pretty seaside 
village of St Agnes. Ignore the strange use of apostrophe, put away your 
pac-a-mac and join the locals in a weekend of beach campfires, foraging, raft 
racing, wild singing and fancy-dress surfing.

The Dumfries and Galloway Spring Festival (wildseasons.co.uk 
<http://wildseasons.co.uk>) celebrates the season with wildlife walks, treasure 
hunts on horseback, garden tours and stargazing.

And in the Peak District the annual Walking and Outdoors Festival returns 
(26 April-12 May,visitpeakdistrict.com/events 
<http://visitpeakdistrict.com/events>) with a programme of guided hikes, 
including a four-day trek along the Derwent Valley Heritage Way, plus 
bushcraft, navigation, rock climbing and caving workshops.

Now repeat after me: "I do believe in spring, I do believe in spring."

Give me a break: the week's best deals


Home Boutique B&B Trevose Harbour House is a cosy new coastal retreat in the 
heart of St Ives with just five bedrooms and a luxury top-floor suite with 
harbour views. Organic breakfasts, a cute little snug and a suntrap terrace 
complete the picture. B&B starts at £135 a night but there will be a discount 
of 30% off all bookings until 18 April, excluding Easter (trevosehouse.co.uk 
<http://trevosehouse.co.uk>)

Away Art in Amsterdam The biggest event in the art world this year is the 
reopening of the Rijksmuseum on 14 April after a decade-long renovation. Join 
the celebrations with a stay at the Grand Hotel Amrath, which is offering a 
one-night package including entrance to the museum, a canal boat tour, bicycle 
hire and a glass of champagne from €170pp (amrathamsterdam.com 
<http://amrathamsterdam.com>)
