
In the last year of my undergraduate history degree I was introduced to one of 
the most fascinating genres of literature: the 18th-century criminal biography. 
Tomes such as Charles Johnson’sLives of the Most Remarkable Criminals 
<http://gesteofrobinhood.com/2016/02/14/charles-johnsons-lives-of-the-highwaymen-1734/>
 (1734) catalogue the experiences of thieves, rogues and prostitutes. I haven’t 
been able to leave them alone since. And now my enthusiasm for little-known 
crime writers of the 1700s is being kept alive by my PhD on 18th- and 
19th-century literary representations of outlaws and highwaymen.

Related: My PhD takes me to one of the last truly wild places on earth 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/feb/29/my-phd-takes-me-to-one-of-the-last-truly-wild-places-on-earth>

One of the reasons I love my PhD is that I get to encounter writers like 
Johnson. Writers who didn’t pen sophisticated literature, but can transform the 
way that we look at the world, both past and present.

In the past, people (for the most part) thought that crime was caused by vice 
and idleness. If a person disdained employment in favour of trying to make easy 
money, it was a sign of potential criminality. Look at William Hogarth’s
Industry and Idleness <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Industry_and_Idleness> 
(1747), where a lazy young apprentice eventually ends up at the gallows.

Once a person had turned to crime, went the thinking, it became like an 
addiction. Take the case of highwaymanNathaniel Jackson 
<http://www.exclassics.com/newgate/ng673.htm>, who Charles Johnson says 
“habituated himself to nothing but wickedness”.

Modern historians offer a more nuanced analysis of the causes of crime in this 
period. Occasional bad harvests, combined with periodic spikes in unemployment, 
as well as the fact that wages were often low, meant a hand-to-mouth existence 
for many people. Granted, there were probably some offenders who were 
incorrigibly bad, but the vast majority who found themselves before the courts 
had stolen to feed their families.

Many of these thieves would be classed as vulnerable today. One of my 
favourite 18th-century rogues, Jack Sheppard (1702-1724), was placed as a youth 
in the care of three different masters, one of whom “used him so harshly that 
he ran away”.

Related: My PhD could save an endangered species with time-travelling mud 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/feb/01/phd-save-endangered-species-common-scoter-bird-mud>

Then there is the case of Captain Stanley (1698-1722) who was physically 
abused by his father from a young age: “The first rudiments he received were 
those of cruelty and blood, his father at five years old often parrying him and 
thrusting him with a sword.”

There is also the case of William Sperry 
<http://www.pascalbonenfant.com/18c/newgatecalendar/lives_william_sperry.html>, 
afootpad <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Footpad> and highwayman, who was born 
to very poor parents and then shipped off to America at the age of 14 to work 
as an indentured labourer.

The deficiencies of the 18th-century justice system meant that each of these 
offenders found themselves at the gallows, where they were “launched into 
eternity”. But these men were not “wicked” as such, they made bad life choices 
in precarious social situations.

Today, the media is often guilty of only giving us part of the story when it 
comes to offenders, and sensationalising accounts of their crimes.

Take the reporting of recent robberies committed near my hometown of Leeds. 
The writer labels the perpetrator as “a career burglar with a long criminal 
record 
<http://www.yorkshireeveningpost.co.uk/news/latest-news/top-stories/burglar-jailed-for-six-years-after-crime-spree-1-7684432>
 for dishonesty”. We’re not told anything about his social situation and what 
induced him to turn to crime, other than a reference to the fact that drugs may 
have been involved. His “crime spree” is described as “targeted”.

I have found myself questioning why I am sometimes unable to extend the same 
empathy towards modern-day criminals that I do to characters such as Jack 
Sheppard.

Related: My PhD takes me into a world of space molecules and alien fart jokes 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jan/04/my-phd-takes-me-into-a-world-of-space-molecules-and-alien-fart-jokes>

And this is why I love my PhD. During the course of my research, I encounter 
primary and secondary sources that force me to challenge my assumptions about 
modern-day issues.

This does not mean, of course, that I seek to excuse the actions of thieves 
and burglars. Butsociety gets the criminals it deserves. It’s easy to see this 
in the cases of offenders fromhundreds of years ago, but I keep this in mind 
now when I read accounts of modern-day robberies. These seemingly irrelevant 
sources from the past can shine a light, down the centuries, on to our 
assumptions and prejudices.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
