
Question: The Vote Leave campaign has published a dossier of 50 dangerous 
citizens 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/28/vote-leave-releases-list-of-serious-crimes-by-eu-citizens-in-britain>
 from EU states, including murderers and rapists, who have been allowed into 
Britain. It says this is evidence that the UK is “unable to prevent dangerous 
individuals from walking into the country” while it remains in the trade bloc. 
Is there any truth in this?

Answer: It is simply not the case that, as Nigel Farage has claimed 
<https://twitter.com/nigel_farage/status/512550699662860288>, “we can’t stop 
people like this entering the country”. TheEU’s 2004 citizenship directive 
<http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2004:229:0035:0048:en:PDF>
 makes it clear that the free movement of people within the EU is not an 
unqualified right and can be restricted on grounds of “public policy, public 
security or public health”. This means that serious offenders can be denied 
entry and the right to live in Britain.

However, the directive does say “previous criminal convictions shall not in 
themselves constitute grounds for taking such measures”, but adds that 
convicted criminals can be excluded on a case-by-case basis if they present “a 
genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the 
fundamental interests of society”.

Q: So if convicted criminals are not automatically excluded, aren’t the leave 
campaigners right to say that murderers and rapists will be allowed in?

A: No. As Steve Peers, a professor of EU law at Essex University, has pointed 
out 
<http://eulawanalysis.blogspot.co.uk/2014/09/free-movement-of-murderers-eu-law.html>
, they could be refused entry and it is hard to imagine any British judge or 
the European court of justice overturning that decision in cases involving such 
serious crimes. As the former Conservative immigration and policing minister
Damian Green has said 
<http://www.conservativehome.com/platform/2016/03/damian-green-our-national-security-is-at-risk-if-we-leave-the-eu.html>
, nearly 6,000 European Economic Area nationals have been prevented from 
entering Britain since 2010.

Q: But what about the 50 cases of murderers and rapists cited by Vote Leave? 
Why weren’t they refused entry?

A: The most likely reason is that the UK Border Force was not aware of their 
criminal convictions when they entered Britain. The worst case cited in the 
dossier is that of Arnis Zalkalns, a Latvian builder who, having been jailed in 
his home country for murdering his wife, moved to Britain in 2007 before
allegedly murdering 14-year-old Alice Gross 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jan/27/alice-gross-murder-arnis-zalkalns>
 in west London.

He came to London before EU laws on sharing information relating to criminal 
records came into effect in 2012. The limited measure focuses mainly on telling 
EU member states when one of their citizens has committed an offence abroad, 
but it may have flagged up Zalkalns before he arrived.

The problem is that the sharing of information regarding criminal convictions 
across Europe is still at a rudimentary stage. If someone is high profile, has 
committed serious crimes in several countries, or is on Europol’s wanted list, 
they are likely to be on the UK Border Force warning list database.

Countries such as Germany, France, Italy, Spain and Portugal flag up 
potentially dangerous people so that they can be turned away at the border, but 
some EU states do not yet have the capacity to do this. EU membership means 
that Britain has access to theSchengen II database 
<http://www.asylumlawdatabase.eu/en/content/schengen-information-system-sis-ii-enters-force>
, which has details of 250,000 wanted or missing suspects across Europe. The 
flow of foreign fighters returning from Syria has extended the EU databases 
tracking their movements.

Q: So the system does not always work?

A: That’s right, and the Vote Leave dossier catalogues 50 cases of convicted 
criminals who should have been excluded but were only picked up at a later 
stage, sometimes after they had committed further serious crimes in Britain.

Q: How can this be fixed? 

A: Nick Clegg has proposed focusing on sharing conviction information on the 
most serious offences, such as murder and rape. The government has also opted 
back into a series of criminal justice measuresknown as the Prüm package 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201516/cmselect/cmeuleg/342-xii/34205.htm>
, which allows the sharing of information on suspected criminals, such as 
fingerprints and DNA, and which many Eurosceptics voted against. It seems 
unlikely that taking Britain out of the EU would persuade its European partners 
to put more effort into sharing information about convicted criminals with the 
UK.

Verdict: EU membership does not stop the UK turning away convicted serious 
criminals at its borders. But further EU integration in the shape of more 
information sharing could make this more effective.
