
What a snobby country this is. No wonder George Osborne’s apprenticeship 
scheme and training levy isn’t working 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/02/uk-apprenticeships-plan-attacked-employer-groups>
. Because the government hasn’t quite grasped what a proper apprenticeship is, 
especially if it involves practical skills. To it, and the Department for 
Education, “practical” seems to mean “thick”.

Last week, my friend Olga, who is a potter, heard about a Somerset school that 
had a farm and taught agricultural courses. But the DfE has decided thatno such 
courses shall count in the league tables 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/jul/01/farm-schools-fear-for-exam-crop-gcse-changes>
. They are not academic or “rigorous” enough. A BTec level 2 in agriculture 
counts for nothing. So this excellent school has plunged down the tables. Olga 
was infuriated and nearly blew a gasket. She is sick to death of our leaders 
regarding anyone with practical skills as a comparative dimwit.

Lucky Europeans. They do not have our “damaging gulf between the academic and 
vocational <http://www.buckingham.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/2010/10/voced.pdf>”, 
as educationist Professor Alan Smithers wrote in 2002. Over there, nursery 
teachers, technicians, plumbers, builders, craftspeople and farmers are well 
trained, respected and have proper careers. Here, they are lesser beings, who 
ought to use the back door. Why bother to train them properly? It’s so 
expensive. The government and employers are whingeing about who should pay for 
it. Anyway, foreign plumbers, nurses, builders and other practical creatures 
are cheaper, because we don’t have to train them.

Once upon a time, we weren’t quite so snobby and stingy, or so keen to 
sabotage our industrial and technical abilities. We had industrial training 
boards, which also charged employers a levy for training, unless they were 
providing it adequately themselves. We had technical colleges, day release from 
work to learn something useful, and apprentices weren’t just tea-boys/girls or 
free slave labour.

It wasn’t perfect. “Technical” has never been as admired as “academic”, and 
“good with your hands” has always meant lumpen and brainless. Then Thatcher 
abolished most of the levies and we called all the technical colleges 
“universities”, to make everyone sound similarly clever. Because our leaders 
still don’t realise that there are differences in abilities, interests and 
aspirations. They just see clever or clueless, upstairs or downstairs, academic 
or nothing.
