
I'm getting ready for my first day back at work. "From this morning you're not 
on maternity leave any more," says Lydia mournfully. "I will miss you." This is 
a curious change of heart. Yesterday in the car on the "last time I'll take you 
to primary school while I'm on maternity leave" run she was quite unmoved at my 
attempts to mark the occasion.

"Never mind," she'd said briskly. "Except, wait a minute. Does that mean I 
can't play on your iPhone on the way to school any more?"

"No, of course it doesn't," I say sarcastically. "I'll leave it behind for 
you."

But this morning she can see that I'm sad. "It's because I've loved having all 
that time with you," I tell her.

"Yes," she says. "Although you've been here all these months and still haven't 
sorted out baby Flora's cradleÂ cap."

But I did get the phone upgrade, which has impressed the children, although 
they fight bitterly over whose turn it is to play with it. What I hadn't 
realised was that an iPhone requires adult supervision. Lydia sees an app 
called Find Sex Offenders. "It's highly rated, and I'm sure we should get it," 
she says. "What is a sex offender?"

I do a superficial but still grim explanation. "Are there other unsuitable 
apps on here?" I ask.

"Oh yes, lots," she says cheerfully.

The aim of getting the phone was not to rob Lydia of her childhood innocence 
but to make me feel current, and therefore more confident about returning to 
work. I ask her to take some pictures of herself and Flora on the phone before 
I leave. My plan is to get them out at my desk and feel miserable over 
lunchtime.

After a few minutes, she hands me the phone. "They're quite good, I think," 
she says proudly.

They are certainly unusual. In each shot, either her face or Flora's fills the 
screen. Flora's drooling (there's a tooth coming through), combined with her 
enormous head, makes her look like a Hammer House of Horror baby.

Lydia is pulling faces that only other nine-year-olds would appreciate.

On the way to work, I have a brief feeling of euphoria, of having the freedom 
to read a paper or drink coffee without little arms grabbing at whatever is in 
my hands. I check my clothing and see I have baby dribble stains on my right 
shoulder, which I wash off, rather mournfully, in the office toilets.

By the time I get to my desk I feel bereft. Kind people come up to say hi and 
to ask after Flora. "What a shame I didn't bring any photos," I say quickly.

I know baby Flora is in excellent hands, with my mum and Isobel, our nanny, 
looking after her, but I can still only wait for an hour before phoning home. 
"Oh, Flora's lovely, she's doing fine," says Isobel. "But your mum felt unwell 
so I've taken her to the doctor."

To my eternal shame I don't immediately think, "Oh dear, what's wrong with 
Mum?" I thought, "Oh no, not on my first day back at work." As if I didn't have 
enough to worry about. Which confirms my suspicion that I was a much better 
person while I was on maternity leave. I had more patience, I didn't shout, I 
had time for my children and I cared about my elderly mother. At times I almost 
liked myself. Within 60 seconds of being back at work it has all gone. Every 
bit.

On the way home, I steel myself to recover the lost ground of niceness. I rush 
in, scoop up Flora from the floor where she is learning to crawl (without me), 
check that my mum is feeling better and sit down with Lydia and Tilly to hear 
about their days at school. "It was fine," they say, quickly, in unison. 
"Where's your phone?"

Follow Luisa on Twitter @luisad1
