
Figures released by the universities of Oxford and Cambridge have revealed 
British students from minority ethnic groupsare significantly less likely than 
their white British peers to be offered places at Russell Group universities. 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/jul/08/why-do-elite-universities-admit-so-few-ethnic-minority-applicants>

Just 36% of minority ethnic applicants to all Russell Group universities were 
offered places compared to 55% of white applicants between 2010 and 2012. Those 
least likely to receive offers were applicants from Bangladeshi (31%), 
Pakistani (30%) and black (23%) backgrounds.

Students from Oxbridge have previously shared their experiences through the 
viral campaign "I, too, am Oxford" <http://itooamoxford.tumblr.com/>, which 
highlighted the prejudices and discrimination faced by students from a minority 
ethnic background. Inspired by"I, too, am Harvard" 
<http://itooamharvard.tumblr.com/>, hundreds of students took part in the 
campaign which quickly went viral on a number of social networks.

We'd like to hear not just from students at Oxbridge, but from other Russell 
Group universities too. Some of the questions we'd like answered are:

 * How difficult was it for you to gain a place at your university? 
 * Since beginning your studies, have you experienced prejudice or 
discrimination because of your background or skin colour? 
 * Did you feel your background was a factor in your application? 
If there's anything we've missed, feel free to add that in your response. We'd 
also be happy to hear from students who are about to start their studies or 
have graduated from one of the Russell Group universities.

Share your stories, whether in text or visual form, via GuardianWitness and 
we'll feature the best in our coverage. You can submit stories anonymously, if 
you choose. 

 * GuardianWitness <https://witness.theguardian.com/> is the home of 
user-generated content on the Guardian. Contribute your videos, pictures and 
stories, and browse news, reviews and work submitted by other readers. Posts 
are reviewed prior to publication on GuardianWitness, and the best ones will 
feature on the Guardian site. 