
Having conquered Sunday nights for BBC1 <http://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc1>
, Countryfile will roll its tanks – and tractors – on to the manicured lawns of 
daytime TV as John Craven’s daily spin-off show goes year-round.


Countryfile Diaries, which aired for the first time this spring, will return 
for three new series in summer, autumn and winter on BBC1, it was announced on 
Thursday.

Presenter John Craven will return for the three new series, alongside 
Countryfile regular Jules Hudson, Flog It’s Paul Martin, Keeley Donovan and 
Margherita Taylor.

Related: Countryfile Shakespeare special caps show's unexpected success 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/24/countryfile-shakespeare-special-caps-shows-unexpected-success>

The daily diary show aired on five consecutive weekdays in May 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/09/john-craven-daily-countryfile-sunday-bbc>
 and was commissioned after the Sunday night edition of Countryfile soared to 
its biggest ever audience of 8.6 million.

BBC1 was criticised in the government’s white paper on its future last month, 
with its daytime schedule highlighted for a lack of new shows. Daytime staple 
Bargain Hunt, for instance, is now into its 43rd series.

Dan McGolpin, the BBC’s controller for daytime and early peak programming, 
said: “Countryfile Spring Diaries brought us some wonderful scenes and 
insightful journalism at a key point of the year for rural communities.

Related: Wildlife shows not reflecting reality of natural world – Springwatch 
presenters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/24/wildlife-shows-not-reflecting-reality-of-natural-world-springwatch-presenters>

“We are now extending the series to all four seasons, with five new programmes 
for each of summer, autumn and winter to be scheduled across weekday mornings 
on BBC1. I look forward to many more topical and relevant stories from our 
exciting team of presenters.”

The BBC <http://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> has enjoyed ratings success 
with another stripped seasonal show about the countryside, Springwatch, and its 
various offshoots at other times of the year, currently in its 12th series on 
BBC2.

Margherita Taylor, who also presents a show on Classic FM, said: “One of my 
favourite things about summer is the great flowers that appear so I’ll be 
looking at the rise in seasonal British cut flowers as well as the elderflower 
harvest and the invasion of the spider crabs out on the Dorset coast, so it’s 
set to be a show of huge variety.”
