
In the run up to the EU referendum 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> we ask a panel of experts 
to answer your questions on how the vote could affect small businesses. This 
week they consider the impact on imports and exports: Europe accounts for half 
of the UK’s exports.

If we leave the EU, how might that change our trade with Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and worldwide?

If you have a question about the impact of the EU referendum, you can submit 
it here. 
<http://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/mar/15/question-brexit-ask-expert-panel-eu-referendum>



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjvp%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjvp%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e66eda2478328f85d5b18a4751c2affc96a2e0b%2F302_0_1887_2358%2F1887.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20would%20Brexit%20mean%20for%20UK%20trade%20deals%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjvp%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What+would+Brexit+mean+for+UK+trade+deals%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjvp%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e66eda2478328f85d5b18a4751c2affc96a2e0b%2F302_0_1887_2358%2F1887.jpg>
 Lesley Batchelor Photograph: PR 
Lesley Batchelor

Director general of the Institute of Export. Shaping policy and decision 
making at the highest level, she is active on various advisory panels on 
exports, SME support and the all-party manufacturing group.

The change will not be instantaneous: UK exporters will be charged import 
duties on the goods they sell into the EU, just as they do to any country that 
is a member of a trading bloc.

This, in turn, will increase the price of their products in that market. These 
duties are on top of the local VAT charged between states and impact on the 
final price charged. The EU covers this through our subscription, much like a 
membership to Costco works – where the benefits increase the more you use it. 
To this end, a trading bloc is slightly different to a trade agreement.

A trade bloc is a group of countries that agree to reduce trade barriers 
between themselves. There are 13 trade blocs around the world today designed to 
increase regional trade and create economic growth – the EU for example.

 More than 300 agreements have been reported to the World Trade Organisation 
<https://www.wto.org/> (WTO) and the number of free trade agreements have 
increased significantly over the last decade.

Trade agreements outline how the agreement will work in practice and exactly 
what the agreement is – whether it is goods or goods and services, a basic 
preferential trade agreement, free trade or a customs union. In the meantime, 
we will revert back to the next level of agreement which is the WTO and that’s 
161 countries to find agreement with.



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjvp%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjvp%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4007aa6ffb8f94f7bad0922cd6ce824930e96d1b%2F71_0_718_431%2F718.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20would%20Brexit%20mean%20for%20UK%20trade%20deals%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjvp%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What+would+Brexit+mean+for+UK+trade+deals%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjvp%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4007aa6ffb8f94f7bad0922cd6ce824930e96d1b%2F71_0_718_431%2F718.jpg>
 Catherine Barnard Photograph: Daniel Bates 
Catherine Barnard

Professor in European Union law and employment law at the University of 
Cambridge and senior tutor and fellow of Trinity College. She advised the 
government over thebalance of competences review 
<https://www.gov.uk/guidance/review-of-the-balance-of-competences>, which is an 
audit of what the EU does and how it affects the UK.

The answer to this question depends much on what is put into place if the UK 
were to leave the EU. If the UK were to do a Norway – join theEuropean Economic 
Area <http://www.efta.int/eea> (EEA) – then the UK would still benefit from 
free movement of goods. However, it would not be able to benefit from the 50 
free trade agreements (FTAs) which the EU enjoys. That said, all EEA states are 
also members of theEuropean Free Trade Association 
<http://www.efta.int/about-efta> which has 25 free trade agreements with 36 
countries.

Were the UK to go down the Swiss route (managing its relationship with the EU 
through a series of bilateral agreements), this is likely to include an 
agreement on the free movement of goods with EU states. The UK would, however, 
be free to conclude its own bilateral trade agreements with “third countries” – 
non-EU states. This freedom has to be weighed against the reduced influence the 
UK would have as a smaller player, a point emphasised forcibly byUS president 
Barack Obama 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/24/leave-campaign-obama-trade-warning-eu-referendum>
 on his visit to the UK this week.

Were the UK to go down the route of looking for an FTA with the EU (sometimes 
referred to as the Canada model), there would be free movement of goods between 
the UK and the EU. However, the Canada deal took over five years to negotiate. 
The UK’s bargaining power would be weaker: the UK sells about 50% of its goods 
to the EU, while the EU sells about 6% of its goods to the UK.

If no deal is reached, then the WTO rules apply. This means that the EU can 
apply a tariff to UK goods, provided the tariff is no higher than those imposed 
on goods imported into the EU from other non-member states. It isestimated 
<http://researchbriefings.parliament.uk/ResearchBriefing/Summary/RP13-42> that 
tariffs would be imposed on 90% of the UK’s goods exports to the EU by value, 
meaning many exporters will become less price competitive.



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjvp%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjvp%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01c87e52653758b0ecb21991ab5a57c94f8e7d48%2F0_469_3265_4082%2F3265.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20would%20Brexit%20mean%20for%20UK%20trade%20deals%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjvp%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What+would+Brexit+mean+for+UK+trade+deals%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjvp%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01c87e52653758b0ecb21991ab5a57c94f8e7d48%2F0_469_3265_4082%2F3265.jpg>
 Mike Cherry 
Mike Cherry

Federation of Small Businesses (FSB) national chairman and former FSB policy 
director. He is an entrepreneur with a passion for small business issues and 
getting the voice of small businesses heard

Now is a good time for any small business which exports or imports to have a 
crystal ball. Because the truth is, no-one can really predict how trade will be 
affected if the UK does leave the EU. We do know that the EU is the most 
important export destination for small firms. The EU market is often considered 
the easy option because it’s close by, there are no tariffs and there is one 
set of product rules and standards.


For all that, there is a clear appetite to export further afield: 32% of FSB 
members currently either export or import. The US is their second biggest 
export destination after the EU. Thetrans-Atlantic Trade and Investment 
Partnership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/03/what-is-ttip-controversial-trade-deal-explained>
 (TTIP) has huge potential to benefit smaller firms seeking to increase or 
start selling their goods and services to American customers.


 In event of an EU exit, exporters will want to know how the UK will negotiate 
a trade deal with the EU and what this deal will look like, as well as how it 
will approach other trade deals around the globe. If the UK does end up going 
it alone on trade deals, the FSB would push for each set of negotiations to 
have a focused strategy on smaller firms. Small businesses have huge potential 
to export, both within the EU and further afield. Only by supporting these 
businesses to achieve their potential will the government succeed in closing 
the UK’s long-standing trade gap.

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
