
As wife of Canada’s rather popular prime minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/15/canada-loves-justin-trudeau-pandas>
, Sophie Grégoire Trudeau has no official duties – nor a formal job of any kind 
– yet she claims to be so swamped with demands on her time that, even with her 
own assistant, she can’t cope. “I’d like to be everywhere, but I can’t,” 
Trudeau, a mother of three young children,told Le Soleil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/16/i-need-help-first-lady-sophie-trudeaus-anger-canada>
. “I need a team to help me serve the people.”

Political enemies say 
<http://globalnews.ca/news/2698965/opposition-opposed-to-more-staff-for-sophie-gregoire-trudeau/>
 that complaining about her staff puts Trudeau out of touch with “the reality 
that Canadian women face”, but is that fair? It depends which other first 
ladies and husbands you compare her with …

US: 24 staff


First ladies are basically surrogate royals in the US, which has a formal 
office of the first lady 
<http://www.whitehousemuseum.org/east-wing/first-ladys-office.htm> and a staff 
to match.Michelle Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/michelleobama> 
currently performs the function with the help of 24 people (at leastwhen the 
number was counted in 2009 
<http://www.factcheck.org/2009/08/michelle-obamas-staff/>). This is large, but 
not remarkable.Laura Bush 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/02/michelle-obama-laura-bush-africa>
 had a staff of at least 24.Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> had 20, plus 15 interns 
and volunteers.

UK: one (controversially)

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j998%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j998%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff560ccb8f05575dbdb2ca2610663cdaa2310dd8b%2F296_354_951_570%2F951.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%E2%80%99t%20get%20the%20staff%3A%20how%20many%20assistants%20should%20a%20first%20lady%20(or%20man)%20have%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j998%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%E2%80%99t+get+the+staff%3A+how+many+assistants+should+a+first+lady+%28or+man%29+have%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j998%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff560ccb8f05575dbdb2ca2610663cdaa2310dd8b%2F296_354_951_570%2F951.jpg>
 Samantha Cameron used public money to hire a ‘special adviser’. Photograph: 
Danny E Martindale/Getty Images 
Britain has its own royal family, of course, so our prime ministers’ wives 
(and husband) have tended to stay out of the way, except when it comes to 
hosting official functions. Whether this justifies Samantha Cameronusing public 
money to hire first Isabel Spearman and then Rosie Lyburn 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3527314/Model-Rosie-Sam-Cam-s-Girl-Friday-paid-taxpayers-Special-adviser-paid-53-000-organise-PM-s-wife-s-diary-wardrobe.html>
 as her “special adviser” is a matter of debate – especially if their main 
duties really are assembling her wardrobe, assome claim 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/samantha-cameron-special-adviser-fashion-aide-taxpayer-salary-530000-a6974181.html>
.

Germany: zero (that we know of)

If you think it’s hard work being married to a head of government, then you 
haven’t heard ofJoachim Sauer 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-germany-sauer-idUSBRE84F07420120516> – which 
is just the way he likes it. Sure his wife isAngela Merkel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/angela-merkel>, the most powerful woman in 
the world <http://www.forbes.com/profile/angela-merkel/>, so sometimes he has 
to have dinner with the Obamas, but otherwise … nothing. No staff. No 
interviews. No public campaigns. Sauer flies on budget airlines and didn’t even 
attend his wife’s inauguration in 2005. Helikes to be left alone 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/europe/germany/1496200/Bad-tempered-husband-threatens-Merkels-bid-to-be-German-chancellor.html>
 to research quantum chemistry.

France: five, eight or none
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j998%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j998%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c2d50c512adced5dc31dcf27be7c0bed2157e19%2F1043_63_1438_863%2F1438.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%E2%80%99t%20get%20the%20staff%3A%20how%20many%20assistants%20should%20a%20first%20lady%20(or%20man)%20have%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j998%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%E2%80%99t+get+the+staff%3A+how+many+assistants+should+a+first+lady+%28or+man%29+have%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j998%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c2d50c512adced5dc31dcf27be7c0bed2157e19%2F1043_63_1438_863%2F1438.jpg>
 Julie Gayet likes to keep a low profile. Photograph: Guillaume Horcajuelo/EPA 
Being president of France, François Hollande 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/francois-hollande> has a complicated 
arrangement with his wives. The current one, Julie Gayet,keeps a low profile 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/francois-hollande/12113749/Francois-Hollande-too-traumatised-by-Trierweiler-to-make-Gayet-First-Lady-says-new-book.html>
 and may need few staff if any. His ex,Valérie Trierweiler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/valerie-trierweiler>, however, was a public 
first lady in the full French style,spending €396,900 (£312,516) on a staff of 
five 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/16/valerie-trierweiler-spent-more-than-previously-thought-francois-hollande>
 in 2013, not including security guards. Yet this was cheap compared with 
former president Nicolas Sarkozy’s wife,Carla Bruni-Sarkozy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/carla-bruni-sarkozy>, who spent €437,376 
on her eight staff, plus €410,000 on her website.

India: a dozen (reluctantly)

The status of India’s current first lady – Jashodaben Narendrabhai Modi – is 
weird to the point of Kafkaesque. She and Narendra Modimarried, by arrangement, 
when they were teenagers 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/abandoned-as-a-child-bride-indias-first-lady-still-hopes-her-husband-will-call/2015/01/25/3509dac5-5ac1-49e3-8b44-7d92e027c9ec_story.html>
, but he left soon afterwards and they have neither divorced nor lived together 
since, and scarcely even met. Mrs Modi now lives quietly retired in a small 
town in Gujarat, but upon Mr Modi’s election as prime minister, shefound 
herself being followed everywhere by about a dozen security staff 
<http://www.business-standard.com/article/current-affairs/jashodaben-s-security-cover-to-stay-the-jury-is-out-on-rules-for-privileges-114112600027_1.html>
 in an expensive car, while she goes about on foot or by rickshaw. Apparently 
the guards also demand to be fed, and Mrs Modi has said she is scared of them. 
They refuse to identify themselves and the police won’t explain why they’ve 
been assigned.

• This article was amended on 17 May 2016. An earlier version referred to 
Angela Merkel <https://www.theguardian.com/world/angela-merkel> as head of 
state, rather than head of government.

