
‘Age-appropriate” is a red flag for me. When certain people say it, you know 
it’s being deployed in service of curtailing fun. Leopard print? Wear it until 
you’re 99, I say. Short shorts? Your business! This magnanimity is partly down 
to the full-on crush I have on an age-inappropriate celebrity: 19‑year‑old 
actor and singerZendaya <http://zendaya.com>. She seems like a really cool bean.

First stop on the introduction to Zendaya tour? Your tween relatives. They 
might have seen her inShake It Up <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gJ34WCpnLfE> 
on the Disney Channel (she played Rocky, a background dancer on a local TV show.
So meta!). Or perhaps in KC Undercover 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YONKXFjNMVk> (she plays KC, a maths genius and 
teen spy-in-training).

But I first heard of her last year, when TV presenter Giuliana Rancic 
disparaged her dreadlocks at the Oscars 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/feb/25/giuliana-rancic-zendaya-hair>
, saying she probably smelled of patchouli or weed.Zendaya’s thoughtful, 
gracious Instagram takedown 
<https://mobile.twitter.com/Zendaya/status/570075725765541888?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
 was a thing of quiet fury and beauty: “My wearing my hair in locs [sic] on an 
Oscar red carpet was to showcase them in a positive light, to remind people of 
colour that our hair is good enough.”

Related: Why I love… Curtis Sittenfeld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/14/curtis-sittenfeld-crush-author-eligible-bim-adewunmi>

When an internet-stranger called her parents ugly, her reply began: “First, 
I’m gonna pray for you.” 
<http://www.mtv.com/news/2254304/zendaya-internet-trolls-parents/> I love her 
assuredness (when she’s putting idiots in their place 
<http://www.usmagazine.com/celebrity-news/news/zendaya-vs-the-world-4-times-she-schooled-her-haters-2015262>
) and her goofball tendencies (herred carpet gurning 
<http://demetrialuvater.tumblr.com/post/144322916367/i-love-these-poses> makes 
me chuckle). And can we talk about herstyle 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/sheridanwatson/shake-the-red-carpet-up?utm_term=.dlrNRBN22#.xg13za3vv>
? My God. Clothes like this are what your teen years are for.

But big things are ahead, too: Zendaya’s got a “key role” in the Spider-Man 
reboot <http://variety.com/2016/film/news/spider-man-reboot-zendaya-1201724216/>
 out next year. And last monthshe popped up in Beyoncé’s visual album, Lemonade 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BEka12OJmBg/>. A co-sign from Queen Bey? Amazing.
