
It’s amazing how quickly your Twitter feed can turn. One minute mine was 
filled with people congratulatingEmma Watson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/emma-watson> on her UN speech, urging men to 
join the fight for gender equality. The next, all I saw were retweets of this:

— Sky News (@SkyNews) September 22, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/SkyNews/status/514152751165485056> 
DAILY STAR FRONT PAGE: "Emma Watson naked photo shock" #skypapers 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/skypapers?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/onVCuLQrtw 
<http://t.co/onVCuLQrtw>
 <https://twitter.com/SkyNews/status/514152751165485056> 
Bypassing, for the moment, the sheer grotesque wrongness of the phrase “Harry 
Potter babe’s stolen sex pics”, what really upset me about this front page was 
that it seemed to be designed to put the actor back in her box. To make it 
clear that if she dared to stand up for anything more controversial than which 
brand of wand to use, then someone out there would make it their mission to 
attempt to humiliate and shame her. And it says everything about the minds of 
these people that they assume the most humiliating thing any woman can 
experience is public nudity.

Helen Lewis recently wrote about the under-representation of women online 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/aug/08/women-misogyny-internet-mary-beard-female-troll>
 and the level of abuse they receive when they do put their head below the 
commenting line. She, quite rightly, argues that we need more female-dominated 
spaces online; forums and websites where women rule and any attempt to abuse or 
attack them is dealt with swiftly and harshly. But we also need greater respect 
for women across the rest of the internet. And, forgive me for stating the 
obvious, we also need a greater respect for what those women have to say.

Emma Watson did not talk to the UN about the need for equality because all 
forms of gender discrimination have been eradicated from our world. She spoke 
about it because every day, in every country, women face violence, abuse or 
just plain old ignorance. Rather than trying to humiliate her for reminding us 
all of these simple facts, we should stop, listen and join her in trying to 
change it. But here’s the funny thing. Much as we’ll cheer for the underdog in 
a sports match, in real life we don’t want them to defend themselves.


A recent study at the University of Colorado–Boulder 
<http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/07/23/glass_ceiling_study_women_and_people_of_color_are_penalized_for_valuing.html>
 asked managers to mark their employees on a range of factors, including 
performance, competence and “diversity-valuing behaviour”. What it found was 
this: women or people of colour who scored highly for “diversity-valuing 
behaviour” scored less well on performance. This was not the case for white 
men. It seems we are psychologically inclined to see an attempt at creating 
diversity by white men as a good thing, while anyone else is a trouble-maker.

If you’re a woman trying to stand up for other women’s rights, whether that’s 
in your office, online or at the UN, you instantly mark yourself out as someone 
who needs to brought back in line. For most of us, this won’t manifest itself 
in front page headlines screaming about naked photos but that doesn’t mean 
we’re let off. We might miss out on a promotion or have to deal with trolls and 
accusations of “women’s lib gone mad”. Slowly but surely, the person speaking 
out is battered and worn down until they can no longer remember why they 
started talking about this issue in the first place.

How depressing to be silenced by a threat, to believe that each time you point 
out an injustice you just bring more harm to yourself. The only way we solve 
this is by being vocal in our condemnation of the people who try to tear others 
down. The rage I felt looking at my Twitter feed last night began to dissipate 
when I saw the response to the Star’s headline: how loudly women and men mocked 
it, how much disgust was thrown at the hackers who claimed to have stolen these 
photos. And how much support Watson gained for her campaign. She’d asked men to 
stand with her against female inequality and it was happening live. Those 
people who had tried to silence her had just helped her, and every other woman 
who’s ever spoken out against injustice, to shout a little louder.

More on this topic: 


The assassination of Hilary Mantel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/sep/22/assassination-hilary-mantel-thatcher-thought-police>

Cairo+20: what progress has been made on women’s rights? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2014/sep/22/cairo20-progress-womens-rights>

#Heforshe: how to engage men in the fight for gender equality 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/apr/29/engaging-boys-men-gender-equality>

 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2014/sep/22/cairo20-progress-womens-rights>
