
Jo Oakley bought her beach hut in Whitstable for £220 more than 20 years ago, 
when her daughters Hannah and Daisy were young. “As soon as they were home from 
school on a Friday, we’d jump in the car and head out of London to the 
seaside,” she says. “When it was warm, we’d all bed down on the deck and 
star-watch until we fell asleep.”

Oakley, an artist, has seen Whitstable evolve from a backwater fishing port on 
the Thames estuary into a thriving coastal town. Her hut would cost about 
£25,000 today. “Old-timers might complain that it’s changed but I think most of 
those changes – being able to get a great cup of coffee, say – have been for 
the better. I’ve been coming here for so long that I get treated like a local. 
When I’m buying fish in the harbour, they’ll often pop an extra one in the bag 
for nothing.”

The beaded chandelier was a present from my nana ... the 50s curtain fabric 
came from a beach hut that was being updated

For Oakley, the idea of fitting out her hut with new furniture had no 
attraction. Everything in it has had a previous life. “The beaded chandelier 
was a present from my nana, and the 1950s curtain fabric came from a beach hut 
that was being updated,” she says. She has collected vintage china with a 
passion since childhood; the family who owned the hut before her left behind a 
set of 1950s crockery.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tpm9%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tpm9%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F070b2a56717371b4b1564d8ff4fa0cec3050aecf%2F0_278_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Life%E2%80%99s%20a%20beach%20hut%20with%20a%20vintage%20twist&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tpm9%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Life%E2%80%99s+a+beach+hut+with+a+vintage+twist&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tpm9%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F070b2a56717371b4b1564d8ff4fa0cec3050aecf%2F0_278_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
 The hut sleeps two comfortably on futon. Photograph: Photograph by Andreas von 
Einsiedel 
There is no electricity or running water; as soon as she arrives, Oakley 
fetches fresh water from a nearby standpipe. Communal loos for hut owners are a 
short walk away, and Oakley has a solar-heated shower on the side of the hut, 
useful for rinsing off after a swim. “Swimming is one of my great pleasures,” 
she says. She kayaks when her partner, Ed, comes for the weekend: they knew 
each other as teenagers and met again in Whitstable about 10 years ago – he had 
a hut along the beach.

The hut sleeps two comfortably, on a futon, but her daughters have had half a 
dozen friends to stay by putting tents up in the garden.

This simple lifestyle is conducive to creativity. “Beach hut life  
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/aug/23/joy-of-beach-huts-julie-myerson>
is basic. You become much more aware of the elements: the weather, the light, 
the view, the sound of wind and waves, and the tide,” she says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tpm9%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tpm9%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b7932a1e1476ddbe2af99921d91b3536dbbbb00%2F0_248_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Life%E2%80%99s%20a%20beach%20hut%20with%20a%20vintage%20twist&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tpm9%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Life%E2%80%99s+a+beach+hut+with+a+vintage+twist&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tpm9%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b7932a1e1476ddbe2af99921d91b3536dbbbb00%2F0_248_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
 A portable stove and a selection of lanterns add to the vintage feel. 
Photograph: Photograph by Andreas von Einsiedel 
One of Oakley’s favourite haunts in Whitstable is Wheelers Oyster Bar 
<http://www.wheelersoysterbar.com/>. “It’s tiny and you have to bring your own 
wine, but the fish is delicious,” she says. “On balmy evenings, they’ll prepare 
a platter of shellfish for you, which we take back to the deck outside the hut. 
Then we’ll curl up on the cushions and star-watch. That’s one aspect of 
Whitstable that will never change.”

• Jo Oakley’s work can be seen by arrangement at Jonathan Cooper Gallery, 
London SW10. Go tojonathancooper.co.uk <http://www.jonathancooper.co.uk/>, 
www.jooakley.co.uk <http://www.jooakley.co.uk/>
