
Culture minister Ed Vaizey has said that rules governing how companies such as 
Sky and BT are allowed to advertise broadband speeds to attract customers are 
“misleading” and a “complete and utter joke”.

Under the UK advertising code, which is administered by the Advertising 
Standards Authority <http://www.theguardian.com/media/asa>, companies are 
allowed to advertise their top speeds even if they are available to only 10% of 
customers.

“It’s ridiculous,” Vaizey told the House of Commons culture, media and sport 
select committee.


Related: Virgin Media asks ASA to crack down on false broadband speed claims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/22/virgin-media-asks-asa-to-crack-down-on-false-broadband-speed-claims>

“The idea that if you can deliver to 10% of houses the broadband speeds you 
are advertising on a large billboard and get away with it seems to be a 
complete and utter joke, and I have told that to their [the ASA’s] face.”

In January, the ASA announced it is to crack down on the way companies 
including Sky, BT, Virgin Media, TalkTalk, EE, Three and O2 advertise the 
confusing advertising of prices of broadband packages 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/21/ad-watchdog-cracks-down-misleading-broadband-ads>
.


This prompted Virgin Media, which is able to offer superfast broadband through 
its cable network, to call for the scope to be increased to look at theveracity 
of “up to” speed claims in ads <http:// 
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/22/virgin-media-asks-asa-to-crack-down-on-false-broadband-speed-claims>
.

“It is good to have independent regulators,” said Vaizey. 


“But I also feel as a politician and minister in this space I want to have the 
opportunity to express my frustrations. I am frustrated.


“The way broadband speeds are advertised are misleading and I’d like to see 
them changed. I’ve made my views clear and the ASA will be aware of my 
concerns.”

A spokesman for the ASA said: “Our position on broadband speed claims in ads 
is based on extensive work undertaken in recent years, including a full public 
consultation on new guidance. We are an independent, evidence-based regulator 
and that underpins our regulation. We are, however, aware of the minister’s 
concerns, and we are carefully considering his views.”
