
Where to go


Asia 
"Over the winter months, the best-value destinations in Asia are Bangkok, and 
Delhi," says Ian Swain ofSTA Travel <http://www.statravel.co.uk/>. "Bangkok 
continues to offer the lowest flight prices in south-east Asia, with many 
carriers flying regularly from the UK, and you can reach Thailand's beaches or 
jungle relatively cheaply by public transport." STA's London-Bangkok fares 
start at £335pp return in Jan/Feb. It has city accommodation from £11 per 
night, and can arrange an eight-day trip to northern Thailand's hill tribe 
villages for under £300pp.

The company has Delhi flights for £249pp return in early February, and a "Roam 
India" 20-day tour (throughGap Adventures <http://www.gapadventures.com/>) for 
£599.

Africa
"Gambia and Kenya tend to be good-value winter sun destinations," says Sam 
Baldwin, travel features editor ofskyscanner.net <http://www.skyscanner.net/>, 
a flight deals website. For example,Monarch <http://www.monarch.co.uk/flights> 
has flights to Banjul from Gatwick, from 5-12 January, for £205 return.

For Kenya, flights to Mombassa can cost up to £800, but flying from the middle 
to the end of January will find the best bargains, says Kathryn Frengs ofTravel 
Fusion <http://www.travelfusion.co.uk/> , which also collates deals and has 
flights from London on 24-27 January for around £523 return.Dealchecker.co.uk 
<http://www.dealchecker.co.uk/> has two weeks in Kenya for only £499pp, 
departing from Manchester on 13 December, including B&B hotel accommodation set 
back from a white beach near Mombassa.

Chris McIntyre, managing director of Expert Africa 
<http://www.expertafrica.com/> says: "Last year, the recession hit dollar-based 
countries particularly hard, especially Tanzania, Zambia and Botswana. They've 
had a tough 2009, so they're all coming out with quite sensible prices, and 
rolling out the special offers they implemented this year in the rand-based 
countries – South Africa and Namibia – which were great value, although the 
rand has now got stronger again. In 2010, some very top-end properties have 
come down quite a lot. December-March is the rainy season in most of Africa, 
but it's a bit different in Tanzania, when there is a short dry period in 
January and February. At the top end, our Elephant Fly-in Safari (six nights), 
at the top-ratedBeho-Beho camp <http://www.behobeho.com/>, costs £2,766pp (inc 
all flights, transfers, meals, park fees and activities), as opposed to £3,584 
last year."

Europe and North Africa
The best bargains are the Canaries and Egypt, which offer "exceptional value", 
says Sam Baldwin of Skyscanner.net. "And Tunisia's Mediterranean coastline is 
emerging as a good winter sun destination, yet is not overrun with tourists. 
You can fly Gatwick to Tunis for around £134 during January-March, when the 
weather is warm and sunny."

EasyJet <http://www.easyjet.com/asp/en/book/index.asp>'s flights start at 
£75.88pp return for flights from Gatwick to Tenerife in the first week of 
January.Teletextholidays.co.uk 
<http://www.teletextholidays.co.uk/Holidays/Package_Holidays/> has got trips to 
the Red Sea in December from £108pp inc flights and hotel B&B. WhileIntrepid 
Travel <http://www.intrepidtravel.com/> currently has 20% off its action-packed 
Egypt Experience tour, taking in the pyramids of Giza, Alexandria, a Nile 
cruise, the royal burial sites of the Valley of the Kings, and temples of Abu 
Simbel, from 13-24 December, for £908pp instead of the usual £1,135. Flights 
withSwiss International Air Lines 
<http://www.swiss.com/web/EN/Pages/index.aspx?Country=GB> from Heathrow to 
Cairo, are around £307.70 return for those dates.

City breaks closer to home can also offer good seasonal value, and you may be 
lucky with the weather if you go mid-haul.Kayak.co.uk <http://www.kayak.co.uk/>
's deals section has flights from London to Athens, for example, from 23-27 
December for £142 with easyJet, and has three star hotels from £85 a night.

The Caribbean

This may also be a good option this year if value for money is what's 
important to you. "Holiday offers are usually unheard of in peak season [our 
winter], but as a result of the current financial climate we have got some 
amazing savings at our top-selling hotels," says Paul Cleary, managing director 
ofCaribtours <http://www.caribtours.co.uk/>. Among the company's current offers 
to luxury hotels are a £770pp saving on the super posh Blue Waters in 
Antiguapp, now costing £1,775 pp all inclusive, including flights. It also has 
£880pp off the Colony Club in Barbados – a week costs £1,785pp.

Use packages as a jump off

Often the cheapest way to reach a far-flung spot is to bag a last-minute 
package to a touristy destination. While you may grimace at the accommodation 
included, a tacky deal can be worth booking for the flight price, to use as a 
jumping off point for a stay somewhere more interesting. This works well for 
Goa. A week costs £229pp withMonarch Holidays 
<http://www.monarch.co.uk/holidays>, departing Manchester on 11 December for 
seven nights at the Baga Hotel, including return flights and seven nights' B&B. 
Monarch's flight-only for the same route and dates is £260pp, and flying with
Jet Airways <http://www.jetairways.com/> costs £957.60pp return on those dates 
– its cheapest winter flights are around £550 in January. Baga is rather 
overdeveloped, but you could head down the coast to lovely Majorda, backpacker 
favourite Palolem or up to hippyish Arambol where there are lots of funky beach 
shacks and boutique hotels (seei-escape.com 
<http://www.i-escape.com/country_summary_pts.php?country=India%3A+Goa>).

Be savvy about dates



Some of the best bargains are on or around Christmas day. Flights with British 
Airways 
<http://www.britishairways.com/travel/globalgateway.jsp/global/public/en_> over 
Christmas from London to Mexico City cost £720 one way inc taxes if you fly on 
23, 25 or 28 December, but £2,486 on the 21 December. Flights to Sydney cost 
£729 one way on 24 and 25 December, £846 on the 23, but £1,181 on 26, £1,304 on 
the 27, and £3,393 on the 28.

There are also some general rules to bear in mind. "All the best flight deals 
on long-haul, such as the Caribbean and the Maldives are for Sunday departures, 
but closer to home, in Europe, Monday tends to be the cheapest," says Alex 
Saint, managing director of dealchecker.co.uk.

For all winter sun destinations, the first two weeks of December (ie now!) and 
mid-January are normally cheapest, said Sam Baldwin of Skyscanner. And certain 
weeks of the year tend to work out cheaper for specific destinations, says 
Kathryn Frengs of Travel Fusion. "Direct flights from London to Cancun in March 
and April can cost more than £800, but a trip in the last week of January 
(22-29) is currently only £457 return onThomsonFly 
<http://flights.thomson.co.uk/en/index.html>."

• Deals available and prices valid at time of going to press.
