
Local water vendors are not happy with fruit seller Mercy Muiruri. At the end 
of last year, she found a different solution to washing fruits before making 
them into a salad for her customers – a water ATM. “Now I know the water I use 
is safe and from a trusted source. Even my customers will be happy,” she says.

Muiruri has been operating food businesses in one of Kenya’s most populous 
slums,Mathare <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mathare>, for nearly two decades. 
Until recently, she used water from local vendors whenever she needed it.

“But I could not vouch for its safety. I, like many of my friends, never knew 
the source of that water. It got to us in 20-litre plastic containers and we 
used it,” she says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gx4d%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gx4d%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe023807cbb4eda79899aec6313ff6c24275c6954%2F0_106_3724_2235%2F3724.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20ATMs%20bringing%20cheap%2C%20safe%20water%20to%20Nairobi's%20slums&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gx4d%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+ATMs+bringing+cheap%2C+safe+water+to+Nairobi%27s+slums&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gx4d%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe023807cbb4eda79899aec6313ff6c24275c6954%2F0_106_3724_2235%2F3724.jpg>
 The water reaches the ATM through 18km of newly laid water pipes, connected 
from the city’s main supply lines. Photograph: Grundfos 
Now she and other slum residents have something to smile about. Last year a 
public-private partnership betweenNairobi Water and Sewerage Company 
<https://www.nairobiwater.co.ke/index.html>, the city’s main water distribution 
company, and Grundfos, a Danish water engineering firm, resulted in the 
installation of water vending machines. The machines are expected to 
revolutionise water availability and distribution to populations that have long 
beenat the mercy of water cartels 
<http://in.reuters.com/article/women-cities-kenya-water-idINKCN0JA0P620141126> 
and a changing and unreliable climate.

To buy clean water, users load points onto smart cards which are able to 
access the water ATMs around the slum. By a simple swipe of their smart card on 
the ATM’s sensor, water is released from the main storage and into a waiting 
container.

Related: The rural Kenyan school that collects water for the community 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/may/06/the-rural-kenyan-school-that-collects-water-for-the-community>

The water reaches the ATM through 18 km of newly laid pipes, connected from 
the city’s main supply lines which receive treated water fromNdakaini Dam 
<http://awsboard.go.ke/media/photo-gallery/ndakaini-dam/>, the main reservoir 
for the city’s more than3 million residents 
<http://www.knbs.or.ke/index.php?option=com_phocadownload&view=category&id=20&Itemid=1107>
.

“Apart from knowing we are drinking and using safe water, the vending machines 
have also helped us cut costs,” Muiruri says. “I can put the difference saved 
back into my business.”

The daily income in a slum household in Kenya is just over a dollar 
<http://www.irinnews.org/pdf/nairobi_inventory.pdf>, and the average home uses 
around 100 litres of water a week. The water vendors operating in the slum 
would charge Sh50 (50 cents) for a 20 litre container of water. With the 
introduction of the ATMs, weekly expenditure on water in Mathare has been 
reduced from Sh250 ($2.5) to Sh2.50 (2.5 cents).

The Nairobi Water <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/water> and Sewerage 
Company has been trying to get viable solutions to water supply problems within 
informal settlements for years. “Initially, our pipes were vandalised by these 
same cartels that sold water to residents at exorbitant prices,” says Mbaruku 
Vyakweli, the water company’s communications officer. “Now, all we need is a 
safe and secure area, agreed on by the residents, and we supply the water from 
our own dams and reservoirs. Our prices are constant because the product is 
available throughout. Plus, the water ATMs are run and monitored by residents; 
they own them and therefore take better care of them.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gx4d%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gx4d%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F803ba3dda41577c1f7b72e5075f46ffedeff53d1%2F0_0_5378_3228%2F5378.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20ATMs%20bringing%20cheap%2C%20safe%20water%20to%20Nairobi's%20slums&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gx4d%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+ATMs+bringing+cheap%2C+safe+water+to+Nairobi%27s+slums&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gx4d%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F803ba3dda41577c1f7b72e5075f46ffedeff53d1%2F0_0_5378_3228%2F5378.jpg>
 Water vendors operating in Mathare slum charge Sh50 (50 cents) for a 20l litre 
container of water. Photograph: Tony Karumba/AFP/Getty Images 
The ATMs in Mathare are managed by a village chairman in association with a 
committee of residents. The smart cards are given out to residents for free and 
they load them with a value of their choice from a Nairobi Water and Sewerage 
Company outlet.

These outlets are spread around the slum, home to some 200,000 people. They 
are located in central and well-lit areas, such as near floodlights and along 
the main streets of Mathare, making them easily accessible day and night.

Residents say the health benefits of the scheme are already being felt. In the 
middle of last year, a cholera outbreak swept through the slum and other 
surrounding areas, resulting in two deaths. The cramped slum conditions coupled 
with poor sanitation – including unhygienic water – contributed to the spread 
of the disease. At the time, Médecins Sans Frontières was recording200 new 
cholera cases every week 
<http://www.msf.org/article/kenya-msf-concerned-rapid-spread-cholera-outbreak>.

Related: Lack of engineers delaying vital water projects in developing 
countries 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jan/15/lack-of-engineers-delaying-vital-water-projects-in-developing-countries>

Although Muiruri has only been using her smart water card for four months, the 
memory of dealing with water brokers and the constant worrying over her 
family’s health now seems distant. “Life has become much easier. I can budget 
and I am also saving on other costs because I spend less on charcoal or 
kerosene to boil my drinking water. It has already been treated,” she says.

Nairobi’s water company now hopes to roll out the machines into more informal 
areas, using the technology to safely solve everyday problems.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter, and have your say on issues 
around water in development using#H2Oideas 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23H2Oideas&src=typd>.
