
I never normally use drugs. But when my girlfriend, Kirsty, and I went on a 
weekend break to Amsterdam for our birthdays in the summer of 2014, we thought 
it would be a missed opportunity if we didn’t sample one or two cannabis cafes. 
It was such a great holiday and as soon as we got home we booked another – this 
time to the Tunisian island of Djerba. Two weeks later, we left our home in 
Hyde, Greater Manchester, for the north African coast.

One evening we got talking to a friendly group of young Tunisian men on mopeds 
outside a bar. We were having a laugh and I persuaded one guy, Basam, to give 
me a ride on his scooter. Within seconds, we were surrounded by armed police 
shouting at us in Arabic.

We were bundled into a car and driven to a local police station. After three 
hours, they let Kirsty go. The officer asked me three questions: “Do you smoke 
hashish? Do you have any hashish? Did you smoke hashish inTunisia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/tunisia>?” My honest answer was “no” to all 
three. Not since Amsterdam.

After three days in the police station, a man and woman came from the British 
embassy to tell me I was being charged 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/nov/23/foreign-office-condemned-failing-britons-need-help>
 with consuming cannabis. They told me police had found a small bit of hashish 
on Basam, which he said I’d given him.

A few days later, I finally got to see a judge. But he didn’t speak English, so
I was told I’d be taken to prison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jan/21/political-prisoners-tunisia-released>
 while they found a translator. I was driven to Harboub prison, in the middle 
of the desert. I was terrified, but kept telling myself it was just a mix-up 
and surely I could soon go home. They shaved my head and led me to a 40ft x 
40ft cell containing 100 men. Every inmate went quiet and stared at me, the 
only westerner in the room. There were fans, but daily power cuts made them 
useless in the 40C heat, and my bunk was three feet from the toilet – a 
stinking hole in the floor.

I made a couple of friends who spoke broken English, which helped pass the 
time. But by December, five months later, I still hadn’t seen a judge. There 
were no phones to call home, though I sent Kirsty a letter every week (she 
received only three). She fought tirelessly for my release, contacting our 
local MP, harrying the Foreign Office, and sending hundreds of pounds, though 
only £30 got to me.

Embassy staff visited me just three times; they seemed to know less than I 
did. They did find me a local lawyer, but she never showed up. As my 
desperation grew, an inmate told me I should go on hunger strike to force their 
hand. So, on 22 December, I did.

I’d spent some dark days at Harboub, but none worse than Christmas Day. I was 
delirious, unable to get out of bed. I remember the inmate in the bunk next to 
me had been sent a roast chicken by his family. After three days without food, 
the aroma just made me want to vomit. I thought of home and what my family 
would be doing.

After 19 days on hunger strike, the prison doctor sent a letter to the judge 
saying he had to see me or I would die. I went to court on 20 January. My 
“trial” lasted five minutes, all in Arabic. A prisoner told me the gist: they’d 
done tests and found cannabis in my urine – from the trip toAmsterdam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/27/netherlands-cannabis-cafes-off-limits-tourists>
. He said I’d been sentenced to a year in prison and fined the equivalent of 
£450. Strangely, I was elated because I finally knew where I stood. On 20 
March, I was released as part of a presidential amnesty. Within an hour of my 
name being called, I was on a plane home.

Being met by Kirsty at Heathrow airport was surreal. All I could think of to 
say was: “Do you think I’ve got a suntan?” She just laughed and gave me a big 
hug. I had spent eight months in jail. While I’m relieved to be home, I’m angry 
at the government for not doing more to help me. And on top of everything, I’d 
lost my job as a rail worker.

Related: Experience: I skied off a cliff 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/04/experience-i-skied-off-a-cliff>

Sometimes at night, I am back in that stinking cell. When I wake, I’m reminded 
of how much I used to take for granted. I’ll never look at a roast chicken the 
same way, though.

• As told to Matt Blake. Do you have an experience to share? Email 
experience@theguardian.com <mailto:experience@theguardian.com>
