
“You must be mad!” My friend looked horrified. “At your age? You’ll never 
stick it out.”


But here I am in the British Library, hunting though lists of artworks from 
long-forgotten exhibitions, hoping to spot a painting of a beggar in among the 
still lifes of cabbage leaves and dead game. I am 69 and retired, but instead 
of pottering round the golf course or soaking up the sun on some Mediterranean 
cruise, I am studying for aPhD 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/phd>.

Related: Academics Anonymous: 'Why are you doing a PhD at your age?' 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2014/jul/25/academics-anonymous-mature-phd-worthless>

Quite how I ended up doing this, I’m still not entirely sure. English 
literature was my first love and the subject of my first degree. But history of 
art had always come a close second and when I finally retired, I decided to 
embark on an MA. It was part-time with the Open University and just for fun. 
But what I hadn’t realised was that those three years would lead to a 
fascination with the portrayal of the beggar in 18th-century art – a 
fascination that would become something of an obsession. So when I finished my 
master’s, I just had to carry on.

 Continuing with the part-time Open University route was the obvious choice. 
At my age, I have too many family and other commitments to immerse myself in 
three years’ uninterrupted study, tempting as that might be. And it has not 
always been easy: juggling academic work and babysitting duties requires a 
certain amount of forward planning. There have been crises with elderly 
relatives and with younger ones, too. But it can be done and I am now nearly 
two years into a six-year journey.

Is it worth it? Absolutely! There’s still a childish thrill in getting a 
reader’s ticket and settling into those dimly-lit libraries at the V&A or the 
Royal Academy, waiting for the dust to settle. There’s the excitement of 
opening some ancient volume, never quite sure what you’re going to find.

There’s also a wealth of online databases to explore – newspapers and 
journals, early texts, prints and provenance – you wonder how anyone ever 
managed to do research in a pre-digital age. And there’s that moment when a 
beggar does jump out from among the landscapes and staid conversation pieces 
and has to be fitted into the patterns you’ve been building in your mind.

It’s a paradox that the more you learn, the less you realise you know

But the eureka moments come with a hard slog. After nearly 70 years of 
constant use, my brain is not as quick as it once was and my stamina is 
undoubtedly less. There’s a certain nostalgia to be had from sitting in library 
cafes, surrounded by crowds of students, radiating youth.

They have the computer skills I’ve had to struggle to acquire: how to compress 
images and create footnotes, how to set up citation alerts and, above all, how 
to back up and save every last word. And while I can safely opt out of the 
career in management training, I still find myself faced with a skills audit; a 
task I thought I’d long left behind.

Research <http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/research> can be 
a lonely journey. Your subject is yours and yours alone, it’s hard to explain 
in a dinner party conversation. And study with the Open University, for 
part-timers like me who are many miles from all the activities in Milton 
Keynes, is indeed distance learning. But it is not a wholly virtual experience. 
There were the initial induction days when we all chatted excitedly, not quite 
sure what lay ahead. I have face-to-face meetings with my excellent supervisors 
in London and all the support I need is there. I can order an obscure thesis 
from America and have it delivered to my door, while the IT helpdesk will 
resolve my computer problems for me.

Related: Five years of hard graft in a pub kitchen fired up my PhD 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/feb/15/five-years-of-hard-graft-in-a-pub-kitchen-fired-up-my-phd>

So do I ever wake in the early hours and wonder if my friend was right? Well, 
I have certainly been warned to expect a halfway hump. And of course there are 
days when the words won’t flow, when I can’t find the evidence for my latest 
theory, when ideas are as elusive as those beggar images, hiding behind the 
cabbage leaves. Those are days when a Mediterranean cruise suddenly seems most 
attractive.

But would I give up? No. It’s a truism that the more you learn, the less you 
realise you know. Every answer leads to another question and in that sense the 
journey never ends. I know I am lucky to have the physical health and financial 
resources still to be travelling on it. And while it’s the journey that counts, 
not the final destination, I shall still be proud when I do eventually arrive 
and prove my doubters wrong. “You’re never too old,” I’ll tell them. “So go for 
it while you can!”

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
