
How we use metrics in higher education is a fiercely debated topic , and as the
Teaching Excellence Framework is rolled out, 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/nov/02/teaching-excellence-framework-university-tef-student-data-higher-education>
 looks set to stay high on the agenda. Yet academics are not the only ones 
facing an increased emphasis on measurement. Over the last few years 
administrative staff have also felt the pain of the numbers game. But there’s 
been very little debate about how the shift to a data-driven culture is 
affecting us.

What does the emphasis on metrics mean for people who work in alumni 
relations? Online tools such as Google Analytics, for example, have been used 
to check web statistics for quite a while. But workplaces are constantly 
evolving, putting staff under pressure to generate more and more data.

Related: Our obsession with metrics turns academics into data drones 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/nov/27/our-obsession-with-metrics-turns-academics-into-data-drones>

Much of the issue boils down to how we measure “engagement”. It’s a worthy aim 
but difficult in practice. How exactly do you put a numerical value on the 
quality of relationships? And the truth is that donating to your university is 
as much an emotional activity as it is a financial one. No amount of 
number-crunching should blind us to that fact.

Another problem with metrics is that people focused on targets can become 
allergic to risk, yet alumni relations is a fundamentally creative role. It is 
hard to be creative without taking risks.

Perhaps the biggest issue is that metrics, handled badly, can be profoundly 
divisive. Much has been said about the gulf that threatened to open up between 
the arts and the sciences as a result of the impact agenda, introduced as part 
of the Research Excellence Framework. As a result, academics pushed for an 
ethical approach to measuring impact and theIndependent Review of the Role of 
Metrics in Research Assessment and Management 
<http://www.hefce.ac.uk/rsrch/metrics/>was set up. 

It’s not impossible to imagine a divideoccurring in alumni teams; with metrics 
driving a wedge between fundraising staff, whose progress against financial 
targets is easily measured, and communications staff, whose work on engagement 
is much messier and harder to quantify.

Staff are under pressure to create more and more data

But we communications people should not see numbers as the enemy. There are 
lesson to be learned from academia, in particular, the adoption of “altmetrics” 
or non-standard indicators of quality. Altmetricsembrace the idea that because 
quality is a multi-dimensional concept 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2012/aug/24/measuring-research-impact-altmetic>
, we need a holistic approach to measuring it. The key is to capture our 
activities from many different angles instead of using misleading metrics in 
isolation (follower numbers on social networks is widely acknowledged as a bad 
metric in communications circles, because you can’t be sure those followers are 
actually reading your feed).

In alumni teams in the US and Canada, the use of altmetrics to track alumni 
engagement has already been trialled with some success. George Brown College in 
Toronto and Ivy Tech Community College in Indiana are two institutions that have
designed bespoke systems to measure return 
<http://www.case.org/Publications_and_Products/September2013/Tracking_Alumni_Engagement_.html?site=mobile>
 on investment in alumni relations. They have done this by counting activities 
such as event attendance, participation in discount programmes, and 
volunteering hours, then weighting them based on the level of commitment 
involved.

Related: The metric tide: an agenda for responsible indicators in research 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/political-science/2015/jul/09/the-metric-tide-responsible-indicators-research>

An important caveat is that the development of an engagement tracking system 
is a serious piece of work that cannot be developed quickly or easily. George 
Brown College conducted a survey of alumni, followed by a literature review and 
consultations with a number of Canadian and US institutions before putting 
together a tracking system.

In addition, the responsibility for devising altmetrics lies with both 
fundraisers and communicators; it is only by working together that we can make 
a proper case for investment.

Given the amount of work involved in tracking and reporting engagement, at 
some point you will probably be tempted to fudge the numbers. What’s the harm 
in selecting a few dodgy measures to impress the boss? Why do we need a 
strategy when we have data?

My advice is to resist this kind of thinking. Data work best when they tell us 
unpalatable truths that can help us to improve. We have a responsibility to 
refuse requests for bad metrics that distort our efforts, and we must work 
harder at communicating why.

We must keep questioning how metrics are used within universities. There will 
always be those who try to game the system but if the Ref and the Tef have 
taught us anything, it’s that metrics have enormous power over people’s lives 
and careers. And where is the job satisfaction in falsifying the evidence?

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
