
The Conservatives have “hijacked” the UK’s multi-billion pound aid budget and 
are using it to bankroll big business, military programmes and their own 
anti-immigration policies rather than to provide healthcare and education to 
millions in the developing world, according to the shadow international 
development secretary,Diane Abbott 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/diane-abbott>.

In an excoriating speech to be delivered on Saturday in London, Abbott will 
tear into the government’snew aid strategy 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/uk-aid-tackling-global-challenges-in-the-national-interest>
 and accuse the Tories of putting politics and national self-interest above 
efforts to help some of the planet’s poorest people.

Abbott will tell the national gathering of the campaigning group Global 
Justice Now <http://www.globaljustice.org.uk/national-gathering-2016>: “Aid has 
been hijacked by this government, to subsidise big business, military and 
anti-immigration policies. They should be using aid money to help build public 
services, providing health and education for millions of people, not filling 
the coffers of western big business.”

She will say that the “slide towards using aid to subsidise British business 
and as a slush fund top up its military and security budgets” will undermine 
efforts to improve global health and education, and fight climate change.

Related: Britain has a new aid strategy. But has it got its priorities right? 
| Nilima Gulrajani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/03/britain-development-aid-strategy-priorities>

The government’s aid strategy 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/478834/ODA_strategy_final_web_0905.pdf>
 (pdf), which was published last November, has been criticised for being too 
“Treasury-led” and for focusing more on the UK’s security and prosperity than 
on traditional development goals.

In a recent report, the Commons international development committee (IDC) said 
the strategy could make it harder for the Department for International 
Development (DfID) tofulfil its core mission of reducing global poverty 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/22/treasury-led-aid-policy-risks-sidelining-poverty-reduction-mps-warn>
.

The IDC also expressed concerns over the new strategy’s provisions to allow 
government departments other than DfIDan increased share of the aid budget 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/03/britain-development-aid-strategy-priorities>
, which is nowenshrined in law 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/09/uk-passes-bill-law-aid-target-percentage-income>
 as 0.7% of gross national income.

The proportion of the aid budget spent by DfID is expected to fall from 85% 
now to about 72% by 2020. In2013, the UK spent £11.46bn 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/16/dfid-national-audit-office-criticism-uk-aid-spending-1bn-two-months>
 on overseas aid, which is technically known as official development assistance 
(ODA).


Abbott will also accuse the government of specious arguments to spin what she 
terms “the dubious argument that communities in the world’s poorest nations 
share the interests of both UK business and the UK security state”.

She will add: “It is not for no reason that the refrain ‘Can we ODA that?’ is 
now common in the corridors of the Ministry of Defence and the Foreign and 
Commonwealth Office – departments that can also claim national security to 
cover up any embarrassing aid expenditure.”

A DfID spokeswoman said: “The UK government’s aid strategy is focussed on 
making a difference in the real world - using aid to the very best effect, and 
under internationally-agreed rules, to tackle global challenges like poverty, 
economic development, countering extremism and violence against women. This is 
the right thing to do and it is firmly in our national interest.”

In 2014, the UK became the first G7 country to meet the 46-year-old UN target 
of spending 0.7% of its gross national income on ODA 
<http://www.unmillenniumproject.org/press/07.htm>. The push to get the target 
enshrined in law was tortuous, with some backbench Tories doing their best to 
torpedo the debate.

Philip Davies, the MP for Shipley, had previously labelled the bill “a handout 
to make a few middle class, Guardian-reading, sandal-wearing, lentil-eating 
do-gooders with a misguided guilt complex feel better about themselves”.

Despite legislation to guarantee the target, controversy over how and where 
DfID spends its money has refused to die down.

On 13 June, parliament will debate a petition – signed by more than 230,000 
people <https://petition.parliament.uk/petitions/125692> – that calls on the 
government to drop the 0.7% commitment and “provide money only for truly 
deserving causes, on a case-by-case basis”.
