
A column written by the editor of Ireland's largest-selling newspaper was 
changed between editions after objections by her bosses.

The presses of the Sunday Independent were stopped on Saturday evening (19 
July), reported yesterday'sSunday Times 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/sundaytimes> in Ireland, in order to amend an 
article by Anne Harris.

The changes involved specific references to Denis O'Brien 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/denis-o-brien>, the major shareholder of the 
paper's publishing company, Independent News & Media (INM).

But copies of Harris's original column did make it on to the street and the 
differences between the two versions were spotted by Gavin Sheridan, who 
pictured them and then posted themhere on thestory.ie website. 
<http://thestory.ie/2014/07/20/why-was-the-anne-harris-sunday-independent-column-modified/>

Version one - Harris wrote: "Denis O'Brien is the majority shareholder in INM. 
In theory, with 29% of the shares, he does not control it. In practice, he 
does."

Version two -  the phrase "In practice, he does" was deleted.

The next paragraph was also changed...

Version one -  Harris wrote: "The question is whether he understands 
newspapers. In order to confront the truths in our society, we must have a free 
press. With the restrictive charter for journalists proposed last year, and 
some garrotive (sic) new structures, Denis O'Brien does not make this easy."

Version two - "The question is whether he understands newspapers. In order to 
confront the truths in our society, we must have a free press. If the 
restrictive charter for journalists proposed last year, along with some other 
structural changes, are anything to go by, it might be instructive for him to 
listen to journalists, troublesome and all as they are."

According to the Sunday Times, the order to stop the presses was made by 
Stephen Rae, group editor of INM's titles, a decision which led to "a heated 
discussion in the newsroom".

Harris's column, "Lies won't compromise the Sunday Independent" 
<http://www.independent.ie/opinion/lies-wont-compromise-the-sunday-independent-30444448.html>
 (version two), was a response to an article about her in Phoenix (Ireland's 
Private Eye-like satirical magazine).

It claimed that she was leaving the Sunday Independent in October and had 
negotiated a generous leaving package, a key part of which involved her 
agreeing not to publish articles about O'Brien.

Harris regarded that claim - which implied she had been "bought" - as 
defamatory. Hence her article, in which she did mention O'Brien.

While the enforced changes did not undermine Harris's personal stance, they 
did prove that press freedom is indeed circumscribed in her newspaper. Well 
done, Stephen Rae.
