
Frustration at her powerlessness to change the country prompted Scottish Tory 
leaderRuth Davidson <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/ruth-davidson> to quit 
her well-paid, four-days-a-week job as a popular drivetime radio presenter in 
2009 in order to stand for Holyrood. The irony of Davidson, now 37, nailing her 
colours to the mast of the sinking Conservative ship in Scotland so as to grab 
hold of the levers of change isn’t lost on her. “My mother was horrified, as 
you can imagine,” she admits, sipping on a glass of water in a fashionable 
Edinburgh bar near Holyrood.

Related: Scottish Conservative manifesto vows strong opposition to SNP 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/13/scottish-conservative-manifesto-strong-opposition-snp-ruth-davidson>

The Scottish Conservative party’s results at the 2015 general election – the 
first under Davidson – were unlikely to have offered her mother much succour. 
The party suffered its worst ever UK return, with just 14.9% voting 
Conservative; the brand having been on the slide ever since Tories north of the 
border failed to differentiate themselves from Thatcherism in the 1980s.

But these are extraordinary times in Scottish politics 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/scotland> and, to a great extent as a 
result of the slow-motion implosion of the Labour party, Davidson’s mum could 
be in for a welcome surprise. “Tories ‘could form official opposition at 
Holyrood’,” screamed a recent headline in theScotsman.

The latest polling ahead of May’s Holyrood election has the SNP on 50%, Labour 
on 21% and theConservatives <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> 
on 18%. There is only one winner here, but the contest for that second spot is 
tight and Davidson’s pitch is simple: if you want a strong leader to hold the 
rampant SNP to account then she will do it. And, she will take any opportunity 
to remind those who voted No in the 2014 referendum that she is utterly sound 
on independence.

While the Labour leader, Kezia Dugdale (exposed as having applied for work 
experience with the SNP in the Scottish parliament in 2003), has suggested she 
could support independence if the UK voted to leave the EU (a confession she 
swiftly retracted 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-scotland-scotland-politics-35948407>), Davidson 
says she doesn’t believe there can be any excuse for another poll on that 
subject. “I struggle to see how even the SNP with their political gymnastics 
can argue that it is so important for Scotland’s interests that we stay part of 
a wider union [the EU] to which we export 16% of our goods and services but 
that we must leave a union [the United Kingdom] to which we export 64% of our 
goods and services,” she says.

Davidson adds: “We are going into the election being really upfront with 
people about what the relationship is. If you vote for me I will do a very 
specific job for you. And that job is to hold the SNP to account, fight against 
any attempt at a second independence referendum and make them concentrate on 
the things that matter to you.”

She stalls a little when asked about the impact of the Panama Papers and the 
coverage of David Cameron’s tax affairs, calling over her press adviser to 
“listen to this stuff” just in case the line of questioning becomes awkward.

After pausing for a bit she says: “I think the electorate in Scotland 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> is pretty sophisticated so they know 
what they are voting for. This is not a David Cameron versus Jeremy Corbyn 
election, because neither is on the ballot paper. It [the Panama Papers 
revelation] is a noise off, but in terms of having a material impact on the 
outcome of this campaign, I don’t think so.”

But, for all that moment of hesitancy perhaps suggests her continued concern 
about the toxicity of the Tory name, there is a confidence and buoyancy to the 
Conservative leader in Scotland. She is a dab hand at photo opportunities, 
aware that much of her job is to keep her party on the map. Not many frontline 
politicians would throw a friendly V-sign at their spin doctor when a camera is 
around.

And, with the knowledge that she needs to differentiate herself from the 
coterie of public school boys at the top of the party in London, Davidson feels 
free to write off the leadership ambitions of two of the big hitters in the 
political cabinet of which she is a member (“I actually think it will get past 
both Boris [Johnson] and George Osborne”). She is backing the new work and 
pension secretary, Stephen Crabb, for the position.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tdxk%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tdxk%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff368b4696158e0157a107e169a3933c4ba373cc7%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20Ruth%20Davidson%20really%20bring%20about%20a%20%20Conservative%20poll%20revival%20in%20Scotland%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tdxk%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can+Ruth+Davidson+really+bring+about+a++Conservative+poll+revival+in+Scotland%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tdxk%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff368b4696158e0157a107e169a3933c4ba373cc7%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Kezia Dugdale, Scottish Labour’s leader, has taken the party to the left. 
Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Observer 
When asked how Corbyn’s leadership is being received in Scotland, she responds 
with a prolonged belly laugh.

“I don’t think Jeremy Corbyn’s leadership is an unalloyed success for Scottish 
Labour <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour>,” she adds after composing 
herself.

Labour insiders put it rather more succinctly. “We are fucked,” confided one 
former Labour official. “Utterly fucked, to use a technical term,” repeated a 
former Scottish Labour MP.

It has been a devastating few years for Labour. Ousted by the SNP as the 
giants on the scene, the polls now suggest their numbers at Holyrood will be at 
least halved from the 38 currently held under the mixed proportional 
representation system, with some predicting the party could lose every one of 
its 16 constituency seats. Under Holyrood’s mixed proportional representation 
system, 56 of the 129 seats are elected via regional lists. The party, fresh 
from a general election drubbing where it was left with just one MP in 
Scotland, will instead rely on voters using their second vote to give it 
representation.

With such a rout looming, there is a battle going on behind the scenes to 
apportion blame. Sources close to the Labour leadership in London point out 
that Corbyn has generally stayed away from Scotland, allowing Dugdale to make 
her own choices, and mistakes. Her neck appears to be on the line.

Those supportive of the Scottish Labour leader, or at least sympathetic to her 
position, point out that Dugdale is being stridently anti-austerity in her 
message, tacking to the left of the SNP, as presumably Corbyn would want it.

Former MP Thomas Docherty, one of the 40 Labour MPs to lose their seat at the 
general election, is standing for the Scottish parliament in Mid Scotland and 
Fife and describes the Scottish Labour party’s manifesto – support for 
unilateral nuclear disarmament,an increase on the Scottish rate of income tax 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/02/labour-pushes-1p-tax-rise-in-scotland>
 and an increase in spending – as “unambiguously socialist”.

“Jeremy’s people have told us throughout that Jeremy was going to improve our 
circumstances in Scotland,” he says. “At the 2011 election we had 26% of the 
vote, so let’s see how it goes.”

But he believes it is not only Labour who should worry about what might be 
coming down the line, given that in his opinion the Conservatives will never 
get above 20% in Scotland.

Drinking coffee in the lounge of the Queensferry Hotel, with views of the 
Forth bridge and the Rosyth dry docks, where the Royal Navy’s two new aircraft 
carriers are being constructed, Docherty says the greatest danger in the 
party’s potential defenestration might be in breaking apart the organisational 
capacity that delivered a No to independence in 2014. “It’s why the 
nationalists put out the story about Keziaapplying to do work experience with 
the SNP 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/07/scottish-labour-leader-kezia-dugdale-job-application-leak>
,” he says. “They know that in order to win a referendum they need to destroy 
the Labour party. There is no way the Conservatives and Liberals could deliver 
the vote.”

Twenty-five miles north, that isn’t a consideration for Dean Lockhart, of 
course, the Tory candidate in Stirling. . He has a chance of stealing a seat on 
the regional list here and the former corporate lawyer is determined to take 
it. As a boy, when he was growing up on a council estate, Lockhart would walk 
down Keir Hardie Road, turning into Wilson Street and on to Clem Attlee Gardens 
to get home from school, but he isn’t sentimental about helping to kill off the 
old giant.

Striding out in the middle-class suburb of Torbrex, in Stirling, in his 
luminous blue wind-cheater (“People see it and they are reminded that we are 
back”), Lockhart knocks on the key battleground doorsteps – those who voted No 
in the referendum; who are more advanced in years; and who are dismayed by the 
SNP’s seizure of power. “You don’t want a second referendum, and we will fight 
it,” he tells the voters. “Ruth Davidson is a strong leader isn’t she?” he asks.

This is Davidson’s chance to break the “soft left consensus in Scotland” and 
expose the lie of a left-wing “Scottish exceptionalism”, she admits. “A lot of 
people have left Labour in recent years. A lot of those who are left are older, 
core voters who have worked hard all their lives, done the right things, saved 
a bit of money, bought their council house, for example,” she says. “They look 
at the crackpot economic policies espoused by Corbyn and they want to run a 
mile. It is not the Labour party they know. It is not a Labour party they want 
to be a member of and it doesn’t speak to them, their children or their 
grandchildren.”

• This article was amended on 17 April 2016.
