
Universal credit <https://www.theguardian.com/society/universal-credit> will 
see housing benefit paid direct to tenants each month (as part of a larger 
amount of benefit payments), instead of being paid to their landlords, as is 
currently the case.

Sanctuary Housing <http://www.sanctuary-housing.co.uk/> has taken part in one 
of the government’s pilot schemes to test the impact of the policy. Sanctuary’s 
head of income services, Daren Nowlan, shares his lessons for other landlords 
about how to manage the changeover.

Know your data

Sensible performance management measures are an essential part of managing 
cases. Being able to analyse rent accounts which are impacted by the changes 
early on means greater support can be provided where needed. Central to this is 
a responsive IT system that provides meaningful management information, records 
key UC data and, critically, can take a direct debit on any date to empower 
customers to manage their finances effectively.

Identify a universal credit expert

Related: Top tips: preparing for universal credit 
<http://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2012/jun/04/universal-credit-top-tips>

We found it worked well to identify at least one person to become the 
organisation’s universal credit expert to become a single point of contact for 
liaison. This person was given time to research and analyse best practice so 
that it could be fed back to other staff and provide a basis for training 
frontline officers.

We also found that a support team is a great asset, one not only well versed 
in universal credit but also able to provide customers with comprehensive 
advice about budgeting, managing debt and accessing free-banking. We also 
promoted longer term goals such as signposting for dependency issues, and 
support for access to work, education and training.

Work closely with the DWP

Working closely with the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) is essential 
and we recommend attending meetings and participating in briefings with the 
local DWP office about universal credit to ensure staff remain well informed. 
Clearly it is important to turn around DWP queries quickly but it is worth 
reminding staff about the importance ofdata protection 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media-network/olswang-partner-zone/2014/dec/04/eu-data-protection-reform-business-fines>
 and making sure they know about the latest data sharing provisions.

Existing relationships with the local council should be maintained as they 
will still be processing many housing benefit claims. Landlords should ensure 
their processes and staff can work in parallel with both housing benefit and 
universal credit.

Anticipate tenants in need

Ensuring housing officers and lettings teams understand the implications of 
the new system will put them in a stronger position to identify tenants at 
risk. In our experience, tenant requests for a rent statement or letter 
confirming current rent was one of the early indicators of a change in 
circumstances that meant a universal credit claim was imminent.

The housing sector has already recognised the risk around tenants juggling 
multiple priorities in their budgets. To ensure rent is the first payment made 
from universal credit, income recovery teams need to ensure they are proactive 
in contacting tenants when payments are due.


Related: Iain Duncan Smith gets more time to rescue the loathed universal 
credit 
<http://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2015/may/15/iain-duncan-smith-rescue-loathed-universal-credit>

We found that the personal touch, through home visits and telephone calls, 
brought benefits to both tenants and landlords alike. Tenants appreciated the 
opportunity to learn about universal credit and their responsibilities, and we 
were able to explain the importance of paying their rent promptly, reducing the 
likelihood of arrears forming.

Don’t overlook service charges

Review your service charges and understand which costs will be covered by 
universal credit and which will not. Make sure the tenant is aware of what they 
need to pay – even where analternative payment arrangement (APA) 
<https://www.citizensadvice.org.uk/benefits/universal-credit/universal-credit-getting-paid/universal-credit-alternative-payment-arrangements/>
 is in place.

Make use of APAs

APAs should be submitted as a priority by landlords where the tenants face 
either a high risk of non-payment or where arrears total eight weeks rent. 
Close monitoring of APAs helps avoid problems later on. Landlords also need to 
be alert to changes in a tenant’s circumstances which could suspend the payment 
of housing costs.

Keep customers informed

Last but not least, keep tenants informed about universal credit, including 
their responsibilities, and any changes that may affect them, using your usual 
communications resources such as direct mail, leaflets, newsletters, websites 
and social media.

Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
Guardian Housing network newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to you 
every Friday. Follow us:@GuardianHousing <https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>
