
The UK’s role in funding for-profit private schools in the developing world 
has come under attack by the UN, which fears the spike in private, “low-fee” 
schools in poor countries could undermine thesustainable development goal 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/sustainable-development-goals> 
of inclusive and equitable education for all by 2030.



Related: As private education rises globally, researchers disagree whether 
it's worth it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/mar/16/private-education-development-public-research-profit>

The UN Committee on the Rights of the Child said it was concerned that UK aid 
money was linked to private education providers 
<http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/treatybodyexternal/Download.aspx?symbolno=CRC/C/GBR/CO/5&Lang=en>
 and called on the UK government to refrain from such financing. The UK 
government is being drawn into the dispute after investing £3.5m in helping the 
Nairobi-based firm Bridge International Academies set up 250 low-cost schools 
in Lagos, Nigeria.

“Rapid increase in the number of such schools may contribute to sub-standard 
education, less investment in free and quality public schools, and deepened 
inequalities in the recipient countries, leaving behind children who cannot 
afford even low-fee schools,” the committee statement said.

Enrolment in primary school education represents one of the big success 
stories in international development over the last decade or so, with91% of 
children 
<http://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/sdgoverview/post-2015-development-agenda/goal-4.html>
 in low-income countries now signed up to study. Yet human rights and education 
groups argue that this is thanks to public investment, a direction of travel 
that could be reversed if private educators are allowed to set up shop in the 
world’s poorest areas.

“The scary tendency at the moment is the investors who are saying, we are 
going to make so much money from education’,” says Delphine Dorsi, a human 
rights expert and executive coordinator of the Right to Education Project, 
citing a packed investors’ forum oneducation innovation 
<http://www.educationinnovationafrica.com/> in Nairobi last week. 

Private education providers have always existed in the developing world, but 
recent years have seen a spurt in companies setting up in low-income 
communities in Africa, Asia and South America. For-profit firms suchBridge 
International Academies <http://www.bridgeinternationalacademies.com/> are 
emblematic of this rapidly-expanding “edupreneur” market.

Some critics question the quality of education and professionalism of the 
teaching staff thatlow-fee schools 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/aug/12/low-fee-private-schools-poverty-development-economist>
 provide, but it is the principle of paying for schooling and its effect on 
free quality education that lies behind the concerns of the UN and others.

Every child who attends a fee-paying school should free up resources for 
pupils in the state system. In reality, it doesn’t work that way, says David 
Archer, head of programme development at charity ActionAid and a board member 
of the Global Partnership for Education. Instead, government schools get caught 
up in a “spiral of decline” if their better-off students are poached.

Public schools “end up with fewer resources because their income depends on 
how many children they enrol. If they were struggling already, then their 
income goes down, so the actual effect is a negative one on the local state 
schools”, he says.

How low is “low fee” is also a contentious question. Even if the publicised 
figure is as low as $6 (£4.25) per month, which is around average according to 
Archer, ancillary costs often see this easily double. For an impoverished 
family with several children, such fees become untenable.

As a result, parents are left with difficult choices about which children to 
educate – a decision-making process that typically works to the detriment of 
girls and disabled children. At present, households living on less than $2 a 
day spend a reported $51bn per year on private nursery and primary education [
pdf 
<http://www.proparco.fr/webdav/site/proparco/shared/PORTAILS/Secteur_prive_developpement/PDF/SPD23/Article_S_MAY_S_BECK_PSD_23_UK.pdf>
].

“It is very clear that when you directly start charging fees for school then 
there is an active process of exclusion,” says Archer. “This contradicts all 
[the UK government’s] other commitments, which say that girls’ education is 
their biggest priority.”

Related: Developing world education is failing, it's time to open the doors to 
the private sector #SDGs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/sep/25/developing-world-education-failing-business-private-sector-sdgs-teachers>

A spokesperson for the UK Department for International Development defends the 
government’s position, arguing that the “vast majority” of its funding is 
directed to the state sector but that it supports paid-for schools where 
government provision is “weak or non-existent”.

“We do not accept that this in any way undermines the right to education in 
the developing countries in which we operate,” the spokesperson adds.

Education giant Pearson which has a stake in Bridge International Academies, 
along with other for-profit firmssuch as Spark Schools 
<https://www.affordable-learning.com/content/corporate/global/palf/en/home.html>
, says: “Low-fee private schools are a legitimate approach to raising access 
and quality in the developing world. In fact, enrolment in low-fee private 
schools in developing countries has increased over the last 20 years because 
millions of parents understand the importance of education as a mechanism for 
defeating poverty.”

Pro-state education campaigners disagree. Low-fee schools typically focus on 
urban areas where education establishments already exist, says Sylvain Aubry, a 
legal adviser at the Global Initiative for Economic, Social and Cultural 
Rights, a Geneva based non-profit. Rural areas or very poor areas without 
existing education infrastructure are often overlooked.


Take Bridge International Academies. In Kenya, where the firm first started, 
the vast majority of itsschools are clustered 
<http://www.bridgeinternationalacademies.com/approach/locations/> in the better 
off and more populous south and west. In contrast, the country’s remoter areas 
bordering Somalia, South Sudan and Ethiopia are much less represented.

Lucy Bradlow, spokesperson for Bridge International Academies, insists that 
the company incorporates marginalised communities into its portfolio of 
schools. Over half its schools in Uganda, for instance, are in areas officially 
designated as rural. She also refutes question marks over the quality of 
education provided, citinginternal research 
<http://www.bridgeinternationalacademies.com/results/academic/> that suggests 
Bridge pupils are outperforming their state-educated peers in Maths and English.

She defends the affordability of Bridge’s fee structure, arguing that Bridge 
was set up to be accessible to those parents already sending their children to 
low-fee schools. Its profitability derives from scale, rather than cutting 
costs, she adds.

Aubry admits that the state-funded school system is often far from perfect and 
acknowledges that “no miracle immediate solution” for free universal education 
exists. In this respect, private providers may have an interim role to play, he 
says, but they should set up only in areas where there are currently no 
schools. They should also avoid business models premised on “the lowest costs 
for the maximum return”.

It could take a decade or more for the investment in teachers and school 
infrastructure to make universal free quality public education a reality, he 
says: “In the meantime, we need to think how we can fill in the gap by working 
with other schools … rather than this anarchic, ad hoc process where the 
strongest win.”

 * This article was amended on 15 June to clarify that Bridge International 
Academies is based in Nairobi. 