
You might think you’d need a colonial estate high on some exotic hillside to 
grow your own tea, but this pretty evergreen, with scented flowers and 
delicious leaves, can thrive pretty much anywhere in the UK.

A close relative of the garden camellia (Camellia japonica), the tea plant (
Camellia sinensis 
<http://www.kew.org/science-conservation/plants-fungi/camellia-sinensis-tea>), 
despite its tropical associations, is a distinctly temperate plant. Hailing 
from the same cold, soggy regions in China that gave us the rhododendron, these 
guys can handle pretty much anything the British winter can throw at them. In 
fact, the only reason they are grown at high altitudes in places like Kenya and 
Malaysia is that those are the only regions chilly enough to keep them happy. 
Take it from someone who tried and failed to grow it dozens of times in 
Singapore, yet has had a mini plantation of it in Croydon for 10 years – tea is 
not tropical.

Winston Churchill is even alleged to have drawn up plans to cover large areas 
of the UK with outdoor tea plantations, as he felt if Britain’s tea imports 
were cut off we could not win the war. Fast forward to 2016 and there is a 
small commercial tea estate that’s been running in Cornwall for more than a 
decade, another has recently been planted in thehighlands of Scotland 
<http://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/jun/21/weatherwatch-tea-scotland> and 
plans are afoot for a third in Northern Ireland. But domestic gardeners are 
only just beginning to catch on to its charms.

Just like the regular camellia (which was once also thought of as tropical by 
UK gardeners), tea loves a bright, sheltered spot in moist, acidic soil. If, 
like me, you are growing on chalky soil, the plants are perfectly happy in a 
large pot of ericaceous potting mix, with the occasional douse of liquid feed 
in summer.Tea <http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/tea> makes an excellent 
hedge, its glossy, evergreen foliage creating a dense, verdant wall if 
regularly picked. Add to that delicate, white flowers with a sweet, 
jasmine-like scent in autumn. And, of course, the “unbuyable” flavour of its 
fresh young leaves.

Making green tea from your plant is pretty straightforward. Simply bruise a 
small handful of the fresh green tips between your hands (the more you pick, 
the more fresh, young growth there will be) and leave them to sit and wilt for 
an hour or two in the shade. As the oxygen in the air reacts with the chemicals 
in their cells exposed by the bruising, their characteristic aroma develops. 
Pop them in a pot of hot water, steep for five minutes and you are done.

Alternatively, and more excitingly, the fresh young leaves make an excellent 
green vegetable. Tossed into salads or in a stir fry they add an amazing grassy 
bitterness – like a grown-up watercress or radicchio, but richer and more 
complex, and ending in a surprising sweetness. In fact, they are a common 
regional vegetable in southeast Asia that is almost impossible to buy in the UK.

Email James at james.wong@observer.co.uk <mailto:james.wong@observer.co.uk> or 
follow him on Twitter@Botanygeek 
<https://twitter.com/Botanygeek?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
