
I’ve interviewed a lot of smallholders over the years and in most cases, a 
quest for greater self-sufficiency began with a back garden or allotment veg 
patch. Of course you don’t need to move to the countryside to expand your 
self-sufficiency horizons, and this is why for many back garden chicken keeping 
is the obvious next step.

I love keeping chickens – they are such fascinating, friendly creatures and 
I’ll never tire of freshly produced, properly free range eggs. With the 
gardening and smallholding courses that we’ll be running on our little Welsh 
plot in the very near future, more animals are very much on the agenda. I 
adopted some rescue hens a few weeks back: without theBritish Hen Welfare Trust 
<http://www.bhwt.org.uk/rehome-some-hens/> (BHWT), they would have been 
destined for slaughter.

The charity rehomes ex-layers when they are about 17 months old and no longer 
deemed commercially viable by farms. As well asenriched cages 
<http://www.bhwt.org.uk/egg-industry/enriched-cages> (which means 40 to 90 hens 
per cage) the BHWT also works with barn and free range hens. Ours were from the 
latter and have proven to be spirited and inquisitive from the off. We’ve had 
them in a fox proof enclosure (and house) next to our existing hens, so they 
can get used to each other before letting them out together. The termpecking 
order <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pecking_order>originates from the 
expression of dominance in chickens for a very good reason, so it’s worth being 
careful especially with birds that could be a tad fragile for a few weeks.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jhpx%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jhpx%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8c96c0b0ecbb265c7607067aa405c38a688b57c%2F0_58_2144_1286%2F2144.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chicken%20keeping%20for%20beginners&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jhpx%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chicken+keeping+for+beginners&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jhpx%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8c96c0b0ecbb265c7607067aa405c38a688b57c%2F0_58_2144_1286%2F2144.jpg>
 A BHWT rescue hen exploring a wildlife twig pile. Photograph: Kim Stoddart 
Yet with a little TLC and a healthy diet, most chickens will keep on laying 
productively enough - their eggs just get bigger and less uniform in size at 
this age, which doesn’t matter a jot for home use. From our little brood of 
six, we were getting about three eggs a day from day one. Fresh grass, produce 
from the garden and seaweed powder (such as kelp) mixed into their drinking 
water all helps them to flourish. BHWT also provide lots ofuseful guidance 
<http://www.bhwt.org.uk/topics/newly-re-homed-chickens/> for first time chicken 
keepers and new adoptees.

There are many benefits to keeping chickens, although most will nibble at your 
flower beds, fruit and vegetables given half a chance, so I now keep mine in a 
separate area of the garden where they still have plenty of free range foraging 
interest. Their used bedding provides a brilliant compost accelerator, and 
having hens means that the sometimes ridiculous number of slugs I remove from 
the veg patch can be put to good use (in other words munched greedily) when 
thrown their way.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jhpx%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jhpx%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23d8c1753209a493e837eed91fff1412e2cbf14c%2F0_162_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chicken%20keeping%20for%20beginners&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jhpx%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chicken+keeping+for+beginners&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jhpx%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23d8c1753209a493e837eed91fff1412e2cbf14c%2F0_162_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
 Indian runner ducks will eat slugs and make a good alternative to chickens. 
Photograph: Kim Stoddart 
Chickens come in all different colours and sizes (as do their eggs) and when I 
visited this year’sRoyal Welsh spring show 
<http://www.rwas.wales/spring-festival/> there was a mesmerising variety of 
poultry on display. Chickens aren’t the only birds worth considering.Khaki 
campbell ducks <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Khaki_Campbell> are good egg 
producers which are more intent on hunting out slugs than eating your produce 
so tend to be a popular choice. Indian runners are also good and hilarious to 
watch as they charge about. Duck poo is rather unpleasant however – you have 
been warned.

Geese are also delightful, especially the gentler breeds such as Toulouse 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Toulouse_goose>: if you were so inclined, they 
could be used as a natural lawnmower. They are noisy, however, which is why 
they also have a reputation as a burglar deterrent. They are unlikely to be a 
popular or indeed realistic choice with your neighbours. Turkeys, as well as 
being the most fascinating creatures to watch, love eating stinging nettles and 
dock leaves, so they can prove useful as ground clearers if you fancy rearing 
Christmas dinner.

At the Royal Welsh the quails 
<http://chickens.allotment-garden.org/quail/index.php> really caught my eye, so 
I fancy adding some of these little birds (and their delicious) eggs to our 
collection in the very near future.


• For more gardening ideas and antics, visit getbadlybehaved.com 
<http://www.getbadlybehaved.com/> or @badlybehavedone 
<https://twitter.com/badlybehavedone?lang=en-gb>
