
• An article about an investigation into Li Chuncheng, deputy party secretary 
of south-western Sichuan province (Newly appointed Chinese official accused of 
'breach of discipline' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/dec/05/china-party-offical-detained-corruption>
, 6 December, page 31), described Xi Jinping as China's new president. As the 
Communist party's new general secretary, he is expected to take up that post 
next year.

• The name of Labour MP Ann Clwyd was misspelled as Clywd in a picture caption 
on the front page and in a caption accompanying an article about her husband's 
death (Husband died like a battery hen, says MP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/dec/04/ann-clwyd-husband-died-hen>, 5 
December, page 9). The front-page caption also incorrectly said Clwyd's husband 
died last year; he died in October this year.

• Although a Chanel fashion show was titled "Paris-Edimbourg", it was not in 
Edinburgh as suggested by the subheading on a report (Chanel revives 
Franco-Scottish love affair in tweedy fashion 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2012/dec/04/chanel-franco-scottish-affair-tweed>
, 5 December, page 12). It was in Linlithgow.

• A Comment article about the Republican party said it had won the White House 
five times in the six presidential elections prior to 1988. It did so in the 
six elections up to and including 1988, but only four times in the six before 
that date (Is this the death of the Republican party? No way 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/nov/18/death-of-republican-party-no-chance>
, 19 November, page 27).

• Dave Brubeck obituary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/dec/05/dave-brubeck> was amended to 
remove an incorrect reference to Brubeck being a conscientious objector in the 
second world war.

• What the autumn statement means to you 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2012/dec/05/what-autumn-statement-means-to-you>
 was amended because the original said the amount you could invest in a cash 
Isa was £3,720. The correct figure is £5,760.

• Q&A: Duchess of Cambridge's pregnancy 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/dec/04/duchess-cambridge-pregnancy> was 
corrected because the original referred to a private farmhouse in Anglesea, 
rather than Anglesey.

• Jonathan Harvey obituary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/dec/05/jonathan-harvey> was corrected 
because the year of his birth had been given as 1935, rather than 1939, and the 
age when he died as 77 instead of 73.

• Ireland budget imposes more austerity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/dec/05/ireland-austerity-budget> was 
amended because the original said the cost a pack of cigarettes in Ireland 
would go up by 10%; it will actually go up by 10 cents.

• The correction above about Jonathan Harvey's obituary was corrected on 7 
December 2012 to change "year of his death" to "year of his birth".

