
Should we stay or should we go? That’s (almost) the question the nation will 
be answering in ballot boxes on 23 June. As the campaigns gather momentum, the 
arguments are stacking up on both sides: Brexit would begood for big business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/11/i-resigned-tell-truth-leaving-eu-british-chambers-commerce>
. It would bebad for farmers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/05/brexit-will-leave-uk-farmers-up-to-34000-worse-off-study-finds>
. It wouldthreaten the NHS 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/03/brexit-would-mean-less-money-for-the-nhs>
. It wouldprotect the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/06/brexit-is-necessary-to-protect-nhs-from-ttip-says-david-owen>
.The Royal Family would be miffed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/01/exclusive-royal-family-considering-dramatic-brexit-intervention>
.

The UK’s universities have largely backed the campaign to stay. But what does 
membership bring to higher education?

Related: Let's stay together: why universities should support the EU 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/nov/09/lets-stay-together-why-universities-should-support-the-eu>

‘Collaboration across borders means better research impact’

Michael Arthur, president and provost, UCL 

The opportunities and challenges we face are global, not national – from 
climate change to space exploration. The UK does not have a monopoly on 
brilliance. If we are going to find the best solutions, we must keep bringing 
the best scientists and researchers together.

The European Union plays a vital role in enabling this. Research carried out 
in collaboration with international partners has50% more impact 
<https://www.digital-science.com/resources/digital-research-report-the-implications-of-international-research-collaboration-for-uk-universities/>
 than that carried out by a single country.

At UCL, we recently led a team of EU researchers that detected gases on the 
planet 55 Cancrie 
<https://www.ucl.ac.uk/news/news-articles/0216/160216-gases-in-atmosphere-of-super-earth>
. By bringing the best minds together, we were able to examine the atmosphere 
of this super-Earth in unprecedented detail. This will impact on our lives for 
years and centuries to come.

To ensure that our scientific research and innovation continues to have 
maximum impact, we should embrace, not reject, the opportunities that EU 
membership provides.

‘Exchanges prepare students for the international jobs market’

Dame Julia Goodfellow, vice-chancellor, University of Kent

We must not underestimate the importance of schemes that enable our students 
to live and study inEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. At 
the University of Kent, we are huge advocates of the Erasmus programme – our 
students have been benefitting from it for the past 30 years.

Since 2000, more than 6,000 of our students have taken places to study or work 
throughout Europe. They have attended some of the continent’s most prestigious 
universities and undertaken a diverse variety of work placements, from 
government departments in Spain to teaching English in the Indian Ocean island 
of La Réunion.

The value of such experiences is not always easy to quantify, but we know that 
those that take part arehalf as likely to experience long-term unemployment 
<http://ec.europa.eu/education/library/study/2014/erasmus-impact_en.pdf>. So 
while we can’t put a figure on the value of living and studying in the EU, what 
we can say is that it goes a long way in helping our students to prepare to 
enter an increasingly international jobs market.

Related: My laboratory would fall apart if Britain left the EU 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/aug/28/my-laboratory-would-fall-apart-if-britain-left-the-eu>

‘We need international talent in teaching and research’

Ian Diamond, vice-chancellor, University of Aberdeen 

Our ability to attract the best researchers and academics from across the EU 
is vital for the success of UK universities. The University of Aberdeen is 
privileged to work with colleagues from across Europe, both here in Scotland 
and as part of cross-border teams.

We are, for example, about to oversee a four-year project to develop the next 
generation of MRI scanners, which will be able to detect diseases earlier and 
in greater detail. The project involves collaboration with six EU member 
states. Several of our own researchers on the team originate from different 
European countries.

EU membership means that talented staff can come to work at the University of 
Aberdeen without worrying about visas or resident permits. It makes it easier 
for us to employ experts who contribute greatly to the teaching we provide, and 
significantly strengthen our research and innovation capabilities. This in turn 
has a positive impact on our international reputation, as well as our 
contribution the national and local economy.

‘EU funding helps universities to transform local economies’

Steve Smith, vice-chancellor, University of Exeter 

Over the past decade, European structural funds have enabled the University of 
Exeter to offer world-class buildings and facilities, and internationally 
renowned research activities at our campuses in Penryn and Truro in Cornwall. 
As a result, the economy of Cornwall and the wider region has been transformed.

Some £100 million of European funding (from Objective One and Convergence 
<http://www.erdfconvergence.org.uk/>) added £491m to the Cornish economy 
between 2002-2012 <http://www.exeter.ac.uk/news/university/title_366228_en.html>
, and created 11,300 jobs. This represents 1% of the GDP of the entire Cornwall 
economy, and accounts for 1 in every 155 jobs in Cornwall. The investment has 
also facilitated high-skills job creation in this struggling part of the 
national economy.

In 2013, EU convergence funding invested in 24 principal investigators in our 
Environment and Sustainability Institute <http://www.exeter.ac.uk/esi/> in 
Cornwall. Within 21 months, 160 people were working there – these are all 
highly skilled jobs, paying well above the national average salary.

More recently, we opened a science and engineering research support facility 
<https://www.exeter.ac.uk/cornwall/about/penryn/facilities/sersf/>, which will 
facilitate the development of long-term research projects with local businesses 
– a project which received £3.9m from the European Regional Development Fund.

Related: EU science funding: 'the UK cannot afford to lose out on this pot of 
money' 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/may/13/eu-science-funding-the-uk-cannot-afford-to-lose-out-on-this-pot-of-money>

We are immensely proud of these achievements and the contribution they have 
made to Cornwall’s economic development. It is thanks to EU funding that they 
have been possible.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
