
Abir Dey’s parents were taken aback when she started wearing saris and make-up 
at the age of 11.

Dey was their only son, and her parents, from a middle-class family in 
Kolkata, are still unable to accept her gender identity. But her family’s 
increasing reliance on the 24-year-old’s income from dancing and working as a 
beautician have allowed for a tentative compromise.

Since September, she has been taking hormones to transition and gain more 
feminine features. But changing her identity to transgender, now allowed under 
Indian law, would be a step too far. “My family knows I’m different but they 
would not be able to handle an ID change,” she says.

Last year, the upper house passed a bill 
<http://indianexpress.com/article/india/india-others/rajya-sabha-passes-private-bill-to-protect-the-rights-of-transgenders/>
 to increase educational and economic opportunities for the country’s trans 
population and offer protection from violence, including sexual assault. The 
bill was intended to strengthen a2014 supreme court ruling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/apr/16/india-third-gender-claims-place-in-law>
 that established transgender as a legal category of identity and added a third 
gender option on official identification documents, steps that have already 
been taken in Nepal, Pakistan and Bangladesh. But thebill is reported to have 
been put on hold 
<http://economictimes.indiatimes.com/markets/stocks/news/pmo-asks-for-putting-on-hold-bills-on-transgenders-drugs/articleshow/52385421.cms>
 by the Indian prime minister’s office last month.

For 4,000 years, Indians have recognised people who don’t identify as either 
male or female ashijras <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hijra_(South_Asia)>. 
According to2011 census data <http://www.census2011.co.in/transgender.php>, 
almost half a million Indians identified as hijra. Advocates say the numbers 
are likely to be much higher.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Fbeing-laxmi-narayan-tripathi-hijra-india-transgender-community-video&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Fbeing-laxmi-narayan-tripathi-hijra-india-transgender-community-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F1%2F1441123847127%2FKP_435674_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Being%20Laxmi%3A%20'I%20belong%20to%20the%20hijra%2C%20the%20%20oldest%20transgender%20community'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Fbeing-laxmi-narayan-tripathi-hijra-india-transgender-community-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Being+Laxmi%3A+%27I+belong+to+the+hijra%2C+the++oldest+transgender+community%27+%E2%80%93+video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Fbeing-laxmi-narayan-tripathi-hijra-india-transgender-community-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F1%2F1441123847127%2FKP_435674_crop_640x480.jpg>
Being Laxmi: ‘I belong to the oldest ethnic transgender community, the hijra’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2015/sep/03/being-laxmi-narayan-tripathi-hijra-india-transgender-community-video>
Establishing third-gender identity is a significant step for the community, 
allowing access to employment opportunities and social benefits. The effects 
are evident. Last year,Manobi Bandopadhyay made headlines 
<http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/other-states/manobi-bandopadhyay-indias-first-transgender-college-principal-takes-charge/article7298708.ece>
 when she took charge at Krishnagar Women’s College in West Bengal, becoming 
the country’s first transgender college principal. In November, K Prithika 
Yashini, 25, was thefirst trans Indian to become a police officer 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-india-34753502> – in Tamil Nadu, after 
the Chennai high court ruled the state was wrong not to recognise her gender, 
citing the supreme court ruling.

 However, many hijras say they would not want to change their ID – partly out 
of deference to their families, but also because of the realities that underlie 
the veneer of acceptance and integration. Third-gender IDs do not address basic 
rights like marriage, transferring property or adopting children, which are 
governed by statutes based strictly on a man-woman binary.

The inability to transfer bank accounts to children after death is one reason 
Dey plans to keep her male ID card, even though she identifies as transgender. 
“Property rights are only given to a he or she,” Dey explains. “I want to 
inherit my father’s land and find a job. Nobody would employ a trans person.”

One of the biggest concerns voiced by trans groups across the country was the 
certification process: a screening committee appointed to decide who qualifies 
as transgender and can receive third-gender passports and licences.

“A physical exam is not required by state authorities but many doctors are 
still doing it,” explains Dr L Ramakrishnan ofSaathii 
<http://www.saathii.org/about>, an HIV and Aids non-profit group in Chennai. 
“ID cards are only given to those who’ve had sex reassignment surgery. I’ve 
heard of doctors touching patients inappropriately, groping them to see if they 
get an erection.”

Trans Indians have also reported being turned away repeatedly because they 
didn’t have multiple forms of identification, including photo IDs, needed to 
make the change. Many leave home at the onset of puberty to join hijra 
communities in big cities. Often, they take with them little more than the 
clothes they are wearing when they flee home in search of acceptance.

Although the new law will help to raise the status of the hijra community, 
greater effort will be needed to tackle the entrenched discrimination they 
still face.

“It becomes very difficult when our own people don’t treat us as human 
beings,” says Rudrani Chettri, director ofMitr Trust 
<https://www.facebook.com/mitr.trust>, a community-based organisation for the 
trans communities in Delhi. “There’s so much discrimination. There’s acceptance 
but there’s also violence and hate and hypocrisy.”

The community still has problems accessing benefits, entitlements and medical 
treatment.

Shashi Bharti, of the Naz Foundation (India) Trust, a Delhi-based sexual 
health NGO, has seen her trans clients refused anti-retroviral treatment when 
they were unable to produce the requisite ID cards and proof of residence, 
often because they left documentation behind when they fled their homes. “Trans 
people don’t have that,” she says.

Lack of adequate medical care was a common experience for trans patients. 
“When they go to the government hospital, doctors ask them to show their 
genital areas to see what they have,” says Souvik Ghosh of Saathii. “Trans 
people are told to leave or are treated like aliens. There are no queues for 
trans people, only for men or women … Doctors will say they only serve women or 
men.”

Accessing healthcare was one of the reasons Abhina Aher, 41, found herself in 
a dingy room being castrated by a “quack” doctor seven years ago. The 
complications were severe: abdominal pain and uncontrollable urination. She had 
to wear nappies and couldn’t walk for two weeks. “Doctors refuse to treat you 
when you’re a trans person,” says Aher. “They won’t touch you.”

She hopes the supreme court’s decision will allow more dignity for trans 
people when accessing medical care, employment and educational opportunities. 
“We’re still being treated as untouchables,” Aher says. “The worst part is that 
parents are rejecting their own children … We need something to hold on to. A 
reason to live.”
