
Dining starkers in a room full of nude guests sounds like that archetypal 
nightmare where you leave the house without your clothes on. But apparently not 
everyone finds the idea horrifying. More than 46,000 people put their names on 
the waiting list for tickets toLondon’s first naked restaurant 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/07/naked-restaurant-bunyadi-bums-on-seats-london>
, the Bunyadi.

Whether it’s the novelty of the experience or a genuine appetite for naturist 
noshing, it’s proved popular with punters.

It’s not the first time a business has launched with a gimmicky USP. Companies 
that have managed to ride the initial wave of launch excitement to become a 
long-term success includeIcebar London <http://www.icebarlondon.com/>, which 
serves drinks at sub-zero temperatures in London’s Mayfair, and acat cafe 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-london-26437881> in Shoreditch, east 
London, where customers enjoy a latte while cuddling a feline friend.

But other faddy businesses have vanished as fast as they appeared. Caffix 
cafe, for example, where everything on the menu cost £1 opened in central 
London last year, butshut down in April 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/london/londons-caf-where-everything-costs-1-shuts-its-doors-after-less-than-a-year-a3228341.html>
. Then there’s the controversially named Cocaine energy drink. It wasn’t long 
before the US makers of the beverage, Redux, were forced topull it from shelves 
<http://articles.latimes.com/2007/apr/12/business/fi-cocaine12> because the 
Food and Drug Administration ruled it was being illegally marketed as a street 
drug alternative.


So what’s the secret to turning a fad into a full-fledged business? How do you 
keep curious customers coming back for more?


Disrupting markets with a fresh idea is something Yo! Sushi 
<http://yosushi.com/> is famous for. When entrepreneur Simon Woodroffe launched 
the first branch in Soho in 1997, the idea of being served Japanese food on a 
conveyor belt was new for most customers, despite the hi-tech kaiten restaurant 
being ubiquitous in the far east. Fast forward almost 20 years and the brand 
has 75 restaurants in the UK and five in the US, which are all company owned. 
It also has 13 franchise branches in other countries.


Chief Executive Robin Rowland joined Yo! Sushi in 1999, when the company had 
three restaurants in the capital. He explains that the cuisine had previously 
been prohibitively expensive, but Woodroffe turned Japanese dining into a rock 
‘n’ roll experience.


Related: Risk in business: does he who dares really win? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/apr/18/risky-business-dares-win-entrepreneur>

“The space we used was flexible and we were more of a fashion brand,” says 
Rowland. “Since then a lot of people [have brought in kaiten dining] too but we 
were definitely the forerunner.”


He adds that their hunch that the cuisine had potential to take off in the UK 
wasn’t just a shot in the dark. Woodroffe had spent time in the US, where sushi 
was already popular, and believed this was proof that the western palette would 
eventually start embracing the food more widely.


Rowland says great businesses are based on some sort of vision underpinned by 
empirical evidence. A startup – no matter how gimmicky – needs to have a clear 
three- to five-year plan covering physical expansion (opening new stores, for 
example), awareness building, staff investment and brand development.


Most importantly, your business needs to be flexible enough to cope with 
changing markets and customer demands. Rowland says Yo! Sushi has done that by 
widening the menu choice (in 2013 it launched itsfirst sushi burger 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-2335594/Japanese-chain-YO-Sushi-creates-worlds-sushi-burgers.html>
) and tailoring the design of new restaurants to appeal to local markets.


Richard Silberman, creative director at Brand Remedy <http://brandremedy.com/>
, says the growth of social media and advances in technology, which offer 
customers instant gratification from services, means it is essential for 
businesses to be agile and responsive to change.


He suggests an insect restaurant as an example of a fad that may have wings in 
the future: “You might say you will never eat bugs. Yet it is founded on a 
cuisine that is popular in another part of the world. It is about marketing 
that story to western society, where it is totally off-piste, creating an 
interest and eventually turning the practice into something desirable.”


Throughout any evolution of your business, however, the brand needs to retain 
a powerful narrative at its core, says Silberman. He adds that the reason a 
business such as Caffix failed was because the brand proposition, while 
initially attractive, missed the point. The price of coffee (and food) is not 
the number one driver for consumers. More important is quality, speed, 
efficiency of service and ambience. The local clientele were more interested in 
convenience than price.


Knowing whether your wacky idea has the potential to be the next big thing 
requires research. Launching a popup is a cost-effective way to test the market 
without the overheads of renting long-term space.

Shamil Sharshek founded La La Piano Bar <http://www.lalapianobar.com/> as a 
pop-up in 2013 with his life partner, David Roper, a former member of cabaret 
quartet Four Poofs and a Piano. He believes being a popup has helped them stay 
lean and flexible, and identify their business’s place in the market despite 
limited resources.


The concept was born after the pair observed that there were few piano bars 
that catered for a younger audience or played commercial music. After receiving 
a great response from the crowd at an event in Covent Garden, Sharshek and 
Roper began rolling out their brand of live music – where the audience is given 
lyric sheets and encouraged to join in – across different venues in the West 
End. But although the demand was there, it was initially a struggle to make a 
profit.


“Our initial challenge was attracting more people,” says Sharshek. “We were 
also selling the tickets cheap so we couldn’t make a lot of money. In the long 
term, that wasn’t really sustainable. So we began developing different product 
offerings such as branching out to do private parties and corporate events.”


The business is now performing at events across the country. But does Sharshek 
worry that the concept might eventually become out of tune with the public mood?


“Singing is never going to go out of fashion, it is always going to be fun,” 
he says. “We are not restricted to a venue, we aren’t focused on food and drink 
– we are focused on delivering great entertainment.”

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
