
Chris Evans’ breakfast show will face no further action from media regulator 
Ofcom over an incident in which actorJeremy Irons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jeremy-irons> swore live on Radio 2.


Irons said “fucked” during an anecdote about fellow thespian John Hurt while 
being interviewed on the programme, which is listened to by nearly 10 million 
listeners a week, including a large number of children.

Ofcom said Evans, who will make his debut presenting BBC2’s Top Gear on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/20/top-gears-big-studio-audience-told-forget-how-show-used-to-look>
, had immediately apologised and said his programme’s producers had done all 
they could do to prevent such an incident happening.

However, Radio 2 <http://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-2> said they would 
further tighten up procedures on warning guests to mind their language, 
including a warning email to their agent or representatives about the perils of 
live broadcasting.

Irons, who appeared on the show on 18 March, was telling Evans and his 
listeners about a coffee he once had with Hurt. “John and I were moaning about 
[good young actors],” said Irons.

Related: Chris Evans’ Radio 2 show to be investigated over Jeremy Irons 
swearing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/25/chris-evans-radio-2-show-to-be-investigated-over-jeremy-irons-swearing>

“And he said, ‘You know what I do when I find a good actor? I say to him, ‘You 
have a wonderful voice. Have you ever listened to it? And the actor is fucked’.”

Evans responded: “You can’t say that, I apologise on your behalf, can you 
apologise on your behalf?”

“I am really sorry,” said Irons. “I didn’t say that, the actor is bleeped, the 
actor is bleeped.”

He added: “When we are at home we say these things, I am most terribly sorry 
if anyone is offended … or their children. I’m so embarrassed I can’t talk. 
It’s so relaxed and so normal in here.”

“A little too relaxed maybe,” said Evans.

Another guest in the studio joked: “What does it feel like to have brought 
Radio 2 to its knees?” Evans replied: “You can’t make fun of it, you have got 
to stop.”

Ofcom <http://www.theguardian.com/media/ofcom> investigated the show after a 
complaint from a listener under rule 2.3 of the broadcasting code about offence 
and offensive language.

The BBC <http://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> said Irons had been given a 
“full face-to-face briefing on arrival” despite research suggesting that he was 
unlikely to use offensive language. It added that Irons was “clearly mortified” 
and apologised without hesitation.

The broadcaster said Radio 2 has now reinforced its policy to limit offensive 
language in live interviews to emphasise the importance of not using offensive 
language.

It added that in “a live studio environment such slip-ups can unfortunately 
happen”.

In its finding published on Monday, the regulator said: “In light of all these 
factors, Ofcom considered this matter resolved.”

An Ofcom spokesperson said: “After investigating this programme, Ofcom found 
the BBC took appropriate steps to limit offence to listeners. The guest and 
presenter apologised immediately after the swearing, and the presenter 
apologised again at the end of the item.

“The broadcaster has also taken steps to improve its compliance procedures, to 
minimise the likelihood of a recurrence. As a result, we considered the matter 
resolved.”

