
Name: Sir Martin Sorrell <http://www.theguardian.com/media/sir-martin-sorrell>.

Age: 71.

Appearance: A strategically shaved Lord Sugar.

What’s he done? Evaded taxes? Refused to pay workers a living wage or clawed 
it back in some viciously petty way? What else do businessmen do? No, none of 
that.

That’s a happy surprise! Sort of. His pay packet has made headlines.

Because of its startling modesty? No. His annual remuneration is due to hit 
around£70m this summer as head of global marketing business WPP 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/18/sir-martin-sorrell-im-worth-every-penny-im-paid>
.

But that’s … £5.83m a month. £191,780 a day. £7,990 every hour. £133 a minute. 
That’s more than a footballer <http://www.forbes.com/athletes/> or a film star 
gets paid. It’s more than Sting makesplaying private gigs for despots around 
the globe 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2010/feb/22/sting-uzbekistan>
, or Jeremy Clarkson orBoris Johnson 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/apr/11/cameron-tax-commons-statement-offshore-tax-osborne-likely-to-publish-tax-return-details-treasury-hints-politics-live>
 get paid for being embarrassing ambassadors for Britain.Sir Martin says he 
doesn’t like the word “pay”. “It’s a reward for performance with risk 
attached.” He has built the business he bought in 1985 for £1m to one worth 
£21bn today.

Oh, I see! This is his first pay packet? He’s taken a slice of a success that 
has been three decades in the making? Well, let’s see – £70m divided by 31 is 
still a lot, but …No, no – he has been paid every year. In fact, his original 
pay cheque for this year 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/15/wpp-sorrell-pay> (before it was 
topped up) was already the second biggest in corporate history: £62.78m.

What? Well, he had his maximum payout cut from £33m to £19m in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2013/apr/30/martin-sorrell-maximum-payout-cut-wpp>
. And shareholdersvoted against a £6.8m award the year before that 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/jun/13/wpp-shareholders-vote-against-sorrell-pay>
. It’s not all been plain sailing.

No, it sounds as if he’s had some tricky times. Some of his shareholders might 
not be thrilled.

I hope it all works out for him. I’m just thinking, though … What?

Police officers take risks, don’t they? So do firefighters. Doctors and nurses 
are exposed to danger all the time. Charities working with refugees, disaster 
victims, refugees and victims themselves … Do any of them get paid £70m? Stop 
right there. You’re clearly a communist.

I’m really not. Just an embittered member of the non-wealth-creating class, 
then?

Again, really not. It just strikes me that however generously you 
conceptualise and quantify commercial risk, £70m a year is off the sca–
COMMUNIST! GOODBYE.

Do say: “Well done, Sir Martin!”

Don’t say: “I’m Bart Becht, former CEO of Reckitt Benckiser, and I got the 
largest pay cheque in corporate history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/apr/07/viewpoint-bart-becht>. £92m. 
Don’t feel bad.”
