
Jeremy Corbyn has accused Boris Johnson 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> and Nigel Farage of being “wolves 
in sheep’s clothing” as they pose as defenders of the NHS when a vote to leave 
would put the health service in jeopardy.

In unusually strong language, the Labour 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> leader said the Brexit camp was 
telling “outright lies” when it claimed that more money would be available for 
the NHS after leaving the EU.

 Corbyn has been accused of sounding lacklustre about the EU during the 
campaign, and recently graded his enthusiasm about staying in at 7.5 out of 10.
Referendum explained: NHS 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/05/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=NHS_and_Brexit>
 But appearing with the entire shadow cabinet, members of Labour’s ruling body 
and trade union chiefs at an event in central London on Tuesday, Corbyn said: 
“It is the Labour position, the trade union position to vote to remain. We urge 
our supporters to think carefully and vote to remain.”

 He said Brexit campaigners such as Johnson, Michael Gove and Iain Duncan 
Smith were showing “faux concern” about the NHS.

 “A vote to leave is a vote to put the NHS in jeopardy and in the hands of 
those who want to break it up,” he said. “Nigel Farage and Boris Johnson are 
wolves in sheep’s clothing, using concern about the NHS to mask their real 
agenda.”

Addressing concerns of those on the left about the TTIP trade deal between the 
EU and US, Corbyn said it would be better to fight it from within the bloc to 
protect public services across Europe.

Related: EU referendum: leave takes six-point lead in Guardian/ICM polls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/13/eu-referendum-leave-campaign-takes-six-point-lead-in-guardianicm-polls>

 The event was introduced by several union leaders, a midwife, a medical 
researcher and an ambulance worker, who emphasised the desire of some leading 
Brexit campaigners to dismantle the NHS.

 Frances O’Grady, general secretary of the TUC, derided Johnson, Duncan Smith 
and Gove as “fibbers, fakes and phoneys” and said they were on record as having 
suggested alternatives to the current system.

 “When did their leading lights every give a toss about our NHS,” she said. 
“The hard right Tories and Ukip … They love the NHS in a way that Dracula loves 
a blood bank.”

 Dave Prentis, the boss of Unison, the biggest union of health workers, said: 
“I don’t think I’ve ever seen a campaign as deceitful as the one being waged by 
the leave campaign.

 “These are the people we have been fighting tooth and nail. Michael Gove 
writes in books that [the NHS] is not fit for the 21st century … I’m sick of 
the British people being lied to.”

 Prentis urged people to “see through the lies”, adding: “Do not, do not, put 
our NHS at risk when you vote on 23 June.”
