
Pre-civil war (1975-1990), the Beiruti neighbourhood of Hamra was peopled with 
poets, academics and revolutionaries. It was considered Beirut’s cultural 
heart, and you were never far from a theatre or cinema. Today, though more 
rambunctious, Hamra is still bursting with that artistic spirit, and some of 
the city’s new talent is nurtured at Metro al Madina, which was “built from 
rubble and ashes with love and hard work”.

The car horns and drills fade way away as you descend two flights of stairs to 
enter this underground bar and gig venue. Waiters in big-collared shirts with 
embroidered name badges serve sazerac cocktails, made with rye whiskey, syrup, 
absinthe, Peychaud’s bitters and lemon zest.

Napkins are emblazoned with the venue’s logo, a nod to the Paris metro sign. 
The tables are see-through plastic, the chairs old-school folding cinema seats. 
It feels retro, but then in the bar there are bright white walls and pink neon 
lights. The crowd’s a fairly mixed bag, with a selection of artistic types – 
puppeteers, painters and filmmakers – usually propping up the bar.

Related: Instagram snapshots: Beirut 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/gallery/2014/nov/19/instagram-snapshots-beirut>

The main concert space, built for cabaret shows, feels like a music hall – all 
dim lighting and plush red velvet in an intimate underground setting, but the 
crowd is always up for everything – fromEgyptian cabaret 
<https://now.mmedia.me/lb/en/features/egyptian-cabaret-in-beirut>, jazz and 
hip-hop gigs <https://now.mmedia.me/lb/en/features/the_roots_of_arab_hip-hop> to
experimental music festivals <http://irtijal.org/festival/>, vintage markets 
and film screenings.

If you’re coming just to drink and chat, it’s free to enter, as are some of 
the events, but on average shows in the main hall cost around $20.

• metromadina.com <http://metromadina.com/> 
