
In a nutshell 
The Kelpies – two gigantic horse-head sculptures – get all the attention but 
the surrounding Helix park is a great place for children: a 860-acre urban 
green space with the Forth and Clyde canal running through it. Opened in 2013, 
the £43m park has become a day-trip favourite for families in Scotland’s 
Central Belt. On the water, take your pick from pedalos, canoes and kayaks. On 
bikes, there’s an easy path network, connected to twoNational Cycle Routes 
<http://www.sustrans.org.uk/ncn/map/route/union-canal>. But with its musical 
stairs, climbing frames for all ages and spiralling slides, the play park 
steals the show.

Related: In search of Scotland’s best beach 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/may/10/scotland-beach-swimming-wild-camping>

Fun fact 
There’s a sign on the slides encouraging adults to be big kids and have a go, 
too.

Best things about it 
Trampolines built into the ground (another “fun for adults too” feature). It’s 
a cracking day out for dogs as well, with plenty of water to swim in. There’s a 
“splash play” area where dozens of jets shoot water into the air – and changing 
areas to dry off . Let’s be honest, it’s Scotland and you’re unlikely to dry in 
the sun.

What about lunch? 
There are three-quid sandwiches and paninis in the Horsebox cafe, but queues 
can build up quickly. Bring a packed lunch if you want to save time and money. 
Teas and coffees are reasonably priced, all £1.80 or below.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4bdvk%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4bdvk%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F10%2F1439211546652%2Fc5b1c70c-e9c6-4451-91aa-0de6200ea72d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Take%20the%20kids%20to%20%E2%80%A6%20The%20Helix%2C%20Falkirk%2C%20Scotland%0D%0A&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4bdvk%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Take+the+kids+to+%E2%80%A6+The+Helix%2C+Falkirk%2C+Scotland%0D%0A&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4bdvk%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F10%2F1439211546652%2Fc5b1c70c-e9c6-4451-91aa-0de6200ea72d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Kelpies sculptures are the largest works of art in Scotland. Photograph: 
David Rankin/Alamy 
Exit through the gift shop? 
The only souvenir you need is a photo of The Kelpies. Visible from miles 
around, they’re beautiful up close,even if the critics slated them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2014/apr/22/andy-scott-kelpies-sculpture-falkirk-scotland>
.

Related: What’s new in your favourite UK holiday spots 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/aug/08/new-attractions-food-uk-holiday-hotspots-family>

Getting there
It’s a 30-minute drive from Edinburgh and Glasgow on the M8. Cyclists should 
put aside a good two to three hours if travelling alongside the Union Canal 
from Edinburgh. The Helix is a 15-minute cycle from Falkirk High railway 
station, which is also well served by the local bus. Be prepared for a tough 
cycle up some seriously steep hills back to Falkirk High station.

Value for money? 
Yes, entry is free, as is car parking.

Opening times? 
It’s a public park and never closes.

Verdict 
7/10. As with most public art, the kids will be bored of the Kelpies within 
minutes. Luckily, possibly Scotland’s best play park is in their shadow. It’s 
got a strong returnability factor, thanks to thoughtful design: for example, 
climbing frames with graded ability levels for different ages. If only they’d 
put those slides inside the giant horse heads.

• thehelix.co.uk <http://www.thehelix.co.uk/> 

• This feature was amended on 11 August. It’s not the Union canal running 
through the park, as originally stated, but the Forth and Clyde canal.
