
If you are anything like me, at this time of year your windowsills will be 
covered with little tomato plants just beginning to produce their very first 
side shoots. Conventional wisdom says to nip out these lateral shoots that 
spring up at the axils, where the leaves meet the stem, in order to concentrate 
the plant’s energy on producing fruit. Unlike many pieces of received gardening 
wisdom, this advice is well supported by trials and scientific evidence, giving 
you larger fruit and earlier harvests. It’s what it says to do next, confining 
these shoots to the compost bin, that I think is a missed opportunity.

You see, the vigour that makes these lateral shoots a drain on the parent 
plant’s energies also means they make fantastic cuttings. Being packed full of 
growth hormones, they are super easy to root and their incredibly rapid growth 
rate means they often catch up with their parent plants within as little as a 
month.

Considering the price of some tomato seed (F1 varieties can be more than £1 
each) I am surprised the practice is not more widely recommended. Aside from 
being extremely cost effective, it can also be a nifty second chance if part of 
your batch of seedlings has succumbed to damping off, or is clobbered by frost 
from planting out too early. Left it too late to sow them this year? No 
problem. Just buy one or two small plants from a garden centre and use the 
cuttings from these.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tp6g%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tp6g%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff61bf5d21db41aa92b254d79f6c25e8d3346975%2F0_0_5124_3074%2F5124.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gardens%3A%20tomato%20cuttings%20that%E2%80%99ll%20shoot%20up&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tp6g%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gardens%3A+tomato+cuttings+that%E2%80%99ll+shoot+up&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tp6g%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff61bf5d21db41aa92b254d79f6c25e8d3346975%2F0_0_5124_3074%2F5124.jpg>
 Pick of the crop: tomato seedlings showing their first true leaves. 
Photograph: Alamy 
To get started, slice off the side shoots with a clean pair of scissors when 
they reach about 5-10cm long and poke the lower cut end into a small pot of 
gritty seed and cutting compost so that the first pair of leaves is just proud 
of the surface. You shouldn’t require any rooting hormone, heated propagators 
or antifungal treatments, as in my experience the success rate of these 
cuttings is more than 95%. This makes them a perfect crop for teaching kids how 
to take cuttings, right up there with geraniums and hydrangeas. Give the pot a 
good soak and place it on a windowsill in a warm room, away from direct 
sunlight. Within as little as a week your plants will have started to take 
root. They can start to flower within a month – far faster than if you were to 
start from seed.

At this time of year, each plant should produce up to six side shoots to make 
cuttings from. This can be done right up until the middle of June to still 
produce an outdoor crop. This window of opportunity is probably longer if you 
have a greenhouse.

Email James at james.wong@observer.co.uk <mailto:james.wong@observer.co.uk> or 
follow him on Twitter@Botanygeek 
<https://twitter.com/Botanygeek?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
