
There have been years when, by now, I’ve had a windowsill full of seedlings. 
And a spreadsheet, a checklist and a plan to tackle celeriac/celery/red 
peppers/aubergines/anything else that’s tricky and requires dedication. There 
have been other years when I’ve let my mother dictate the pace: “Oh, I’d wait 
two weeks and grow with the season.” Then there have been years when my life 
has set a precedent.

This is one of those years. I want a life as much as a vegetable patch (there, 
I’ve said it) so while I will try to succeed at growing my own, instead of 
celery I may aim for beetroot. I know I can succeed at beetroot.

With that in mind, I realise that for tricky chilli peppers, the hot-climate 
sort that are slow to germinate – habaneros and the like – the window for 
sowing is now closed. It makes more sense to concentrate on plug plants. I rate
Simpson’s Seeds <http://www.simpsonsseeds.co.uk/>, Victoriana Nursery  
<https://www.victoriananursery.co.uk/>and Sea Spring Plants 
<http://www.seaspringplants.co.uk/>, who send out beautifully grown plugs, 
perfectly timed for the growing season; all you need is a greenhouse, 
polytunnel or sunny windowsill.

Chilli plants are sensitive sorts. If you are raising from seed, it is very 
important that the compost temperature doesn’t deviate too wildly from the air 
temperature. If necessary, use tepid water and water regularly, feeding with a 
complete liquid fertiliser once the compost nutrients are used up (usually six 
weeks in multipurpose and half that in seed compost).

You can order tomatoes from Simpson’s Seeds, and they’ll let you mix up your 
order as long as you buy six, or multiples of six. Clearly, you get more plants 
for your money when growing from seed. However, if space is at a premium, 
quality plug plants each work out at roughly the same price as a packet of 
seed, allowing you to have one of each of your heart’s desires.‘Green Zebra’ 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Green_Zebra>, ‘Black Krim’ 
<http://www.seedsavers.org/black-krim-tomato> and ‘Yellow Butterfly’ 
<http://simpsonsseeds.co.uk/acatalog/Yellow-Butterfly-plant-P_TOM128.html> are 
on my wish list, but the best varieties get snapped up early.

Related: Alys Fowler: how to cope with changeable weather 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/06/alys-fowler-how-to-cope-changeable-weather>

It’s also worth buying in cucumbers, melons, aubergines and red pepper plants. 
Starting off in a heated greenhouse, with good light and even day- and 
night-time temperatures, makes all the difference to a young plant. A 
windowsill is fine for the tougher stuff. And if you are going to win at 
celery, celeriac or fat heads of pak choi, first read up onJoy Larkcom 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/oct/19/alys-fowler-joy-larkcom> 
andEliot Coleman <http://www.fourseasonfarm.com/>. Then sow early, sow in small 
batches, and repeat again two weeks later, so you have backups. Create a clean 
bed with a layer of good compost to plant into, then leave out cabbage leaves 
or rhubarb, or something big, to catch as many slugs as you can. They’ll 
congregate underneath, then it’s up to you how you dispose of them (flinging 
them over the fence is not neighbourly).

With all tricky vegetables, be sure to water regularly with a liquid feed, and 
cover with cloches or fleece to keep temperatures even.

 * Alys Fowler is running a Guardian Masterclass on growing your own fruit and 
veg on Sunday 8th May as part of our gardening series. To find out more and 
book your place for £39 visittheguardian.com/masterclasses 
<http://www.theguardian.com/guardian-masterclasses/2015/dec/14/growing-your-own-fruit-and-veg-with-alys-fowler>
.
