
The Daily Mail and its companion website Mail Online have been cleared by the 
UK press regulator over articles repeating claims thatPrince Harry 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/prince-harry> was forming a “secret 
relationship” with his sister-in-law Pippa Middleton.

The ruling follows the Independent Press Standards Organisation finding 
against the Daily Star over the same story 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/20/prince-harry-pippa-middleton-daily-star-sun-ipso>
, which originated in the US edition of OK! magazine.

The prince’s complaint to Ipso <http://www.theguardian.com/media/ipso> 
concerned accuracy, intrusion into privacy and failure to provide an 
opportunity to reply to the story.

The complaint said the Daily Mail had repeated the magazine’s claims that “the 
Duchess of Cambridge found her sister and brother-in-law ‘snogging in a 
bathroom’ at the royal wedding”, whileMail Online 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/mail-online> had reported allegations that 
Middleton had “spent the night several times” and that Prince William had 
“found the pair in a compromising position”.

However, while Ipso ruled that the Star had reported the claims in a 
misleading manner, it said both Mail outlets had reported the claims in a 
sceptical tone, and unlike the Star had sought comment from representatives of 
the royal family.

On the first count of accuracy, Ipso said the print title “had taken care to 
ensure that the claims were reported with due scepticism”, while its online 
sister outlet had “on balance … cast doubt over the claims”. In both cases, it 
said the fact that the newspapers had presented doubts about the accuracy of 
the OK! article reduced the impact on the prince’s privacy and the requirement 
to obtain a right to reply before publication.

Ipso’s decision to clear the Mail outlets contrasted sharply with its ruling 
on the Star last weekend, which said the story in the Richard Desmond-owned 
title had been“significantly misleading” 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/20/prince-harry-pippa-middleton-daily-star-sun-ipso>
 in the way it had repeated OK!’s claims and had failed to approach Kensington 
Palace for comment.

It added that: “While it had not contained a positive assertion of their 
truth, there was no suggestion that there was reason to doubt their veracity.”

Ipso also rejected the Star’s defence that other papers, including the Mail, 
had picked up the story, and was highly critical of the newspaper’s handling of 
the complaint, saying it had “ failed to engage substantively with Ipso’s 
investigation”.

The rulings follow hard on the heels of Ipso’s ruling against the Sun article 
headlined 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/18/queen-backs-brexit-headline-in-the-sun-was-inaccurate-press-watchdog-rules>
 “Queen Backs Brexit”, which was the regulator’s first under an updated clause 
that requires papers to ensure headlines reflect the content of a story.
