
Take me there: East Neuk of Fife


Why go?
On a bright day, with sunshine sparkling off the North Sea, there are few 
better places to be than sitting on the harbour wall at Anstruther with a bag 
of fish and chips from the award-winningFish Bar 
<http://www.anstrutherfishbar.co.uk/>. “Neuk” is an old Scots word for corner 
and this truly is a charmed corner of the coast, with its endless Blue Flag 
beaches and attractive fishing villages. There’s a lively music and arts scene 
which reaches its peak in the summer. Next month is the Pittenweem Arts 
Festival (1-9 August,pittenweemartsfestival.co.uk 
<http://pittenweemartsfestival.co.uk/>) at which dozens of artists open their 
studios and homes to the public.

What to do
Wander the galleries, shops and harbours of the villages of Pittenweem, 
Anstruther and Crail, all linked by the scenic Fife Coastal Path with its 
bracing views of the Firth of Forth (fifecoastalpath.co.uk 
<http://fifecoastalpath.co.uk/>). From Anstruther catch a boat to the Isle of 
May nature reserve, home to seals, rabbits and puffins. Spend a day on Elie 
Earlsferry’s beach with its dunes and beach huts and visit Kingsbarns 
Distillery for whisky tours and tastings (kingsbarnsdistillery.com 
<http://www.kingsbarnsdistillery.com/>). St Andrews, with its cathedral, 
university, botanic gardens, pier and beach, is up the coast, and no mention of 
Fife would be complete without including its world-class golf courses (
visitscotland.com <http://www.visitscotland.com/see-do/activities/golf/fife/>).

Where to eat
The rooftop terrace at the East Pier Smokehouse in St Monans is the place to 
enjoy crab cakes, lobster with chips, whole smoked sea bass, or mackerel, with 
dreamy views across to the Isle of May (eastpier.co.uk <http://eastpier.co.uk/>
).

Where to stay
Unique Cottages has fishermen’s houses for rent, from £295 for a week at Sea 
Breeze, a cosy, waterfront cottage in St Monans which sleeps two (
unique-cottages.co.uk <http://www.unique-cottages.co.uk/>).

Insider tip
Crispin Heath of East Neuk Outdoors activity centre (eastneukoutdoors.co.uk 
<http://eastneukoutdoors.co.uk/>) recommends tackling the Chain Walk from the 
end of Elie beach. “It’s a kind ofvia ferrata 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Via_ferrata> with chains and footholds. It’s an 
exciting scramble and takes an hour to 90 minutes for an active person to 
complete.”

Give me a break

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4aknv%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4aknv%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F15%2F1436958981916%2Fb577f973-9c45-442f-9b5b-0fb946df340a-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Travel%20tips%3A%20coastal%20Fife%2C%20plus%20deals%20of%20the%20week%20%7C%20Joanne%20O%E2%80%99Connor&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4aknv%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Travel+tips%3A+coastal+Fife%2C+plus+deals+of+the+week+%7C+Joanne+O%E2%80%99Connor&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4aknv%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F15%2F1436958981916%2Fb577f973-9c45-442f-9b5b-0fb946df340a-1020x612.jpeg>
 Creature comforts: Notting Hill’s new Laslett Hotel. 
Home: Notting Hill hotel A new hotel which aims to celebrate Notting Hill’s 
rich creative and cultural heritage will open next month. Named after local 
community activist Rhaune Laslett, the Laslett Hotel will combine 51 guest 
rooms with a downstairs space which will serve as a coffee shop, bar, library 
and gallery. It is now taking bookings for stays from mid-August, with opening 
rates from £215 per room (thelaslett.co.uk <http://thelaslett.co.uk>).
 Island life: relax by the sea on a Greek island. 
Away: Support Greece There’s no better way to show your support for the people 
of Greece than by booking a holiday there. Planet Holidays has just released 
its expanded 2016 Greece programme with new destinations including the islands 
of Ithaca, Milos, Paros, Amorgos and Folegandros, where a week’s B&B at the 
four-star Anemi Hotel costs from £799pp in June, including flights and ferry 
transfers (planet-holidays.co.uk <http://planet-holidays.co.uk>).
