
An evocative and strangely nostalgic place that I visit over and over again in 
Sicily – and get up before 7am for – is the historic food market of Ortigia, 
the old part of Syracuse, on the east coast. Held every morning except Sunday, 
it is everything one expects an Italian market to be: there is always a lot of 
shouting and gesticulating and wonderful (as well as less wonderful) smells. It 
is sells authentic produce, much of it from the region: herbs, tomatoes, ripe 
blood-red oranges, deep purple aubergines, bright red chilli peppers and 
lemons. All are fresh, and cut up while you’re waiting, and there are stalls of 
local meats and seafood – a swordfish might eye you as you walk past.

But though it is so authentic, the place continues to reinvent itself. New 
types and shapes of cheeses emerge from time to time, such as a cute pig-shaped 
cheese, only made on special occasions, and giant colourful sandwiches.
Caseificio Borderi <http://www.caseificioborderi.eu/?lang=en> is a small 
sandwich shop in the market offering rolls filled with cured meats, cheeses and 
fresh salads, and queues trail round the corner at lunch times. It is nowthe 
place to go for Syracuse’s student population.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tfpg%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tfpg%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac602b711240546b82e1ccf4592d7291838073e8%2F84_117_1227_736%2F1227.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20sights%2C%20shouts%20and%20smells%20of%20Syracuse%E2%80%99s%20Ortigia%20market%2C%20Sicily&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tfpg%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+sights%2C+shouts+and+smells+of+Syracuse%E2%80%99s+Ortigia+market%2C+Sicily&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tfpg%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac602b711240546b82e1ccf4592d7291838073e8%2F84_117_1227_736%2F1227.jpg>
 The Caseificio Borderi sandwich shop 
This type of animated market was common in Sicily’s big cities until fairly 
recently. The best-known ones are probably those in Palermo – the Ballarò and 
the Vucciria, which was immortalised in a painting byRenato Guttuso 
<http://foodoncanvas.eu/la-vucciria/> but unfortunately has been left to die. 
This hasn’t happened in Syracuse, however – maybe because of large tour groups 
that navigate the market’s one small windy street. That’s a good reason to go 
early: to precede the crowds and to experience the market untainted.

• Dirk Booms is co-curator of Sicily: Culture and Conquest 
<http://www.britishmuseum.org/whats_on/exhibitions/sicily.aspx>, at the British 
Museum, which opens today, 21 April, and runs until 14 August
