
No one will be able to accuse the Daily Telegraph 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/dailytelegraph> of failing to give space to 
the debate about the EU referendum.

Its issue on Tuesday was dominated by next month’s poll. Its front page looked 
like a Brexit propaganda poster with a big photograph ofBoris Johnson 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> headlined “I’m fighting for 
freedom” and a sub-deck: “The gloves are off in referendum campaign as Boris 
challenges Cameron to answer five key questions about remaining in EU.”

Below it was a splash based on a letter to the paper signed by five former 
Nato secretaries calling for a remain vote: “Brexit ‘would help West’s 
enemies’”.

Pages 4 and 5 detailed Johnson’s “challenge” to prime minister David Cameron 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> with two more EU pieces 
below it, including a sketch by Michael Deacon, “Shelley, Beethoven, 
Churchill... a classic day in a bitter, bloody battle”.

On the op-ed page were articles taking either side, one by William Hague (“A 
Leave vote would be disastrous for Falklands, Gibraltar and Ulster”) and the 
other by Richard Kemp (“It is an EU army that could bring about war”).

The leading article, “Boris offers a bright vision outside the EU”, was a hymn 
of praise to the man who would be PM (and, of course, the paper’s columnist).

But we haven’t finished yet. The letters section was topped by referendum 
letters (as has been the case most days in recent weeks). Below was a 
pro-Brexit piece by Alan Sked, “Nation states have been the making of Europe”.

And there was a promise of much more to come “as the campaign heats up” with 
plugs for coming columns by “top writers” such as Charles Moore, Lynton Crosby, 
Fraser Nelson, Ambrose Evans-Pritchard, Allister Heath, Allison Pearson, Philip 
Johnston and Juliet Samuel.

True, there was plenty of coverage elsewhere. The Times splashed on the a 
letter from “US defence chiefs” urging Remain, carried a spread on the 
Johnson-Cameron confrontation plus an editorial.The Guardian 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/theguardian> featured the “head to head 
battle” between Johnson and Cameron on a spread, plus an editorial.

The Daily Mail <http://www.theguardian.com/media/dailymail> gave the 
Johnson-Cameron clash full measure, “Now it’s personal”, with a leading article 
critical of the prime minister and an op-ed piece by historian Andrew Roberts, 
“Cameron’s travesty of history.”


It hardly goes without saying that the Daily Express 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/dailyexpress> took the opportunity to weigh 
in on Johnson’s side with a front page headline “Boris: it’s mad to stay in the 
EU”.

As for the Sun, its front page, “Cam’s in her Hans”, concerned a claim by Iain 
Duncan Smith <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/iain-duncan-smith> that the 
prime minister’s EU renegotiation was “secretly controlled” by German 
chancellor Angela Merkel. Maybe, maybe not.

But it was the Telegraph coverage that was the most fascinating, not least 
because of its vacillation on the matter. Its Brexit heart is sometimes ruled 
by its Remain head.

For the moment though, its pro-Johnson editorial was informed by its heart. 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/05/10/boris-offers-a-bright-vision-outside-the-eu/>
 It said that Boris’s “full-on commitment... is the shot in the arm the Leave 
campaign needs.”

It noted that Michael Gove <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove> 
had conceded that the Leave camp was no longer making the case for remaining in 
the single market. The UK would be “outside the single market but have access 
to it”.

This, said the Telegraph, “is a consistent position but one that is open to 
attack from Remainers” and it is also a “dry” economic argument. What was 
needed instead was “someone to articulate a vision of Britain outside the EU 
and Mr Johnson is the man to do it.” It continued:

“He can be a popular counterpoint to the prime minister’s increasingly 
portentous rhetoric... warning of European disintegration if we left.

Mr Johnson said he could see ‘the sunlit meadows beyond’ EU membership and ‘we 
would be mad not to take this once in a lifetime chance to walk through that 
door’.

He is right to observe that the Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> we joined has changed beyond 
all recognition, which is why this referendum is necessary. Mr Cameron should 
at least be commended for promising it, even if he must sometimes wish he had 
not.”

The Telegraph contended that Johnson “sought to turn the tables on the Remain 
camp by challenging it directly to answer five key questions about how Britain 
would look if we stay.”

Then it listed the issues that concern it - immigration, naturally, plus the 
European Court’s “extensive new powers to intervene in aspects of national life 
that were once off-limits” and “the so-called Five Presidents’ report” which 
“indicates that once the UK referendum is out of the way, the structures of 
political and fiscal integration will be established that will affect us even 
if we have no say in them.”

The Telegraph concluded: “How will this be stopped? Mr Johnson, and the rest 
of us, are entitled to an answer.”
