
I am not a sporty person. I never played team sports and any love I feel for 
football is mostly inherited rather than organically grown. But there’s one 
sport I loved to watch from the off: gymnastics. And one body has held my 
attention like no other, a sublimely compact figure that seemingly defies 
physics (suspended mid-air for too-long seconds) and makes my jaw slack. That 
body (all 4ft 8in) belongs to Simone Biles, one of the greatest gymnasts of all 
time.

Biles, 19, is an aspirational American dream in motion: by the age of six she 
was taking gymnastics classes; only recently she had anentire gym facility 
built for her by her family 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/05/30/simone-biles-is-the-best-gymnast-in-the-world>
. Since she won the world title in 2013, she hasn’t lost a single competition. 
She’s been world all-around champion three times (the first African American to 
do so), and holds the record for the most world gold medals (10). She packs in 
more twists and flips than any previous champion, to the point thatone 
manoeuvre has been named after her 
<http://www.cosmopolitan.com/lifestyle/news/a48544/simone-biles-gymnast-wins-world-gymnastics-championship/>
.

Related: Why I love… actor Iwan Rheon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/11/why-i-love-iwan-rheon-game-of-thrones-bim-adewunmi>

Watching her incredibly difficult routines makes me feel limitless, tearfully 
proud, fiercely protective. She is singular, for her unique skill set, yes, but 
also as a young black girl in a predominantly white sport: in 2013, an Italian 
competitor, Carlotta Ferlito,joked about “painting our skin black” to win 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2458533/Carlotta-Ferlito-sparks-fury-racist-jibe-new-world-champion-Simone-Biles.html>
.

Soon, Biles will go to Rio to compete in her first Olympics (she was too young 
to enter in 2012) and, if she wins three medals, will ascend to the position of 
the most awarded American gymnast of all time. “I just keep blowing my own 
mind,”she said last year 
<http://www.usnews.com/news/sports/articles/2015/10/29/simone-biles-wins-3rd-straight-world-gymnastics-championship>
. Ours too, Simone.
