
I’m a 20-year-old history and sociology student at the University of Sheffield 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/universityofsheffield>, having moved “up 
north” three years ago from south Wales. I’m pretty much an average 
Guardian-reading student; lefty, liberal-minded, feminist.

My main hobby is reading, and I try to write when I can. I’m also really 
interested in politics, and a proud but often conflicted Labour party member. I 
love music, and one of my favourite ways to spend my time is at festivals. 
Before university I used to perform a bit, me and my acoustic guitar. I hope to 
get back into it once I’ve graduated.

For the last year I’ve been editor of my student paper, Forge Press 
<http://forgetoday.com/press/>. It’s one of the best things I’ve ever done. 
I always turn to the Guardian for inspiration, for interesting topics and 
design ideas.

The opinion section is my favourite. The pieces always cast light on 
lesser-known issues, which I feel is how journalists should use their platform. 
Recently I was addicted to thePanama Papers 
<http://www.theguardian.com/news/series/panama-papers> coverage, treating 
myself to a copy of the paper the day after the scandal (my student budget 
doesn’t usually allow for this).

When I was about 14, I decided I wanted to be a journalist, and I think the 
Guardian played a large part in this. The articles are detailed, imaginative, 
creative and insightful. You feel like you’re learning, and that’s what I want 
in whatever job I end up in.The Guardian 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/theguardian> forces you to look beyond your 
preconceptions of an issue, and that’s so important.

• If you would like to be interviewed in this space, send a brief note to 
good.to.meet.you@theguardian.com <mailto:good.to.meet.you@theguardian.com>
