
Labour <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> has rejected Michael 
Gove’s vision of life outside the EU as “completely ridiculous utopian rubbish” 
after the justice secretary said Britain could walk away from the EU while 
retaining free access to European markets.


The shadow first secretary, Angela Eagle, said: “There are no countries that 
trade with theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> that don’t 
have to accept free movement, that don’t end up paying virtually the same that 
we pay into the European budget. In their utopian dream, that may be what they 
want, but I can’t see a path to there from where we are now.”

Gove insisted that Britain could reject EU migrants 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/19/michael-gove-likens-uk-remaining-in-eu-to-hostage-situation>
 and refuse to pay into the Brussels budget while remaining part of “a free 
trade zone stretching from Iceland to Turkey that all European nations have 
access to, regardless of whether they are in or out of the euro or the EU”.

His former special adviser, Dominic Cummings, said after Gove’s speech that he 
had spoken to “umpteen ambassadors”, inside and outside the eurozone, who had 
suggested that they would be willing to concede such a deal in the event of a 
vote to leave the EU.


Britain would be in a strong negotiating position when confronting its EU 
trading partners in talks, Gove claimed, because “they sell far more to us than 
we do to them”.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fremain-conjuring-up-boogeymen-to-win-says-gove-video&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fremain-conjuring-up-boogeymen-to-win-says-gove-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Remain%20camp%20'conjuring%20up%20bogeymen'%20to%20win%2C%20says%20Gove%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fremain-conjuring-up-boogeymen-to-win-says-gove-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Remain+camp+%27conjuring+up+bogeymen%27+to+win%2C+says+Gove+%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fremain-conjuring-up-boogeymen-to-win-says-gove-video&media=>
Remain camp ‘conjuring up bogeymen’ to win, says Gove 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/apr/19/remain-conjuring-up-boogeymen-to-win-says-gove-video>
But Eagle, who believes that the referendum on 23 June is “on a knife edge,” 
said our £67.7bn trade deficit with the rest of the EU is a sign of economic 
weakness, not enhanced political leverage.

“I’ve never heard a trade deficit being used in that way,” she said. “It’s a 
problem, not an opportunity: it’s a sign of how narrow our economy is and how 
the government has neglected our manufacturing base.

“I don’t know what planet they’re on: planet Brexit.”

Eagle, who is regarded as a strong Commons perfomer and even tipped by some as 
a potential successor to Jeremy Corbyn, said she was too young to vote in the 
last referendum on our relationship with the EU but that “the world has 
changed” since then.

“Our economy is much more integrated into mainland Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, in a way that those of us who 
grew up in the 1970s never thought would happen,” she said. “We are so much 
more continental now.

“I just don’t think you can unwind 42 years of economic integration when it’s 
your biggest customer and you can’t unwind it without a huge exogenous shock to 
the whole economy. We’re not in a position that’s very strong at the moment, or 
in a global economic structure that’s very strong. So would you volunteer for 
that now? I don’t think so. And I think it’s perfectly reasonable and not 
fearmongering to point it out.”

She also rejected Gove’s assertion that Britain would be free to strike better 
deals 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/18/remain-campaigners-treat-public-like-mere-children-says-michael-gove>
 with countries such as China and India outside the EU. “I actually think our 
capacity to negotiate trade deals is increased and amplified by being in the 
EU,” Eagle said.

“If we went back to being quite an isolated island on the edge of Europe, we 
would still have to trade mostly with our near neighbours, because that’s how 
trade works, and then we would be in the queue behind the big trading blocs to 
negotiate treaties with India and any other developing countries we want.”

As well as setting out the economic case for Brexit, Gove used his speech to 
argue 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/19/brexit-could-spark-democratic-liberation-of-continent-says-gove>
 that a British exit from the EU could lead to “the democratic liberation of a 
whole continent” as other member states followed suit and threw off the 
shackles of Brussels.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tf66%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tf66%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b22f2f9019b47438e2c7c8faa6b4ab060d7b902%2F0_429_4683_2812%2F4683.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michael%20Gove's%20post-EU%20vision%20labelled%20'utopian%20rubbish'%20by%20Angela%20Eagle&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tf66%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michael+Gove%27s+post-EU+vision+labelled+%27utopian+rubbish%27+by+Angela+Eagle&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tf66%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b22f2f9019b47438e2c7c8faa6b4ab060d7b902%2F0_429_4683_2812%2F4683.jpg>
 Dominic Cummings, former adviser to Michael Gove, said the justice secretary 
had consulted with ‘umpteen ambassadors’. Photograph: David Levenson/Getty 
Images 
He compared the EU, with what he called its “mock parliament”, to sprawling 
and ultimately unsustainable historical regimes, from the Ottoman empire to 
tsarist Russia, and said that by leaving, Britain would force the EU to 
reinvent itself.

Speaking at the headquarters of Vote Leave across the Thames from the Houses 
of Parliament, Gove also ridiculed the idea repeatedly stated by the prime 
minister, David Cameron, that the government wouldimmediately have to invoke 
article 50 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/10/eu-referendum-economy-david-cameron-brexit-boris-johnson>
 of the Lisbon treaty, which would set a two-year timetable for negotiating an 
exit deal.


“Preliminary, informal conversations would take place with the EU to explore 
how best to proceed,” Gove insisted. “It would not be in any nation’s interest 
artificially to accelerate the process and no responsible government would hit 
the start button on a two-year legal process without preparing appropriately.”

Some analysts have suggested that this logic means Vote Leave would push for 
Cameron to be replaced if voters choose to leave, but Gove rejected that idea.

The prime minister’s official spokeswoman insisted: “The PM has been very 
clear on what the government’s approach would be. The government is offering 
the people of the United Kingdom a choice about membership of the EU and we 
would act on that choice. The process is set out very clearly in the Lisbon 
treaty.”

In contrast to Gove’s position, Ukip, which is backing rival Brexit campaign 
Grassroots Out 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/15/eu-referendum-grassroots-out-brings-a-hint-of-the-trump-to-middle-england>
, wants article 50 to be triggered straight away. “I don’t want any 
shillyshallying, I want article 50 invoked straight away,” Nigel Farage, the 
Ukip leader, told the Guardian.

“What we want is to use that two-year period to get sensible bilateral 
arrangements. What worries me is a government that would say ‘We’ve seen the 
vote and we’re going back to Brussels for more negotiations’. The establishment 
will do its best not to enforce the will of the people. We need to be very 
clear that leave means leave.”
