
With schools in England facing real-terms budget cuts, it’s no surprise that 
job losses have been on the agenda of many a governors meeting recently; ina 
survey of more than 900 schools 
<http://www.ascl.org.uk/news-and-views/news_news-detail.ascl-survey-reveals-scale-of-education-funding-crisis.html>
 by theAssociation of School and College Leaders <http://www.ascl.org.uk/>, 
almost four in 10 respondents said they have made redundancies.

Making staff redundant is perhaps one of the most difficult things you have to 
do as a manager. You need to handle the process in as sensitive, efficient and 
legally compliant manner as possible, while dealing with the understandable 
anxiety of the individual whose livelihood is under threat. Here are some 
suggestions for making this painful process as smooth as possible.

Related: Five alternative careers for teachers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/jan/10/five-alternative-careers-for-teachers>

Do it by the book

There are strict legal requirements that must be met when arranging compulsory 
redundancies to ensure that the process is open, fair and consistently applied. 
This includes several consultations with the staff and trade unions or employee 
representatives to identify those at risk, agree the redundancy process and 
selection criteria, as well as formally communicating decisions and the appeals 
process.

All alternatives must be considered, from offering voluntary redundancy on 
enhanced terms to redeployment, career breaks or reduced hours. It is strongly 
recommended that you work closely with your in-house human resource (HR) 
adviser, the HR team at the local authority or, if necessary, bring in an HR or 
legal consultant to help the school and governing body. There is helpful 
guidance on this on theAdvisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service 
<http://www.acas.org.uk/media/pdf/1/1/Redundancy-handling-accessible-version.pdf>
 (pdf) andAssociation of Teachers and Lecturers 
<https://www.atl.org.uk/help-and-advice/other-issues/redundancy.asp> websites. 
If you fail to follow due process you run the risk of fighting unnecessary and 
expensive unfair dismissal claims and losing trust and respect in an already 
emotionally fraught situation.

Communicate clearly and consistently

It’s best to communicate as early as possible that there may be restructuring 
ahead. The senior leadership team (SLT) should signal early that there are 
budget challenges as this allows for some proactive cost reduction moves, such 
as recruitment freezes, that may offset the need for redundancies.

Making sure that all managers are “on message” when they give information to 
staff is important too – discrepancies only heighten anxiety further. Brief the 
managers together as a group, and confirm the messages they should deliver in 
writing so that they have clear cues as to what to say and how to say it.

Be attentive

Individuals at risk of redundancy face real uncertainty about their future and 
need to know that you appreciate how difficult this is for them. Be courteous 
even if they are not. Take time to listen to what they have to say so that they 
feel heard. Make any final feedback constructive so that the individual can 
part company with dignity and self-esteem. If you’ve promised to provide 
information by certain deadlines, ensure you do, or at least offer explanation 
as to why it’s no longer possible.

Use your emotional intelligence

Individuals react very differently to redundancy, but this will be helped or 
hindered by the manager’s handling of the situation. Those who feel they have 
been treated respectfully are typically more positive, confident and ready to 
tackle the job market.

You cannot change the decision, nor are you responsible for getting them a new 
job

Find a way to acknowledge and discuss any concerns with the individual or 
groups of staff. A simple way to do this is to say, “I know that this must be 
difficult” or ask, “What would be helpful to you at this point?” This shows you 
are not just “the bearer of bad news” but someone who recognises their distress 
and wants to help.

The support you can offer might include providing them with some professional 
career outplacement support, write them a good reference, help look over an 
application, or recommend some agencies. If they seem distressed, signpost them 
to resources that can help. These could include: an employee assistance scheme 
if this is offered at your school; help via a trade union;Citizens Advice 
<https://www.citizensadvice.org.uk/work/work-comes-to-an-end/redundancy/>; 
their GP; or theBritish Association for Counselling & Psychology 
<http://www.bacpregister.org.uk/> website has a directory of counsellors.

Be careful about boundaries, however. You cannot change the decision, nor are 
you responsible for getting them a new job or sorting out their finances.

Separate your relationship from the business decision

It can help to draw a distinction between your relationship with the 
individual and the decision for the redundancy. Saying something such as, 
“While I can see that this is the right decision for the school, on a personal 
level I’m sorry that we have had to do this.” This separation enables you to 
have a constructive personal relationship even if there is disagreement over 
work decisions.

Handover

Arrange a proper handover so that the individual can communicate what they 
feel needs to be known and tie up any loose ends. This helps the organisation 
ensure continuity, but also enables the individual to feel that they have 
discharged their responsibilities. After all, they were paid to care that their 
job was done well – that can’t easily be turned off.

Related: Fact or fiction? The reasons teachers choose the job – and quit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/oct/23/fact-or-fiction-the-reasons-teachers-choose-the-job-and-quit>

Leaving do

It’s best to ask the individuals what they would prefer in terms of a leaving 
do – some will want a party and a warm speech while others may prefer to leave 
quietly. Respect their wishes, but a card, flowers, wine or present never go 
amiss.

Survivors

If those who are leaving appear to be treated well and respectfully, then this 
will be reassuring for remaining staff who may be feeling distressed for their 
colleagues, and perhaps wondering how they might be treated, if it was their 
turn next.

Schedule one-to-one meetings with remaining staff to discuss the impact of the 
changes and their role in the new structure. It’s important that they feel they 
have a future in the school so it’s an ideal time to talk about their career 
development, perhaps offer career planning workshops, training or other 
professional development opportunities.

Corinne Mills is managing director of Personal Career Management 
<http://www.personalcareermanagement.com/>.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
