
The tributes to Brian Friel have rightly been handsome. I agree with Michael 
Billington that he was“the finest Irish dramatist of his generation.” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/02/brian-friel-ireland-great-theatrical-explorer>

His great achievement, as Fintan O’Toole wrote in the Irish Times 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/news/ireland/irish-news/brian-friel-no-country-needed-his-gift-more-than-ireland-1.2377115>
, was “to give the confused their own nobility” and his gift was to “salvage 
human dignity from the wrecking ball of history.”

I can still remember the thrill of seeing Translations in the early 1980s. 
Soon after, I saw a brilliant staging of Aristocrats and a rather poor amateur 
production of Philadelphia Here I Come. But the play was so good it didn’t 
matter.

His response to the Widgery whitewash report on Bloody Sunday, The Freedom of 
the City,was one of the best dramas to emerge from the Irish troubles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/02/brian-friel>. 

Like me, my journalist wife, Noreen Taylor, adored Friel’s work. One fact we 
learned about him early on was that he positively disliked giving interviews.

So imagine the scene at Derry airport one morning in the early 1990s, when 
having been informed that the flight to London had been cancelled, we would be 
obliged to take a taxi across to Belfast.

We were easing ourselves into the back seat when the front door opened and the 
taxi driver said: “Would you mind an extra passenger? This man needs to get to 
Belfast too.” We nudged each other as we realised it wasBrian Friel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/brianfriel>.

We would have something like two hours alone with the great man. Were we about 
to get a scoop?

After a curt nod to us both, he slumped into the front seat and the car set 
off. After about 10 minutes Noreen judged that it was about time to strike up a 
conversation. There was no reply.

It was clear that Friel had fallen asleep or, perhaps - and very possibly - 
had feigned falling asleep. And he went on to “sleep” for the entire journey. I 
think the only word he said to us was “goodbye.” As exclusives go, it wasn’t 
much to go on.

Many years later, with Noreen having added painting to her journalism, Friel 
sat for a portrait at his house in Donegal on the shores of Lough Foyle.

He was courteous, if a little grumpy, and said very little. And weeks 
afterwards all he said of Noreen’s picture was: “If it gives you pleasure, 
that’s fine.” How wonderfully cryptic!

Instead, Friel spoke eloquently through his plays, as we were reminded in the 
summer when attending a stunning production of Dancing At Lughnasa at 
Letterkenny’s An Grianán theatre.

Directed by Annabelle Comyn, starring Catherine McCormack and Catherine 
Cusack, it was a spell-binding evening and proved, once again, that Friel was a 
master of his trade.

But I can’t finish without repeating, as Fintan O’Toole did 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/culture/brian-friel/fintan-o-toole-the-truth-according-to-brian-friel-1.2375988>
, Friel’s 1972 BBC radio performance in which he conducted an interview with 
himself:

“When did you know you were going to be a writer?”

“The answer is, I’ve no idea.”

“Which of your plays is your favourite?”

“None of them.”

“Which of your stories?”

“Most of them embarrass me.”

“Do you think the atmosphere in Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> is hostile or friendly to the 
artist?”

“I’m thinking of my lunch...”

“Or would you say, Mr Friel, that the influence of Heidegger is only beginning 
to be felt in the drama and that Beckett and Pinter are John the Baptists of a 
great new movement?”

“Well, in answer to that I’d say that I’m a middle-aged man and that I tire 
easily and that I’d like to go out for a walk now, so please go away and leave 
me alone.”
