
Australia is almost the size of Europe, spanning pretty much every climate 
zone and boasting a mind-boggling diversity of plants. Yet from this botanical 
treasure trove of more than 30,000 species, the Aussies have only provided the 
world with a single major crop: the macadamia. With the revival of traditional 
Aboriginal cuisine, however, some incredible new flavours are beginning to get 
the attention they deserve.

Imagine pomegranate grains, only tinier, with an intense citrus tang

As a “bush tucker” geek, I have tried my fair share, and so far my favourite 
is the caviar lime (Citrus australasica). As delicious as it is quirky looking, 
like something straight out ofCharlie and The Chocolate Factory, the fruit is 
almost impossible to buy in the UK. Just as well then that they are widely 
available as houseplants, capable of fruiting in any brightly lit living room.

Originating from the subtropical rainforest on the border of New South Wales 
and Queensland, these long, cylindrical fruit look a bit like gherkins on the 
outside. Not very appealing. Slice one open, however, and the pulp spills out 
like shiny bubbles of caviar in vibrant shades of emerald green, pale yellow, 
even bright pink and deep reds. The juice is trapped in each of these tiny, 
jewel-like bubbles and is only released when bitten into, creating a bright 
spritz of intense lime flavour with a fragrant hint of mandarin. Imagine 
pomegranate grains, only far tinier, with an intense citrus tang and coming in 
the colours of the rainbow.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4teya%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4teya%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3228957b616306327f006309f528b35c34e88919%2F1006_1719_1962_1560%2F1962.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gardens%3A%20enjoying%20the%20lime%20light&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4teya%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gardens%3A+enjoying+the+lime+light&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4teya%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3228957b616306327f006309f528b35c34e88919%2F1006_1719_1962_1560%2F1962.jpg>
 ‘Slice one open and the pulp spills out like shiny bubbles of caviar.’ 
Photograph: Alamy 
Their recent introduction into commercial production has seen them 
enthusiastically taken up by top chefs all over the world who sprinkle the 
citrus-flavoured grains over salads and muddle them through martinis. Because 
of their brilliant colour, acidity and resemblance to caviar, they are spooned 
over oysters and served with smoked salmon or even rolled around sushi instead 
of flying-fish roe. I find they work well in salads and fresh sauces. They are 
really just limes in far cooler looking and more versatile packaging.

The plants are now increasingly available online from a range of independent 
nurseries at a similar price to conventional citrus and can be grown in almost 
the same way. A bright spot indoors, away from radiators but close to a window, 
would make the perfect habitat. Like all citrus plants, they benefit from a 
dose of liquid feed during the spring and summer, as well as well-drained 
potting mix that is on the acid side (any commercial citrus compost will do 
fine). Just ensure the plant dries out slightly between waterings, as they hate 
having their roots sit in cold, sodden compost.

Regular limes cost less than 50p in a supermarket, yet the fruit of quirky, 
tasty caviar limes are essentially unbuyable – and I know which I’d pick to 
grow at home.

Email James at james.wong@observer.co.uk <mailto:james.wong@observer.co.uk> or 
follow him on Twitter@Botanygeek 
<https://twitter.com/Botanygeek?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
