
Next time you open a bottle of merlot or chardonnay, be sure to thank the 
vintner. And you might want to toast the worms, as well.

 Everyday earthworms are the latest solution to a thorny problem that most 
wine drinkers never consider: wastewater disposal.

Related: Corking climate change: sustainable practices bear fruit in champagne 
production 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/dec/31/corking-climate-change-sustainable-practices-bear-fruit-in-champagne-production>

Producing a single glass of California wine may require as much as 14 gallons 
of water 
<http://www.sacbee.com/food-drink/wine/dunne-on-wine/article2622749.html>. Much 
of that water is used to clean the winery and bottling equipment after 
processing grapes. At most wineries, the wastewater is moved through a series 
of aeration ponds, where air is pumped through the water for several weeks 
while bacteria break down contaminants.

Now a Chilean company, BioFiltro <http://biofiltro.com/en/>, offers an 
alternative: spraying the wastewater into giant bins filled with earthworms.
Fetzer <http://www.fetzer.com/>Vineyards, located in California’s Mendocino 
County, has signed on to become the first American winery to use the process to 
treat 100% of its wastewater.

The industrious worms are expected to clean the water just as well but in only 
four hours. They require almost no electricity, and the only byproduct is worm 
excrement – also known as castings – which can be returned to the vineyard as a 
nutritious fertilizer.

“This system is using nature. It’s using worms and microbes to treat all of 
our winery wastewater,” says Josh Prigge, director of regenerative development 
at Fetzer.

BioFiltro has begin to install its system at Fetzer, which expects to have it 
fully operational later this year, in time for the 2016 grape harvest. Fetzer 
and BioFiltro declined to disclose the system’s cost.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j2bj%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j2bj%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec8ca46572aec84abc8da56f4d635af28bc0569d%2F0_0_3216_2136%2F3216.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=California%20winery%20hires%20earthworms%20to%20clean%20up%20its%20wastewater&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j2bj%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=California+winery+hires+earthworms+to+clean+up+its+wastewater&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j2bj%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec8ca46572aec84abc8da56f4d635af28bc0569d%2F0_0_3216_2136%2F3216.jpg>
 Wineries have historically relied on aeration ponds to treat their wastewater. 
Such a pond requires pumping air through the dirty water to get bacteria to 
breakdown contaminants, a process that takes more time than the earthworm-based 
process that Fetzer Vineyards is trying out. Photograph: BioFiltro 
Fetzer has long been a sustainability leader  
<http://www.wineinstitute.org/resources/pressroom/04132015>in the wine 
industry, having converted its entire operation to use renewable energy sources 
such as solar, for example, back in 1999. It also recently became the largest 
winery certified as a B Corporation 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/jan/07/b-corp-leed-fair-trade-certification-sustainability-lab-danone-group-black-rock-unilever>
, a process requiring Fetzer to meet rigorous environmental and social 
standards.

The drought in California has motivated many vineyards and wineries to slash 
their water demand. Switching to drip irrigation is a common move, as is adding 
low-flow fixtures and meters to better measure consumption. Some have drilled 
wells to avoid diverting water from streams, or they have switched todry farming
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/05/dry-farming-california-drought-wine-crops>
, which avoids irrigation by relying on rain and techniques to retain moisture 
in the soil.

The BioFiltro process was initially developed by Jose Toha Castella, a 
biophysics professor at the University of Chile, and commercialized by one of 
his students, Alex Villagra, a co-founder of the company. It has since been 
used at 129 installations in six countries, in environments from Antarctica to 
the Atacama Desert, and in a variety of wastewater settings from human and 
dairy cattle sewage to slaughterhouses and wineries in California, Washington 
and elsewhere, says Mai Ann Healy, the firm’s regional manager in the US.

“The worms are the stars of our facility,” Healy says. “As they digest and 
break down the contaminants, their guts are producing these bacteria, 
essentially. The bacteria are actually the ones who work 24-7 and don’t get as 
much credit.”

At each installation, BioFiltro builds large concrete “treatment” boxes, which 
contain 12,000 worms per cubic yard. These have an open chamber at the bottom 
to maintain air follow, then are lined bottom to top with large river cobbles 
(rocks), wood shavings three feet thick, then a top layer of worms and 
bacteria. The concrete boxes are open to the sky, and the wastewater is simply 
sprayed on top of the worm piles.

BilFiltro designs different worm and bacteria recipes, which depend partly on 
the types of worms that can thrive in local conditions, to treat a particular 
type of wastewater. Large solids in the wastewater collect on the wood shavings 
and are then consumed by the worms. Microscopic solids are consumed by the 
bacteria, both on the wood shavings and in the worms’ digestive tracts.

Fetzer will have three treatment boxes, each 36-feet wide, 200-feet long and 
six-feet deep. An estimated 100m worms in total, mostly the common California 
red worms, will be on duty, Healy says.

The vanguard of that worm workforce has already started in a kind of 
“incubator” at the Fetzer winery, Healy says, where they are being gradually 
exposed to the wastewater so they can acclimate.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j2bj%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j2bj%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb57a627bf60e183fc5e236d06af2e9b73f733d75%2F0_291_3873_2324%2F3873.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=California%20winery%20hires%20earthworms%20to%20clean%20up%20its%20wastewater&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j2bj%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=California+winery+hires+earthworms+to+clean+up+its+wastewater&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j2bj%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb57a627bf60e183fc5e236d06af2e9b73f733d75%2F0_291_3873_2324%2F3873.jpg>
 BioFiltro worms at work at a campground in Torres del Paine National Park, in 
the Chilean side of Patagonia. The system contains wood shavings, earthworms 
and bacteria to help it treat wastewater and reuse it for flushing toilets. 
Photograph: BioFiltro 
Once or twice a year, BioFiltro will visit the winery to collect worm castings 
from the treatment boxes, which Fetzer will combine with compost from other 
parts of its operation and then apply throughout its vineyards to nourish the 
soil.

Sanjai Parikh, an associate professor of soil chemistry at the University of 
California, Davis, says BioFiltro looks like a promising option for treating 
winery wastewater.

“That type of approach of recreating the natural system in this contained 
environment, I think, is a very good approach and could be really beneficial. 
It’s something that wineries and tomato canneries and similar facilities should 
all consider,” Parikh says.

Parikh, who recently co-authored a study 
<http://www.ajevonline.org/content/ajev/66/3/302.full.pdf> that examined 
wastewater management at wineries, said most of them use aeration ponds, a 
proven technology but one that is very energy intensive because air must be 
constantly pumped and mixed with the wastewater to ensure bacterial contact.

Such ponds are also slow to clean wastewater – it can take weeks or even 
months. This requires lots of land area to hold the water since it continues to 
accumulate with ongoing operations. And the process tends to generate offensive 
odors. These issues don’t exist with BioFiltro’s process, Healy says.

But there’s one potential downside with worm processing: it’s not much more 
effective at removing salts from wastewater than pond aeration. Salts naturally 
accumulate in wastewater from agricultural operations, and this is particularly 
true in winemaking because many of the cleaning agents used contain sodium.

Related: The Californian craft beer brewed from waste water 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/mar/14/californian-craft-brewer-beer-recycled-water-environment>

Salt makes wastewater less useful for irrigation because it causes clay 
particles in the soil to bind together, preventing the soil from absorbing 
water, Parikh says. Many plants also won’t grow in salty water or soil. 
Dilution is the preferred and cheap way to reduce salt, but Parikh’s research 
reveals another option: replacing sodium-based cleaning chemicals with the 
potassium-based alternatives in winemaking. Potassium in wastewater may 
actually improve soil fertility.

“What we see across the board is that, yes, winery wastewater has exciting 
potential to be reused, and you could probably use it for irrigation,” Parikh 
says. “But it’s always going to be a big challenge having a way to dilute water 
when salts are too high, or a way to get rid of it when it’s far too high.”

Currently, Fetzer disposes of its treated wastewater by spreading it on land, 
where it then filters into the groundwater table – a common practice.

Once the BioFiltro process is operating, the treated wastewater will be 
plumbed to a pond and used to irrigate landscaping. That pond is now filled 
from wells and a nearby stream, and Fetzer hopes to stop using those water 
sources. It also plans to build a rainwater catchment system to further reduce 
reliance on streams and aquifers.

With more testing and quality control, the company hopes to use the 
worm-processed wastewater to irrigate its vineyards, Prigge says, effectively 
closing the loop on its water consumption.

“This is what we feel is the evolution of corporate responsibility,” he says. 
“We don’t want to just minimize our impacts. We want to eliminate those 
impacts.”
