
Labour will run a distinctive campaign to stay in the EU, former home secretary
Alan Johnson <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/alanjohnson> will say at the 
launch of the party’s official pro-Europe campaign.

Johnson, the MP for Hull West and Hessle who is heading up the Labour in for 
Britain campaign, will seek to differentiate the party’s pro-Europe campaign 
from the cross-party Britain Stronger in Europe campaign,led by the former 
Marks & Spencer chairman Stuart Rose 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/12/stuart-rose-pro-europe-campaign-patriots-britain-stronger-in-europe>
, by focusing on the benefits of “a social Europe that protects all workers”.

In an official video released before the campaign launch on Tuesday, Johnson 
talks about his memories of the 1975 referendum over Britain’s continued 
membership of the European Economic Community.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGfDOJxe_I-Y&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGfDOJxe_I-Y&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGfDOJxe_I-Y>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGfDOJxe_I-Y&media=>
“When people ask me why I am leading Labour’s campaign for Britain to stay in 
theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>, I think back to 
1975,” says Johnson. “Wearing a tank top and flares, I asked myself two 
questions: What is best for me and my young family, and what is best for 
Britain? I was deciding how to vote in the European referendum.

“I was a 25-year-old postman, raising three children on a council estate. I 
knew the arguments for and against – I carried them on my back for weeks – 
delivering the leaflets for both sides to every street in Slough.

“It’s about jobs. Jobs that put food on the table for millions of British 
families. It’s about British businesses. Businesses that rely onEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> for trade worth £26.5bn every 
year. And it’s about a better future. A future that comes from Britain taking 
our place at the top table and not turning our back on the world. We can’t put 
jobs, business – our future – at risk. That’s why I’m in for Britain.”

Speaking before the launch in Birmingham, which is likely to be overshadowed by
the party’s internal debate 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/30/jeremy-corbyn-labour-talks-vote-syria-airstrikes>
 over a potential parliamentary vote on extending anti-Isis airstrikes from 
Iraq to Syria, the Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, said the campaign would go 
hand in hand with the party’s “determination to put a progressive reform agenda 
for the European Union on the table”.

“Labour has campaigned to make sure our place in Europe has led to better 
protection and rights in the workplace, and we will continue to fight for jobs 
and security for all the British people,” he said.

A total of 213 of Labour’s 231 MPs have signed up to the campaign, including 
the entire shadow cabinet. Johnson has also written to constituencyLabour 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> parties inviting them to join.
