
It’s the start of the academic year in many parts of the world, which means 
university students are busy organising timetables and dusting off their 
textbooks. To help get your head around the year to come, we have a wealth of 
student resources on the site.

There is a series on theories of development 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/series/theories-of-development> 
analysing the work of key thinkers, a list ofbooks 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/aug/27/development-studies-books-students-read-review>
 you might not find on your reading list, and an interactivesnapshot of women’s 
rights 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2014/feb/04/womens-rights-country-by-country-interactive>
 around the world.

Plus, our popular geography quiz 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/interactive/2012/dec/20/geography-game-how-well-know-world>
 – bonus points if you can outscore your lecturer. We also have quizzes on
population 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/quiz/2013/nov/07/development-data-population-quiz-hans-rosling>
,rivers and dams 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/quiz/2013/mar/14/rivers-dams-head-above-water-quiz>
, andfood 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/interactive/2013/jun/07/food-game-what-do-you-know>
.Browse all our quizzes here 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/global-development+content/quiz>
. We haveextracts from recently published development books 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/global-development+tone/extract> 
and ourWorld library 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/series/world-library> series 
selects suggested reads on developing countries.

We are also giving you the chance to have your say on development issues with 
a new series called Students Speak. Each month we’ll pose a question based on a 
hot topic in development and ask you to submit a response of 250 words or 
fewer. We’ll post our favourite responses on the Global development site.

This month’s question: in September, global leaders will gather for the UN 
climate summit <http://www.un.org/climatechange/summit/> in New York. If you 
were attending the summit, what single action would you propose to reduce the 
impact of climate change in developing countries?

Email your response to development@theguardian.com 
<mailto:development@guardian.co.uk> with “Students Speak” in the subject line. 
Please include your name, the country where you live, and the university or 
school you attend. Submissions close at 6pm BST on 21 September.
