
Sometimes the most chilling news is tucked away on back pages. Warwick 
Mansell’s always illuminating diary (14 June 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jun/14/regional-schools-commissioners-all-academy-system-speed-read>
) reveals that the “powerful but shady” regional school commissioners see it as 
their “responsibility to ensure that the government’s goal is achieved”. And 
the goal? “England’s system to be all-academy in six years”. So much for the 
U-turn. Turn back a page and read Aditya Chakrabortty’s article (Less free 
market, more freeloaders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/14/freeloaders-free-market-britain-business-taxpayer-philip-green>
) on a “deformed capitalism, barely worthy of the name”. Then look back at last 
Sunday’s Observer (12 June 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jun/12/academy-schools-cash-cow-business>
) and the equally chilling special investigation on the not-for-profit Bright 
Tribe multi-academy trust, which has apparently made the venture capitalist 
Mike Dwan a multimillionaire. The activities of the “charlatans in pinstripes” 
milking public funds aren’t restricted to the retail sector. Unison’s national 
officer responsible for local government is quoted as saying of a response from 
the National Audit Office, whose job it is to regulate potential profit-making 
in the academy system: “I have read a lot of correspondence from regulators 
over the years. And this one screams: ‘We really don’t like what we see’.” 
Permission to scream with them! We must support your 96 correspondents who 
wrote opposing the drive to multi-academy trusts (Letters 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jun/09/we-oppose-the-drive-to-multi-academy-trusts>
, 10 June). This is as major a privatisation scandal as that facing the NHS.
John Airs
Liverpool

• Puzzled why David Carter (schools commissioner) and Michael Wilshaw (Ofsted) 
have taken so long to “come clean” about the “failing” academy scandal (Report 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jun/15/few-multi-academy-trusts-good-enough-improve-schools-says-sir-michael-wilshaw>
, 16 June). These two powerful positions and the organisations they represent 
are supposed to be independent of political control or bias. Yet we have Ofsted 
supporting the government’s “pro-academy” policy by pushing arbitrarily 
designated “failing” schools in to academy status – while also incidentally 
awarding a plethora of academies and alliances “outstanding” status. And Carter 
has told the Commons select committee that 119 academies have been brokered as 
“a last resort”. What is going on? We now know that a teacher can be 
fast-tracked into a school in 12 weeks, which makes a mockery of “professional 
pedagogical training”, and apparently the schools themselves have become the 
objects of “empire-building”. What have these two political appointees been 
doing to allow this disgraceful state of affairs to further erode an already 
crumbling education system?
Professor Bill Boyle
Tarporley, Cheshire

• There is much to agree with in Richard Adams’ article (GCSEs have bent 
schools out of shape. So scrap them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/10/scrap-gcse-exams-ofsted-boss-wilshaw-right>
, 11 June), especially the view that there should be assessments at age 14, ie 
at the end of year 9. Students at this age will have a firm idea of whether 
their future lies along the academic pathway or the vocational, and could 
specialise accordingly between ages 14 and 18. There might also be specialist 
educational establishments to cater for each of these pathways, similar to the 
far-sighted Education Act of 1944, the difference being that the specialisation 
takes place at age 14 rather than 11. This is very similar to what is done in 
France and Germany, where such a system works well, and the vocational route is 
completely and fully respected, enjoying parity of esteem with the academic 
track. Why does our country always show the way and then leave it to others to 
profit from it? It is unrealistic to expect any single establishment to be able 
to provide all things to all students and to all levels.
Dr David Moulson
Scunthorpe, Lincolnshire

• Martin Kettle is too kind to Michael Gove in calling him a hitherto 
“moderniser, fascinated by openness, logic and ideas” (Opinion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/09/narrow-nasty-michael-gove-justice-secretary>
, 10 June). As secretary of state for education, Gove was an unthinking 
disciple of the philosopher ED Hirsch, with his ill-conceived epistemology and 
limited view of education. As a result, we have a narrow curriculum, an 
obsession with testing, demoralised teachers and stressed children. Had Gove 
been at all open or interested in other people’s ideas he would not have 
imposed his ideology onto the education professions and generations of children.
James Pitt
York

• Periodically the national press excitedly rediscovers the benefits of 
Steiner Waldorf education (Singing, playing – and strictly no screen time: the 
Steiner schools 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jun/14/steiner-schools-children-tablets-tech>
, 14 June), and commonly seems perplexed at the success of this allegedly 
“controversial” learning approach. As a trained Waldorf teacher and keen 
student of Steiner myself, I can attest to there being far more instances of 
Rudolf Steiner being proved right than there are examples of his ideas being 
disproved; and a deep understanding of the proper place of technology in 
children’s learning is just one of these. The Steiner approach is so successful 
because it is built upon perennial wisdom, is not afraid to embrace a spiritual 
cosmology, and challenges head-on the unwarranted assumption that technological 
progress is always and necessarily a beneficent good. Architect Max Frisch’s 
definition of technology speaks a thousand words – viz: “Technology… the knack 
of so arranging the world that we don’t have to experience it.” For as long as 
we have parents with the insight to question the worst aspects of a crass, 
technology-obsessed modernity, there will be a demand for these excellent 
schools, and the gimmick-free, perennially wise approach to learning that they 
patiently offer.
Dr Richard House
Stroud, Gloucestershire

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
