
The reigning Miss Great Britain, Zara Holland, has been stripped of her title 
after having sex onITV2 <http://www.theguardian.com/media/itv2> reality show 
Love Island.


Beauty pageant organisers said they had “no problem with sex” but said they 
could not condone Holland’s relationship with 24-year-old scaffolder Alex Bowen.

Wednesday’s episode of the show, watched by around a million viewers, featured 
the two in bed together and what one insider described as a “look of delight” 
on Bowen’s face.

Related: Gary Barlow teams up with BBC for Take That talent show Let It Shine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/17/gary-barlow-bbc-take-that-let-it-shine-graham-norton-mel-giedroyc>

Although no explicit scenes were shown, it was readily apparent what had 
happened from comments that were featured in the following night’s programme.

Love Island presenter Caroline Flack criticised the decision, saying Holland 
was a “very sweet girl. What even is Miss GB? Are we living in the dark ages?”

— caroline flack (@carolineflack1) June 16, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/carolineflack1/status/743549263171428352> 
Feel even more sorry for Zara now she's been de-crowned. She's a very sweet 
girl . What even is 'miss GB' ? Are we living in the dark ages ?
 <https://twitter.com/carolineflack1/status/743549263171428352> 
In a statement, Miss Great Britain organisers said they had taken the decision 
with “deep regret”.

“We pride ourselves on promoting the positivity of pageants in modern society 
and this includes the promotion of a strong, positive female role model in our 
winners,” they said.

“The feedback we have received from pageant insiders and members of the 
general public is such that we cannot promote Zara as a positive role model 
moving forward.

“We wholly understand that everyone makes mistakes, but Zara, as an ambassador 
for Miss Great Britain, simply did not uphold the responsibility expected of 
the title.”
— Miss Great Britain ® (@Official_MissGB) June 16, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Official_MissGB/status/743545345989296128> 
To be clear we have no problem at all with sex-it is perfectly natural.We 
simply can't condone what happened on national tv
 <https://twitter.com/Official_MissGB/status/743545345989296128> 
A spokesman for the programme said Holland had been informed about the 
decision and had chosen to stay on the show.

The current series of Love Island, which first aired on ITV in 2005, has 
featured a penis moulding contest and a “girl on girl sock wrestling 
championship” in a paddling pool of jelly.
— John Plunkett (@johnplunkett149) June 17, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/johnplunkett149/status/743799174576111616> 
Love Island girl on girl sock wrestling championship - in full(ish) 
https://t.co/ylpGViFWxd <https://t.co/ylpGViFWxd>
 <https://twitter.com/johnplunkett149/status/743799174576111616> 
The now former Miss GB told fellow contestants on Thursday she regretted her 
decision to sleep with Bowen, the former boyfriend of Loose Women star Vicky 
Pattison, the winner of I’m a Celebrity in 2015.

She told the cameras: “You know when you’re in the moment and it just happens. 
That’s really not like me at all. Why couldn’t we have just gone to sleep?”

Around 70 cameras follow the contestants’ every move, with a reputed 1,000 
condoms placed strategically around the villa.

Contestants face a “race against time” to couple up, with anyone who stays 
single in danger of being eliminated from the show and missing out on the 
£50,000 cash prize.

New features on the show this year include an outdoor gym and a redesigned 
hideaway for couples’ “one-on-one action”.

Presenter Flack said the sex on the show sometimes made her cringe. “I had to 
have my fingers in my ears for certain parts,” she said, before the current 
series’ transmission.

“I could watch it, no problem, but I preferred watching it to listening to it. 
I don’t like hearing those noises!”

Holland will be replaced by runner-up Deone Robertson, who had been crowned 
Miss North Lanarkshire.


The organisation said they would meet Holland on her return to the UK from the 
house in Majorca “to fully explain our decision and will wish her the very best 
going forward”.

● This article was amended on 17 June 2016 to remove a reference to the Miss 
World competition. Miss World is open to Miss England, Miss Wales, Miss 
Scotland and Miss Northern Ireland, but not Miss Great Britain, which is a 
separate event.
