 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
He's been called the Jedi master of data visualisation, dubbed a statistics 
guru and introduced as the manin whose hands data sings 
<http://www.ted.com/speakers/hans_rosling.html>. When it comes to celebrity 
statisticians, Hans Rosling is firmly on the A-list.

In the years since his first TED talk (Stats that reshape your worldview 
<http://www.ted.com/talks/hans_rosling_shows_the_best_stats_you_ve_ever_seen.html?qsha=1&utm_expid=166907-19&utm_referrer=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.google.co.uk%2Furl%3Fsa%3Dt%26rct%3Dj%26q%3Drosling%2520stats%2520that%2520reshape%2520your%2520worldview%26source%3Dweb%26cd%3D1%26ved%3D0CDEQFjAA%26url%3Dhttp%253A%252F%252Fwww.ted.com%252Ftalks%252Fhans_rosling_shows_the_best_stats_you_ve_ever_seen.html%26ei%3DTbqUUbrGKeqj0QWH8ICIBg%26usg%3DAFQjCNEYh0dZMpohAYvMd7ZSxqTMNOh1fA%26sig2%3DeTdGSo-Ou9K7sx1qgt1Apg%26bvm%3Dbv.46471029%2Cd.d2k>
), which thrust him into the spotlight in 2006 with millions of online views, 
Rosling's now signature combination of animated data graphics and theatrical 
presentations has featured in dozens of video clips, a BBC4 documentary onThe 
Joy of Stats 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/science/punctuated-equilibrium/2010/dec/07/1>, and 
numerous international conferences and UN meetings.

Instead of static bar charts and histograms, Rosling, professor of global 
health at Sweden'sKarolinska Institute <http://ki.se/?l=en>, has used a 
combination of toy bricks, cardboard boxes, teacups and vibrant, animated data 
visualisations to breathe life into statistics on health, wealth and 
population. With comic timing and a flair for the unusual, Rosling's style has 
undoubtedly helped make data cool.

When Time magazine included him in its 2012 list of the world's 100 most 
influential people 
<http://www.time.com/time/specials/packages/article/0,28804,2111975_2111976_2112170,00.html>
, it said his "stunning renderings of the numbers … have moved millions of 
people worldwide to see themselves and our planet in new ways". However, 
Rosling, 64, is less convinced about his impact on how people view the world.

"It's that I became so famous with so little impact on knowledge," he says, 
when asked what's surprised him most about the reaction he's received. "Fame is 
easy to acquire, impact is much more difficult. When we asked the Swedish 
population how many children are born per woman in Bangladesh, they still think 
it's 4-5. I have no impact on knowledge. I have only had impact on fame, and 
doing funny things, and so on."

He's similarly nonplussed about being a data guru. "I don't like it. My 
interest is not data, it's the world. And part of world development you can see 
in numbers. Others, like human rights, empowerment of women, it's very 
difficult to measure in numbers."

Rosling is strikingly upfront about the limitations of data. Sometimes, the 
problem is that different countries measure things – like unemployment – in 
different ways, he says. In other cases, there are real uncertainties in the 
data that must be assessed: child mortality statistics are quite precise, 
whereas maternal mortality figures are not; global poverty measurements are 
infrequent and uncertain.

"That unit [at the World Bank] which assists countries, trains the staff, and 
helps them to compile [poverty] data, how many persons are working there? Four 
half-time. For the world. It's a joke. They're very competent, they're very 
good. But it's not serious … The uncertainty of 1.3 billion [people living in 
poverty] is plus or minus half a billion. And we will not know whether the MDGs 
[millennium development goals] have been achieved until 2019, the later part. 
We only get poverty measurements every fifth year."

These issues are well known, he says, but still underappreciated and 
infrequently discussed. "It's like the emperor's new clothes, and I'm the 
little child saying 'He's nude! He's nude!'"

Still – when handled with care – global statistics can help challenge common 
myths and misconceptions about the world, Rosling hopes. Chief among the myths 
still to be debunked, he says, is the idea that the world is split in two – 
with a developed world on one side and a developing world on the other. "We 
don't have two types of countries any longer, we have four or five types … 
[and] the idea that the western world will be ahead of the rest for ever is 
wrong."

Anxiety about population growth is another of Rosling's targets. "If you save 
the lives of poor children you destroy the planet. There are so many who think 
that death keeps control of population growth. That's just wrong!" Child 
mortality has plummeted over the past half-century, so it's no longer death 
that determines population growth, he insists, but fertility rate – and this 
too has decreased in so many countries. "The average number of children in the 
world is 2.4. The number of children below eight years of age in India has 
stopped growing. The number of children in the total world has stopped growing. 
Most of the fertility transition is done."

"I can show you! Let me show you the world," he enthuses, interrupting our 
interview only briefly to pull from his pockets a series of props. Laying out 
toy bricks and a handful of counters on the table, he shows in 3-D how the 
dynamics of global population, child mortality and carbon emissions have 
changed over the past 50 years – and how the world might look by the end of the 
century.

"[We now have] 7 billion people, [with] 7 million children dying. Six 
[million] of these die in the poorest 2 billion, 1 die here in the middle and 
here almost no one. Can you see?" he asks, waving his hands over his display. 
"There is no developing world with high child mortality! It is 2 billion people 
that still have three or more children per woman, where still girls cannot go 
to school, or very few, and where you have almost all the child mortality and 
almost all the maternal mortality."

If Rosling comes across as advocating for a shift in focus towards the poorest 
countries, he's adamant he's not. "I don't debate. There are too many debates. 
Too much Word, not enough Excel.

"If people want to help with something, it's good to know where the problem is 
… [for example] the problem of lack of schooling for girls is not a global 
problem. It is not a developing world problem, it's a problem in the poorest 2 
billion. But there it's an extremely severe problem … Men in Afghanistan have 
half the schooling of women in the world. But young women in Afghanistan have 
one-seventh of the men in Afghanistan. This is the world I would like to 
explain."

Disappointed with his perceived lack of impact on public understanding of 
global progress, the self-styled "edutainer" is now turning his attention 
towards teachers. Over the next few years, hisGapminder foundation 
<http://www.gapminder.org/> will push through a school project to provide 
materials on the basic macro-trends on population, economy, living conditions 
and energy, to help teachers in high school and college to better communicate 
the realities of the world.

"Fame is a dangerous thing. It's what the post-industrial society wants. They 
want fame and many followers on Twitter. But to really make the world 
understandable, that challenge is remaining."
