
From 8am to 4pm, 25-year-old Samina Khaskheli travels door-to-door in rural 
Pakistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> handing out free samples 
of condoms, birth control pills, and intrauterine devices.

“I was told ‘This is sinful’,” Samina says about the initial opposition to her 
selling birth control. She took the job warily. Her off-the-map village, Allah 
Bachayo Khaskheli, is home to roughly 1,500 people in the country’s 
south-eastern Sindh province. The flatlands are covered by livestock, and 
economic desperation leaves women toiling alongside men as farmhands, livestock 
breeders and cotton pickers.

Samina is a worker for the Marginalised Area Reproductive Health Viable 
Initiative <http://hands.org.pk/live/?p=5862> – Marvi – once a popular emblem 
of female independence in Sindhi folklore. Today, Marvi refers to a network of 
literate or semi-literate village women aged 18 to 40 who travel door-to-door 
selling contraceptives. “In our village, there was no information about family 
planning. Many women died during childbirth,” says Samina about what inspired 
her to join.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k2zc%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k2zc%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5685a3a284c57b9c9a2c5d329778d38f881be406%2F0_400_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20'Avon%20ladies'%20of%20Pakistan%20selling%20contraception%20door%20to%20door&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k2zc%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+%27Avon+ladies%27+of+Pakistan+selling+contraception+door+to+door&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k2zc%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5685a3a284c57b9c9a2c5d329778d38f881be406%2F0_400_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
 A group of women in Asoo Babar village learn about birth control in a Marvi 
worker’s home. Photograph: Sabrina Toppa for the Guardian 
Trained by the Karachi-based Health and Nutrition Development Society (Hands 
<http://hands.org.pk/2012/>), roughly 1,600 Marvis are dispersed throughout 
Pakistan’s remotest villages, where government healthcare facilities are scant 
or nonexistent. In the Sanghar district where Samina’s village is located, at 
least 400 Marvis fill a gap left by a lack of government funded lady health 
workers (LHWs).

After Afghanistan and Timor-Leste, Pakistan has Asia’s highest 
<https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/rankorder/2223rank.html>
 maternal mortality rate. In 1994, the LHW programme was established to bring 
urgent healthcare services to rural Pakistani women and lower the birth rate in
the world’s sixth most populous country 
<http://www.worldometers.info/world-population/population-by-country/>. 
However, approximately 30% percent of Pakistan is not covered by the LHW 
programme, says Rubina Jaffri from Hands.

Pakistan’s contraceptive prevalence rate 
<https://dhsprogram.com/Where-We-Work/Country-Main.cfm?ctry_id=31&c=Pakistan&Country=Pakistan&cn=&r=4>
 is low – out of a population of more than 190 million, only 35% of women aged 
15-49 use contraception. Nevertheless, demand is high in rural areas, where 
women give birth to anaverage 
<http://www.nips.org.pk/abstract_files/Priliminary%20Report%20Final.pdf> of 4.2 
children, compared to 3.2 children in cities. “In villages, electricity is not 
there and health facilities are not there, but the need for contraceptives 
certainly is,” says Dr Talat Abro, the deputy secretary of reproductive health 
service for Sindh’s population welfare department.

Marvi workers receive a six-day initial training by Hands and have their 
sessions in the field supervised by LHWs. Marvis emerge from the underserved 
populations they work with, so understand how family planning is best presented 
to the women they target.

“I wish I had learned about birth control 15 years ago,” says Azima Khaskheli, 
a 45-year-old livestock breeder in Allah Bachayo Khaskheli village, her black 
bangles clinking together as goats bleat nearby.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k2zc%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k2zc%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F409bc0b502cc7352f234104e3ed65b2cb8a7a76c%2F0_132_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20'Avon%20ladies'%20of%20Pakistan%20selling%20contraception%20door%20to%20door&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k2zc%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+%27Avon+ladies%27+of+Pakistan+selling+contraception+door+to+door&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k2zc%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F409bc0b502cc7352f234104e3ed65b2cb8a7a76c%2F0_132_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
 Azima Khaskheli Photograph: Sabrina Toppa for the Guardian 
When a Marvi worker visited her household to teach about birth control pills, 
Azima’s husband agreed that limiting future births would be a good choice. Not 
only would it save the family another trip to a hospital – the last one charged 
Azima 2,500 rupees (£16) per visit and was located more than half a day away by 
road – but it might increase Azima’s productivity in the field, which was 
already flagging thanks to the weight of childcare. She hefts her youngest 
child on her back while tending to a pack of cows and goats each morning.

“I tell the women ‘If you have a large family, how will you manage the 
family’s needs and food expenses?’,” says Marvi worker Bhagbhari Babar, who is 
required to make 50 home visits a month and usually visits a home five or six 
times before a couple agrees to buy any contraception.

The most popular contraceptives are the injectable contraceptive and birth 
control pills, says Babar. Ease of use makes them particularly attractive for 
women labouring in the field. Almost every contraceptive method is sold for 
five Pakistani rupees (£0.03) apiece to a family, allowing Marvis to generate 
an income from the sale of the products, which Marvis obtain at a 
government-subsidised rate of 3 rupees per piece.

Related: Six of the best sex education programmes around the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/20/six-best-sex-education-programmes-around-the-world>

“Now [the women] have knowledge about the procedures, and they pursue 
contraception out of their own choice,” says Ambreen Khaskheli, a LHW.

In addition to birth control options, Marvi workers also teach women about 
birth spacing, or providing a gap between pregnancies to protect the health of 
a mother.

“We are not trying to limit the number of children – a woman or a family has a 
right to choose as many number of children as they want, but they must keep in 
mind the pregnancy period is important for a woman’s health,” says Anjum 
Fatima, the general manager for health at Hands.

Opposition to birth control in Pakistan often takes on a religious hue, so 
Marvis are trained to sensitise local religious leaders on the health benefits 
of family planning. The Marvi programme relies on community mobilisers – 
ranging from religious leaders to influential landlords – to communicate the 
benefits of contraceptives. In 2014, approximately 40 Islamic religious leaders
approved <http://www.dawn.com/news/1154188> birth spacing for women in 
Pakistan. Samina adds that she enjoys the support of the village’s maulvis, or 
religious authorities, who endorse her door-to-door campaign, and never issue 
anti-contraceptive messaging over the mosque’s loudspeakers.

Related: Childbirth in Benin – in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/gallery/2016/apr/27/childbirth-in-benin-in-pictures>

“Before the culture was rigid, but now they’ve gradually accepted family 
planning,” says Samina, the Marvi worker, motioning to the group huddled around 
her. “I am proud I can teach women about both the Qur’an and birth control.”

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter. Join the conversation with the 
hashtag#SheMatters <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23SheMatters&src=typd>.
