 There are men screaming at the tiny woman from Yeovil, entirely understandably 
- Polly Harvey has extraordinary stage presence. Her band is vast and solid, 
and when she moves, it's as though the bass is throwing her against her 
microphone - her hips roll, her hair flies. Yet while she sings of big, 
biblical droughts and storms, she shoots a soft, maternal smile at the kids 
being crushed down the front. And she cracks a huge, filthy grin when a 
wild-eyed man at the back vows: "I'll bear your first child, Polly." Given the 
amount of intimate surgery and unpleasant maternity wear this involves, it's an 
impressive offer.
 But then, Polly "PJ" Harvey inspires extraordinary tribute. Her swampy blues 
and knuckle-raw rock make her the first true successor to Patti Smith's 
visceral yowl. Her previous album, To Bring You My Love, was nominated for both 
the American Grammy and British Mercury Music Awards. Her current one, Rid of 
Me, has just made the Grammy short list again. Courtney Love, not a woman who 
doffs her cap readily, has said: "The one rock star that makes me know I'm shit 
is Polly Harvey. I'm nothing next to the purity that she experiences." Madonna 
also recently declared herself a big fan, while indie film hero Hal Hartley was 
so taken by Harvey that he cast her as a modern-day Mary Magdalene in his 
recent millennial satire The Book of Life.

But it's hard for anyone outside her tight-knit circle to discover just what 
Harvey is really like. She's notoriously reclusive. Reversing rock'n'roll 
legend, she ran away from London to a sleepy Dorset town, took her mother to Q 
magazine's awards ceremony, loathes interviews, and refuses to discuss her 
lyrics under any circumstances. The last of these is fair enough, really, given 
that while Natalie Imbruglia can be found "lying naked on the floor",PJ Harvey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/pjharvey> sings of menstruation, dying in 
the desert, drowning her daughter and being tied, live and flaming, to a 
cartwheel like St Catherine.

 It's not surprising, given these feverish extremes, that Harvey has 
experienced what sound like several nervous breakdowns. The first left her so 
broken she could neither answer the telephone nor clean her teeth. The second, 
prompted by her 1995 tour, came at a time when Harvey was so skeletally thin 
that the pink Lycra catsuit she wore on stage seemed like both defiance and a 
plea. Courtney Love semi-outed Harvey in an interview earlier this year, 
saying: "Jung says that women with eating disorders have dreams about being in 
glass coffins; and on [the album] 4-Track Demos, [Harvey] sings 'In my glass 
coffin, I'm waiting'."

 All Harvey will say of that period is "I was not well." Travelling to 
Manchester to meet her on the last day of her recent tour, I'm worried by what 
I'll meet. I nag Amanda, her press officer, to describe her: does she joke at 
all? Rock from side to side? Cry immediately - or only after the first 
question? Amanda searches for the right adjective.

 "She's very... still," she says, finally. Oh dear: disturbed people are 
extremely still. They're like the patients in Awakenings - struck down with 
tremors so severe that they lock, sclerotic and still. We sit in the huge, 
draughty lounge of the hotel, and wait for the patient.

 But when Harvey walks in, it becomes apparent it's a slightly wary but 
content stillness. She's dressed in tight trousers and a cute little jacket of 
Practical Black - rather than Statement Black or Sexy Black - and has a stripy 
knitted scarf wound around her neck. Her smudgy black hair is in little matted 
ringlets, and her fringe is tufty and brutal - it looks as if Harvey got it 
tangled in the branches of a tree, and quickly hacked it off with a penknife. 
As she steps nearer, her eyes astonish - sea-green with long, long lashes, they 
are huge and empathetic. One imagines she would be good to know in times of 
adversity, weeping and heavy drinking. She sits on the sofa, very composed, and 
waits for the interview to happen.

 It's very cold, I say. "Yes, that's why I'm wearing the scarf," she smiles, 
tucking it into her jacket. "I was drinking here until four in the morning. 
It's the last day of the tour, and I don't quite know what I'm going to do 
next." She gives a rather bewildered laugh. "Normal life seems scary. I might 
decompress too quickly, and get the bends."

 Touchingly, Harvey keeps an eye on the door, in case any member of her band 
comes down to check out and she can say farewell to them one more time. While 
she keeps watch, we chat in vague terms about therapy (Harvey's "had some") and 
how adversity can make you stronger. At one point, she says she has known a lot 
of death: "Quite a few friends of my age have died." Given that Harvey is only 
29, this is rather alarming but, as ever, she won't say more.

 She's far happier talking about her music: her face lights up like a birthday 
cake when she talks about a little mini-studio that BjÂšrk recommended to her. 
But I try to explain that this is of absolutely no interest to anyone, 
including myself. I want to know what it is that feeds the sense of extreme, 
and hunger, in your music. What do you do with your life?

 "That's exactly what I'm asking myself now," she laughs, half-despairingly. 
"Now this tour's over, what do I do with my life? What did I do when I had a 
life?"

 Harvey's childhood sounds like Cider With Rosie, but soundtracked by Howlin' 
Wolf. She was brought up on a Dorset smallholding by bohemian parents: her 
father was a stonemason; her mother a sculptor, who booked bands for the local 
venue on the side. They would wake Polly and her brother at 3am, by drunkenly 
playing Jimi Hendrix, or Captain Beefheart's notoriously "difficult" Trout Mask 
Replica LP.

 The village was so small there were no other girls of her age, so she played 
with her brother and the village boys. The gender-ambiguity of childhood was 
even more marked with Harvey - the only toys she craved were Action Men, and 
she would pee sitting backwards on the bowl. She and the boys would call at 
each other's houses and go down to the river. "You would go down there every 
day, and it would always find something for you to do," she says happily, as if 
the river were a brother or a sister.

 The river was the only thing entering or leaving the village. In later life - 
no doubt helped by the blues mythology she absorbed from her parents' records - 
Harvey's songs came back to the river when crisis struck: in "Down by the 
River", she drowns her daughter in it; in "The River", it is a place where pain 
can be thrown, washed away.

 Harvey helped out on her parents' farm: to the great delight of music 
journalists, she revealed that she had twisted off the testicles of baby rams 
when her father proved too squeamish; and she regularly pulled dead lambs from 
birthing ewes' wombs.

 She tells me the story of a family cat who went missing, and was discovered, 
six months later, perfectly mummified in an outbuilding. "He was shrunk a bit, 
and his skin cured," she says, with a sweet smile. "But we could tell it was 
ours, because his right ear was bent, like ours." The Harvey family still have 
the mummified family pet, on a shelf in their front room.

 When Harvey first came to the public's attention in 1992, she cut a strange 
and forbidding figure. With her scrubbed, sallow face and hair in a tight, 
wooden-looking bun at the nape of her neck, she looked like a severe Spanish 
ballerina. Her persona was the subject of immediate interest: she looked like a 
hardline feminist, but claimed to have no truck with feminism, and in an early 
interview noted: "When you're reading a violent rape scene, you can feel really 
aroused, and I find that really hard to deal with, but at the same time, really 
intriguing."

 She was, however, only 21 at the time, and emerging from a horrible 
adolescence. "I was a classic tortured teenager. A troubled child." She had 
suffered month-long depressions and severe self-loathing. "I never, not even 
once, thought I was beautiful," she says, looking as if she would love to go 
back and comfort her adolescent self. "It's only in the past year that I've 
begun to think I'm... all right, you know?"

 This self-disgust translated into fury on record: on the single 
"Sheela-Na-Gig", she has a male protagonist saying, "Wash your breasts, I don't 
want to be unclean", and her lyrics were matched by her guitar-playing - dirty, 
instinctive and tight. "My music is like earth and mud and rock and grit," she 
says. "I don't do tinkly things."

 By the time of her second album, Rid of Me, she was gaining international 
acclaim - the support act for U2's Zooropa tour, she gained more column inches 
than the headliners as she oscillated from the gnawing melody of "Missed" to 
lyrics such as "I'm sucking 'til I'm white/But you leave me dry."

 But, of course, if the fuel you use for your creativity is negative, the 
fumes it kicks off will make you sick; and Polly Harvey seemed very sick. Her 
weight was becoming an issue. While making the rawest, hungriest sound 
imaginable, Harvey was looking almost rickety, and was playing with her 
sexuality by dragging up in blinding false eyelashes, tottery heels and satin 
skin-tight against her jutting bones.

 Her music started to be spoken of as something almost tangibly malevolent. 
Melody Maker journalist Sharon O'Connell claimed to have been so startled by 
the title track from Rid of Me that she shunted her car and suffered whiplash. 
Industry rumour suggested that the album's tinder and kindling was an abusive 
relationship in which Harvey was stuck. Lyrics such as "I'll make you lick my 
injuries" certainly seemed to hint as much. Whatever happened, at the end of 
1992, she broke down, and ran away from London back to Dorset. "Without wanting 
to sound like a name-dropper, I was having a conversation with David Byrne a 
couple of weeks ago," Harvey says now, taking a sip of her coffee. "He was 
saying that it takes at least three years to know what the hell you were going 
on about in any song you write. And I was going, 'That is so true. That's so 
correct.' Looking back now, I know exactly what Dry and Rid of Me are about. I 
get them completely. But I didn't have a clue at the time. You see, it all goes 
in here..." - Harvey gestures to her heart in her tiny chest - "and you don't 
know how or when it will come out again."

 Harvey is a great believer that where you live affects your music. Given 
this, I'm fascinated to find out where Harvey was living when she wrote her 
masterpiece, 1995's To Bring You My Love. It's a swampy, sweaty album: it 
sounds infected, malarial. Heavy with funereal church organs and the 
bone-on-bone disrhythmia beloved of Tom Waits, it was Grammy and Mercury Music 
Award-nominated, and sold more than a million copies.

 "It was an isolated house, out in the countryside of the South-west," she 
says. "All it had was views, really. It was very cold, and very old. I could 
smell all the people who'd lived there. I can always sense things in buildings, 
but as this one was so old it was particularly noticeable."

 Harvey disciplined herself to write a song a day. She would wake up sick 
every morning at the prospect. "I was all alone," she says, quietly. "It was 
pretty much the worst time of my life. I didn't see anyone, at all. I went into 
myself."

 The loneliness is apparent: it's one of the hungriest albums you are ever 
likely to hear. It sounds like a woman going through the emotional equivalent 
of the last stages of starvation - when the body starts to consume its own 
internal organs. It's not exactly The Best of Kylie Minogue.

 Yet despite this, she's very keen to point out that being miserable and 
messed up is not a prerequisite for great art. "I hate that myth," she scowls. 
"I think it's so obviously wrong. When you're messed up, you lose the ability 
to open yourself up and channel these things."

 The subsequent tour was the pink Lycra catsuit tour: Harvey was magnetic on 
stage, but falling to pieces once she got back in the dressing room. She blew 
out a string of dates, and hid herself from the world back at her parents' 
farm. Until, that is, the notoriously gloomy Australian rocker Nick Cave rang 
and asked her if she'd like to collaborate on a song with him.

 She did, and they fell in love. Harvey's relationship with Cave is 
fascinating: she claims never to have felt so loved, and he was wild with grief 
when she left him. They broke up because it was too intense. The most 
instructive thing about it, however, is that while Cave went on to write a 
whole album, The Boatman Calls, about Harvey, her post-relationship album, the 
current Is This Desire?, is all about herself. "I wanted to write for myself, 
about myself. Like someone looking in on me," she explains.

 You can see why she felt this need: other songwriters don't write songs about 
women like Harvey. The characters she uses on Is This Desire? are new to rock 
music: Catherine, who must have her chapel on the hill as a place to wash and 
"make noises"; Joy, 30, unwed, begging to go blind because she doesn't believe 
in anything; the nameless woman in "Electric Light", who looks beautiful under 
the tungsten bulb, but fears her own reflection in the dawn light.

 Even the artwork touches areas from which pop culture generally shies away. 
One of the images on the inner sleeve is of a torso that one presumes to be 
Harvey's, with its tiny, wren-like breast lost in a "normal", 36C bra. Harvey 
is the first artist to mythologise dysfunctional, confused femininity in the 
same way that Thom Yorke and Kurt Cobain, Morrissey and Ian Curtis have 
mythologised troubled masculinity: by seeking to escape it, yet revelling in 
the electricity that that unsettled, molten state brings with it. And Harvey's 
done this without becoming an honorary boy, like Chrissie Hynde.

 It explains why Courtney Love and Madonna are such big Harvey fans. They are 
both women who have spoken of their unhappy, "ugly" adolescences, without art 
or images that reflected them. It was only when they turned what they were into 
an anti-image that they began to feel at ease with themselves. Harvey is such 
an extreme example of this process - and so extraordinarily capable of 
translating this into her music - that it's little wonder these women's women 
idolise her.

 But this is the bit Harvey loathes. To her, the confusions and unhappinesses 
of her life are private - even though the way she processes them is public and 
unique. Any attempt to discover more about her is met with a look that suggests 
you're being dangerously greedy. The subtext seems to be "I've given all I can. 
Now bugger off." "It's all in the lyrics," she sighs. "I can't say any more 
about it, really."

 After her break-up with Cave, Harvey found herself, once again, in an unhappy 
place. She began work on Is This Desire?, but was so troubled that it took more 
than a year to complete.

 Given that all the songs on Is This Desire? are reflections of yourself, was 
there one particular reflection that made you realise you needed help?

 "Yeeeeessss. It was 'My Beautiful Leah'." The fourth track on the album, 
"Leah" starts with a very simple Casio rhythm track. After four bars, the 
nastiest, blackest bass comes in: whale-like and distorted, it vies with a very 
unhappy church organ and a mashed-up brass cymbal for the most disturbing and 
compulsive sound on the song and, indeed, the album. Harvey sings as if she has 
been shot and is trying to spring the bullets back out of her body by force of 
will. "She only had nightmares/And the sadness never lifted/And slowly over the 
years/Her lovely face twisted."

 "I listened back to that song and I thought 'No! This is enough! No more of 
this! I don't want to be like this.' Because it was all so black and white, and 
life just isn't black and white. I knew I needed to get help. I wanted to get 
help."

 It was Harvey's bandmate John Parrish, and video and art director, Maria 
Mochnacz, who offered help. They moved her into the basement of their house in 
Bristol. "They basically saved me," she says. "I needed to be rescued, and I 
was."

 She went into therapy, and started sorting out the tangles in her head, 
simplifying things. It sounds as if she pared her life down almost 
monastically: the flat was very cold and very dark. She would spend hours 
writing the songs for Is This Desire?, and getting them down on her little home 
studio. She would then run upstairs, into the light, and play them to Mochnacz 
and Parrish.

 "I'd ask them to tell me which ones were good and which ones were bad," she 
says. "Then I'd go back downstairs and work more on the ones they liked."

 Is This Desire? is unlike any of Harvey's previous work. While Rid of Me and 
To Bring You My Love were storms at full peak, the height of the fever, Is This 
Desire? comes from the morning after - walking around the wet garden in the 
pre-dawn, shaky but no longer glassy-eyed. It's a very post-therapy, 
coming-to-terms-with-things album. The progress is mirrored in the music: 
Harvey has abandoned her hot red guitars in favour of inky blue keyboards; and 
where once she would have screamed and retched, she now turns up the bass until 
the room heaves, and gets machines to do the dirty work for her.

 "Writing on different instruments changes the way the songs come out," she 
explains, finally putting down her half-drunk coffee. "I used to write all my 
songs on guitar, and they come out physically different to the ones you write 
on keyboards - which is what I did for Is This Desire? I had one tiny keyboard, 
no more than a foot long, and when you're in this position" - she hunches up 
over imaginary keys - "you tend to write more... thoughtfully."

 Her Bristol basement overlooked a tangled garden, through which a ginger cat 
would thread and weave. Harvey would often look up from her work and see him 
sitting, staring at her with big, sea-green eyes. One morning, she woke to find 
him padding around her flat. "I think cats are sent to you, when you need 
them," she says. "They always seem to turn up." She called him Garden, and when 
she was ready to leave, she took him with her.

 When my hour with Harvey is nearly up, I ask her again what she does with her 
life. This time, she answers it far more serenely. She now lives in a flat 
outside Poole, she says. It's the fourth floor of a very narrow Victorian 
block, "so it looks like a coffin". Then she adds, with a giggle: "That'll 
delight all the people who believe I'm all blood and pain and witchery."

 Her windows "have only sea in them"; the beach comes up to her back door. "I 
read a lot. I go to galleries. I like to feed this" - she gestures to her heart 
with her fist. "I walk along the beach every day, and whatever's there, I'll 
incorporate into my sculptures."

 What a neat living metaphor - Jung says that the sea represents the 
subconscious, and the beach the conscious mind. So an artist's job is to walk 
the tide line.

 "That's right," she nods. She leans forward, eager to describe more. "It 
depends on the tides and the flow of the river into the sea. Some days, it will 
all be shoals of bleached baby crabs or seaweed or rope. Other days, it will be 
pebbles, all of a certain weight, or tiny purple mussel shells, the size of 
your little finger nail."

 Every so often, she'll become obsessed with something the sea throws up, and 
bring it back to her flat. "You load down the mantelpiece and shelves with 
important pebbles until they buckle," she says. "But then, you realise why you 
were collecting them. You work out what they meant to you, and you don't need 
them any more. You just don't need them any more."

 The woman from the West Country smiles: a simple smile, a happy smile. She's 
thrown away a lot in the past year.
