
High temperatures and a crippling shortage of rainfall in India is forcing 
schools to close 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/20/india-drought-affecting-330-million-people-weak-monsoons>
 and communities to ration drinking water. In Chennai, the oppressive heat 
currently gripping the southern Indian city has led to workers demanding an
allowance 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/chennai/In-Chennai-factory-workers-seek-heat-allowance/articleshow/51721740.cms>
 for working in stifling factories and vets offeringadvice 
<http://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/chennai/simple-steps-to-save-pets-from-the-searing-heat/article8407190.ece>
 on caring for pets to avoid dehydration. “While some rains would have been a 
blessing in disguise, the rain gods have ditched Chennai,”writes 
<http://www.skymetweather.com/content/weather-news-and-analysis/chennai-to-sizzle-into-april-no-rains-in-sight/>
 a reporter for Skymet, which provides weather forecasts in India.

It would have been hard to imagine such a situation four-and-a-half months 
ago. Following the heaviest rainfall in more than a century at the end of last 
November, the Adyar river – which runs through the centre of Chennai – surged, 
causing muddy water to pour over the walls of nearby apartment blocks and into 
the streets. Thousands were forced to flee their homes, andhundreds died 
<http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/tamil-nadu/death-toll-in-floods-mounts-to-347/article7973293.ece>
.

Businesses were also affected. Factories such as those of Ford and 
Renault-Nissan wereclosed 
<http://auto.economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/industry/chennai-rains-automakers-forced-to-shut-down-production-face-rs-180-crore-loss/49820147>
, Chennai International airportsuspended operations 
<http://www.breakingnews.com/topic/chennai-international-airport-chennai-tamil-nadu-india/>
, power supplies weredown 
<http://indianexpress.com/article/india/india-news-india/rescue-ops-almost-over-focus-now-on-relief-work/>
 and roads across the region became waterlogged, limiting the movement of goods 
and employees. Reinsurance company Swiss Re estimates the floods caused 
economic losses of$2.2bn <http://media.swissre.com/documents/sigma1_2016_en.pdf>
 (£1.53bn).

Despite high levels of economic growth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2015/apr/16/stuck-in-low-global-growth-and-india-overtaking-china-is-this-the-new-normal>
, India lags significantly behind countries such as the US and China in 
building resilience to natural hazards, which cost it$9.8bn a year 
<http://earthsecurity.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/ESG.IndiaInsurance.pdf>. 
This is the conclusion of risk analysis company Verisk Maplecroft, whose latest 
hazard risk indices haveranked 
<https://maplecroft.com/portfolio/new-analysis/2016/03/23/natural-hazards-14bn-people-face-severe-risks-south-asia-region-struggles-build-resilience/>
 India’s population first in a list of those most exposed to natural hazards.

The research identifies flooding as one of the biggest risks to communities 
and businesses in South Asia, and suggests that inIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> alone 113 million people – 9% of the 
population – are acutely exposed to flood hazard.
India natural disasters exposure 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/apr/2016-04-14T16:39:44.html> 
The reasons why India is so exposed are diverse. “India’s most vulnerable 
areas are characterised by high rates of poverty and poor access to public 
services, leaving people with a lack of resources to prepare for and recover 
from natural hazard events,” says Dr Richard Hewston, principal environmental 
analyst at Verisk Maplecroft. “Communities in rapidly growing urban areas also 
tend to be among the most vulnerable, as poor urban planning and weak 
enforcement of building standards means the impacts of natural hazard events 
are more keenly felt.”

In addition, the country’s dependence on agriculture leaves it highly 
sensitive to extreme weather events. India derives a greater proportion of GDP (
17% <http://www.fao.org/3/a-i4691e.pdf>) from agriculture than the global 
average (4%) and the sector employs 47.2% of the population, compared to the 
global average of 30.7%.

The Indian government has begun to address these vulnerabilities, introducing 
a $1.3bncrop insurance scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/14/india-thousands-of-farmer-suicides-prompt-1bn-crop-insurance-scheme>
 at the start of this year to help farmers cope with falling market prices and 
crop failure due to natural disasters. At present only19% of India’s farmers 
<http://www.assocham.org/newsdetail.php?id=4923> insure their crops due to lack 
of awareness about the practice of crop insurance, its cost and lack of 
availability.

Insurance companies themselves could encourage more resilient business 
practices, for example by offering products that support the adoption ofdrip 
irrigation <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qK_LqWj2f-4>.

“It is impossible for insurance companies in India not to notice the risks of 
extreme weather and water scarcity,” says Alejandro Litovsky, CEO and founder 
of Earth Security Group, which has recently published areport 
<http://earthsecurity.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/ESG.IndiaInsurance.pdf> on 
the role of the insurance sector in India. “Besides their agricultural 
portfolios, their clients in energy and infrastructure are also being affected 
as droughts cripple their operations. There is a powerful business case for 
insurance companies to plan their future growth through companies promoting 
sustainable agriculture and renewable energy.”

Ultimately, tackling unsustainable business practices requires more than 
insurance. The Delhi-basedEnergy and Resources Institute 
<http://www.teriin.org/> proposed to work with companies to study the impact of 
climate change on the oil and gas sector. So far, however, only two have signed 
up to take part. “They’re concerned about numbers for demand of their product, 
but not about what the climate can do to their business. Everyone’s knowledge 
is based on hindsight,” says a researcher from the institute who wished to 
remain anonymous.

 * This article was updated on 21 April 2016. A previous version said that 
Chennai was in east India rather than on the east coast of India. 