
Q: I have just thrown out my old nighties (some of them were over 15 years 
old!) and would like to treat myself to some new, pretty nightwear - where do 
you recommend?
Barbara

A: There's nothing nicer than coming home from work on a winter's evening and 
relaxing in comfy pyjamas. I am a sucker for silk pyjamas. Monsoon (
www.monsoon.co.uk <http://www.monsoon.co.uk>) has great sets - delicate 
shoestring-strapped camisole tops with matching bottoms. I love the Harmony 
pyjama set (£55) and the tiny polka-dot Abigail camisole edged in lace with 
matching shorts (£30). You can complete your boudoir look with a silk printed 
kimono dressing gown (£70). Or try ethical label Peace, from the Equa boutique (
www.equaclothing.com <http://www.equaclothing.com>), especially the silk gift 
set including camisole, eye mask and French knickers (£100). If your house 
should catch fire, at least you'll look good when a burly fireman comes to the 
rescue.

Q: Why are men's high-street clothes so boring? I've tried both Zara and 
French Connection, but the colours are dull and they seem to have the same 
jumpers and coats as last winter.
Jason

A: Head to the bigger local flagship stores, which stock a larger selection, 
and if you can make it to London you could sort your winter wardrobe in one 
afternoon. Topman is a great place to start - check out the Topman Design 
range, which specialises in trend-led but affordable clothing. Go to
www.topman.com <http://www.topman.com> for the coat selection - all on-trend, 
all around the £100 mark. Cos (www.cosstores.com <http://www.cosstores.com>) 
also has a good mix of stylish and fashionable winter menswear, and Urban 
Outfitters stocks a great range of reasonably priced brands. Here, you'll find 
label Junk de Luxe, which has great jackets with unusual detailing this season. 
Try Poste for shoes (www.office.co.uk <http://www.office.co.uk>); this Office 
offshoot has excellent classic tie-ups and brogues - many for under £100. That 
should keep you happy until the January sales!

· If you have a fashion question for Jo, email ask.jo@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:ask.jo@observer.co.uk>
