
Your turn to cook? Christmas 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> dinner looks daunting but 
relax, people exaggerate. Simply follow my stress-free festive countdown and 
rediscover the true meaning of Christmas!

Christmas Eve 

9pm Pop turkey in barrel of treacle. 9.15pm Bring in lobsters and use this 
quiet time to kill.9.43pm Curate stockings. 10.15pm Assemble stuffings, one 
trad, one contemporary – this year I’m loving luxurious artichoke and eel 
stuffingetto with saffron.11.45pm Bacon-wrap chipolatas allowing at least 45 
per person.12.15am Still plenty of time to make my easy-peasy cherry truffle 
triflinis, with pink champagne jelly and treacle-infused kumquats.

On the day

3am Light ovens. Knead dough for lush salted treacle and kale panettone. 3.45am
 Prep veg. Keep it simple! Just potatoes, sprouts, celeriac, parsnips, braised 
red cabbage, pomegranate-stuffed aubergines, caramelised carrots, and broccoli 
with port and candied wild violets.5am Make brandy butter and individual nut 
roasticles.7am Pop festive breakfast on table. 7.30am Gut lampreys. 8am Open 
stockings.9am Assemble my bodaciously saffron lolliblinis with celeriac butter 
and salted treacle salsa.10.30am Send family on walk while you tidy. 11am 
Parboil potatoes.11.10am Create a classic 18th century bread sauce with boar 
marrow and swan fat.11.20am Almost there! Finish gravy, cook veg, pop 
chipolatas in the oven.11.25am Assemble cheeseboard. 11.42am Internal turkey 
temp should be at least 1,000 degrees.11.55am Baste! Open oysters. Warm dishes. 
Noon Pop pudding on. Hand round lobster tails with fresh hollandaise sauce for 
dipping.12.30pm Decorate table. 1pm Take turkey to carver, stir plum-infused 
Nutella into sprouts, pop veg in tureens – bon appetit!1.05pm Say you feel sick 
and while everyone’s eating, make a start on your stress-free Boxing Day 
countdown!1.10pm Pop tomorrow’s ham in Lucozade vat.
