
Daffodils grow best in moist, fertile soil but will do reasonably well in most 
soils, including chalk. Almost all are fully hardy and most will spread fairly 
quickly to form large clumps

These fastigiate yews punctuate the orchard, managing to combine formality 
with more naturalistic planting, but with age branches can flop out sideways, 
so they are tied in to keep their shape

Lawns now continue to grow through our milder winters and should be kept 
fairly short with a cut in December so that when the daffodils appear, they do 
not have to compete with the grass

The mellow brick apple-store and belfry provide the 'eyecatcher' at the end of 
this grand vista. Combining ornate grandeur with such a mundane function was 
common in gardens of this period

With bulbs routinely blooming earlier each year, daffodils can now be 
considered a highlight of February rather than March

Bramdean House, a large, 18th-century property near Winchester, is almost 
hidden from the road by a huge, undulating yew and box hedge. Beyond lie five 
and a half acres of mostly formal garden, which slopes away from the house and 
is divided into three. The soil is very alkaline, so there are lessons to be 
learned here for any gardener struggling with a pH of eight or more. The first 
section contains matching herbaceous borders, which in summer are filled with 
nepeta and geraniums, but at this time of year the stars of the show are Iris 
tuberosa and the wonderfully scented Daphne bholua

The careful formality continues in the walled garden, which remains a working 
kitchen garden cultivated by hand. Alongside the fruit and veg grown for the 
house, there are trial areas for plants, a cutting garden and old-fashioned 
sweet peas. The central path then leaves the walled garden through wrought-iron 
gates into a more relaxed orchard (pictured here), although even in this area 
formality has been imposed. Broad, mown grass paths emphasise the view leading 
to the belfry and carpets of bulbs are punctuated with symmetrical towering 
yews.

Â· Bramdean House reopens to the public tomorrow (ngs.org.uk)
