
A British restaurant that began life as a supper club in an east London flat – 
and still takes a notoriously informal approach to fine dining – has been named 
as one of the top 50 places to eat in the world.

The Clove Club 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/jul/06/clove-club-london-restaurant-review>
, based in Shoreditch town hall, was the highest new entry at the annual 
World’s 50 Best Restaurants awards ceremony, rising to 26th place in the global 
rankings.

This year the UK had three restaurants in the top 50, a rise on last year’s 
two entries, and putting London ahead of Paris and Tokyo. The Clove Club soared 
ahead ofHeston Blumenthal’s Dinner 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/feb/27/jay-rayner-dinner-heston-blumenthal>
 in Knightsbridge, London – a stalwart of the list that fell from number seven 
to number 45 – to become the second best restaurant in the UK just three years 
after it opened.


The highest-ranking British restaurant this year was the Ledbury 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/oct/19/ofm-awards-2014-best-restaurant-ledbury>
 in Notting Hill, London, which came in at 14th in the world.

The Clove Club began as a collaboration between two former DJs, Daniel Willis 
and Johnny Smith, who moved from Manchester to London and met the chefIsaac 
McHale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/mar/17/why-were-watching-isaac-mchale>
 through a friend. In 2010, the trio hosted a casual supper club in their 
London flat, with an ambitious menu featuring such things as mackerel, 
nasturtium and burnt puree, pheasant as the main course, and iced goat’s milk 
with beetroot granita for dessert.

It was such a success they were encouraged to open a restaurant permanently, 
moving into Shoreditch town hall, though retaining the informal atmosphere of 
their initial pop-up supper clubs and contemporary take on British cuisine.

Their five-course dinner menu, which costs £65, currently has dishes such as 
roast Cornish pollock, seaweed and orange butter and Amalfi lemonade and 
Sarawak pepper ice-cream, while an extended version of nine dishes costs £95.

For McHale, being ranked in the top 50 restaurants in the world, is “an 
unbelievable honour”, after having only been open since 2013.

He said: “I don’t think it’s sunk in. We’re all really proud and excited. We 
are part of the next generation of restaurants starting to creep up the list 
and we are very excited to be ranked among chefs who have been my heroes for 
the past 20 years.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y4yx%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y4yx%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed99de211e8d350d104d6cd1b22ed1e052525f30%2F0_285_4736_2842%2F4736.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Former%20London%20supper%20club%20enters%20world's%20best%20restaurant%20list&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y4yx%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Former+London+supper+club+enters+world%27s+best+restaurant+list&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y4yx%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed99de211e8d350d104d6cd1b22ed1e052525f30%2F0_285_4736_2842%2F4736.jpg>
 Chef Brett Graham at the Ledbury in Notting Hill said London is the most 
exciting place to be cooking. Photograph: ANL/Rex/Shutterstock 
He described the ethos at the Clove Club as “modern British food, leaning 
towards Scotland and a little bit in love with Japan – just trying to do 
something that is simple and direct and delicious, with a little bit of a 
twist”.

McHale said it had taken a lot of toil, often working 80 hours weeks, to 
perfect the menu and get the Clove Club to its current standard. He also said 
the ticketing system 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/apr/08/would-you-pre-pay-dinner-restaurant-tock-ticketing-system>
which the restaurant has introduced – where people have to pay for their meal 
in full when they book a table – had proved “slightly annoying sometimes and 
not for everyone, but restaurants are a hard industry to make the numbers stack 
up and this does stop people from that bad habit of just not turning up”.

Having started out with no curtains and the “cheapest tables and chairs we 
could find to get the restaurant open”, McHale said “things are slowly stepping 
up”. He added: “I texted my sous chef last night to say ‘lunch just got a whole 
lot busier’.”

The chef Brett Graham 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/video/2014/oct/19/ledbury-best-restaurant-ofm-awards-2014-video>
, who runs the two-Michelin-starred restaurant the Ledbury, said they had spent 
the past year “working out the best ways to cook the amazing English produce we 
get and focusing on different ways of cooking vegetables. It’s an ongoing 
project, so every day me and my sous chef work on something new and we are 
going to keep pushing it as much as I can.”

The Ledbury team have also branched out to purchase 75 acres of land in Oxford 
and will start their own deer park this year to raise their own animals for 
meat and educate staff how the meat goes from “park to table”.

Graham added: “As far as London goes, it’s probably the most amazing place to 
have dinner on the planet and is a really exciting place to be cooking.”

This year also saw an Italian restaurant take the number one spot in the world 
for the first time.Osteria Francescana <http://www.osteriafrancescana.it/> in 
Modena is the restaurant of the chefMassimo Bottura 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/14/massimo-bottura-mercurial-chef-reinvented-italian-food>
, who is renowned for his cuisine that subverts traditional Italian cooking. 
His first Michelin star came after 15 years of cooking when a Michelin 
inspector, left stranded by a road accident, fortuitously wandered into the 
restaurant.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y4yx%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y4yx%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8d80544d589cd8c67e619ca5b3a5767d35c5fc9%2F159_287_3228_1937%2F3228.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Former%20London%20supper%20club%20enters%20world's%20best%20restaurant%20list&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y4yx%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Former+London+supper+club+enters+world%27s+best+restaurant+list&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y4yx%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8d80544d589cd8c67e619ca5b3a5767d35c5fc9%2F159_287_3228_1937%2F3228.jpg>
 Massimo Bottura won number one spot with his restaurant Osteria Francescana in 
Modena, Italy. Photograph: Paolo Terzi/AFP/Getty Images 
William Drew, the editor of the World’s 50 Best Restaurants 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/restaurants> and Restaurant magazine, 
said Bottura’s cuisine was “pretty extraordinary”.

“He takes traditional Italian classic dishes and reinvents them and represents 
them. He takes ingredients such as parmigiana and does extraordinary things 
with it that you would never expect – he serves it five different ways at five 
different temperatures. His cooking is super contemporary.”

Drew also said the rise of Osteria Francescana and restaurants such as the 
Clove Club marked a global trend towards taking high-end cuisine out of its 
traditional, stuffy silver-service environment.

He said: “Undoubtedly there’s a feeling that you no longer need to go to this 
elaborate, very posh luxurious dining room and have what might now be termed 
old-fashioned service, although that does still have its place. Places like the 
Clove Club, or Estella inNew York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york>
, which is another new entry this year – it’s extremely casual, almost like 
eating in a bar with a noisy atmosphere. But the food is still exceptional.”

Bottura, speaking after the awards which took place in New York on Monday 
night, said: “InItaly <https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> we have three 
things that are untouchable – football, the Pope and food. It’s something so 
important.”
