
Dragging on his American-brand cigarette, Rami al-Khatib leans back and looks 
away. There is a wry smile but it hints at a bubbling frustration. I have asked 
him whether he feels optimistic about the future. “There are two questions you 
should never ask a Syrian,” he says, “and that’s one of them.”

From behind a wisp of smoke, Khatib, 29, a law student at Damascus university 
before the conflict, adds: “The other is: where do you see yourself in five 
years’ time?” The young Syrian’s disdain at the line of questioning is 
understandable. Khatib was born in the now infamous city of Palmyra, where Isis 
massacred hundreds and where Vladimir Putin last week emphasised his role in 
winning it back for the regime bystaging a classical concert in its ruins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/05/palmyra-amphitheatre-hosts-russian-concert-after-recapture-by-syrian-forces>
. Brought up in Homs, Khatib helped with the 2014 evacuation and watched as 
snipers picked off women walking through the rubble. He still has family in the 
city.

It was only because a guard at an Assad regime checkpoint recognised his 
mother as one of his former teachers that Khatib’s increasingly desperate 
parents were able to escape Isis. His 15-year-old sister had been told by an 
Islamist fighter that she and her father would be lashed the next time he saw 
her. “She was covering everything but he was asking her to cover properly,” 
Khatib says. “She had never worn the hijab before, you know.”

He lightens briefly while talking about a “friendly” regime sniper in Homs 
who, when his shift came, would aim his bullets into the walls behind them 
rather than take a life. “He was a good guy – although I never actually saw 
him.”

But talk of optimism and the future can’t come easily when you have lost 
countless friends and family in a chaotic, genocidal conflict. Deaths in Syria 
total more than 470,000,according to the Syrian Centre for Policy Research 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/11/report-on-syria-conflict-finds-115-of-population-killed-or-injured>
. One in 10 of the country’s population has been killed or injured since the 
crisis erupted in March 2011. Khatib has been told his friendly sniper is dead 
now, too.

Meanwhile the political and military situation is dire. Isis holds huge swaths 
of land in the east of the country, while the regime, with the help of Russian 
air power, is advancing from the west and through the middle, swirling around 
the key opposition stronghold, Aleppo, along with the loosely pro-regime Kurds. 
They are all eating into opposition territory, which in itself is controlled by 
armed groups ranging from the moderate Free Syrian Army to the 
al-Qaida-affiliated Jabhat al-Nusra, and every flavour of Islamism in between.

It is a bloody, unfathomable mess. And the ceasefire that brought a little 
respite has now broken. In a new low, Bashar al-Assad’s air force was accused 
on Thursday of bombing a refugee camp on the Syrian side of the Turkish border, 
killing dozens. Yet Khatib, quick to smile, and keen to talk to about the 
wonder of Palmyra before the war, does, miraculously, hold out some hope. For 
all the debate about theUK’s pledge to spend 0.7% of its national income on 
development 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/09/uk-passes-bill-law-aid-target-percentage-income>
, he suggests British taxpayers should know that his hope has much to do with 
them.

Khatib is one of 26 people, including 18 Syrians, working in the south-eastern 
Turkish city of Gaziantep, 30 miles from the Syrian border, on a
British-government- funded development programme called Tamkeen 
<http://www.project-tamkeen.org/>, the Arabic word for empowerment. A further 
76 Syrians working for the programme live in Syria itself, in 38 communities 
across four opposition-held provinces: Idlib and Aleppo in the north-west, and 
the southern areas of Deraa and Rif Damascus, the province that hosts the 
capital city, and where opposition-held parts are currently under siege from 
the Assad regime.
Gaziantep's position in Turkey close to the Syrian border. 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/05/gaziantep-map/giv-12515Oc4dIZsmztmL/>
 Gaziantep’s position in Turkey close to the Syrian border. 
“They can’t go in and out of Rif Damascus so we have never met any of the 
people we work with there; it is always over Skype,” says Lejla Catic, 
programme manager.

Launched in 2013, and run by development consultants Adam Smith International, 
Tamkeen is different to anything else being funded by the global community in
Syria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>. It is the first programme to 
combine the provision of aid – in the form of schools, hospitals and services 
as basic as waste management and water treatment – with the perilous job of 
trying to create the foundation for legitimate government in a war zone. In 
short, it is building democracy from the bottom up. And doing it as the bombs 
fall.

Tamkeen field officers in Syria set up committees of up to 11 local notables 
and professionals in rural areas, villages, towns or cities. Each committee 
services a community of between 30,000 and 100,000 people.

In opposition areas, rather scrappy, often corrupt, local administrative 
councils have popped up to try to keep basic services running, and so at least 
one of those councillors will sit on their local Tamkeen committee.

The inclusion of at least one woman is a target but where it is impractical, 
because of the often deeply conservative culture in some parts of the 
opposition-held territory, a subcommittee of women is established – there are 
parts of Syria where women are not allowed to leave their homes unescorted.

The Tamkeen committee is then offered a menu of project options to be funded 
from HQ in Gaziantep. But the funding – from the UK’s Department for 
International Development (DfID)and the EU – only comes if principles of 
“participation, transparency and accountability” can be shown to have been 
adopted. The hoops to be jumped through will be familiar to any English local 
authority.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tqg5%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tqg5%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f36af241da0c43f4571d319592ad3db91f61f7b%2F0_357_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gaziantep%3A%20home%20to%20Isis%20killers%2C%20sex%20traders%E2%80%A6%20and%20a%20quest%20to%20rebuild%20Syria&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tqg5%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gaziantep%3A+home+to+Isis+killers%2C+sex+traders%E2%80%A6+and+a+quest+to+rebuild+Syria&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tqg5%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f36af241da0c43f4571d319592ad3db91f61f7b%2F0_357_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 Members of Tamkeen, an NGO funded by Britain and the EU attempting to 
introduce democratic structures in Syria. Photograph: Andy Hall for the Observer
Notables on the committee have to talk to the people they presume to serve. 
They must ask them about their priorities and needs through surveys, at public 
meetings, via Facebook pages and by addressing people after Friday prayer. The 
women’s subcommittee must be allowed to make its own decisions and have its 
interests pursued.

Once a project proposal from the community is approved in Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey>, the locals then have to establish a 
procurement plan – showing how they will get the best price for the materials 
and work to be done.

And as the projects get under way, they must update their community about what 
is being done through monthly reports, videos on Facebook and regular public 
meetings. Comment boxes are set up and feedback must be pursued. The project 
should be completed in nine months, and after that it is passed to the local 
council to maintain.

Once a pit stop on the silk road trade route, Gaziantep is now a key stop on 
the jihadi highway

It is, Tamkeen’s advocates say, everything that development work in Iraq and 
Afghanistan has not been. This isn’t throwing money at powerful players, hoping 
that their warlord reputations and hold on the people will lead in a Hobbesian 
way to a big, powerful, central government. One of the designers of the Tamkeen 
project, Zane Kanderian, says that model had cost many billions of US dollars 
and left little but corruption, envy, faction and bloodshed. The new project, 
Kanderian says, is about building demand for good government. “Those of us 
involved in democracy promotion in Iraq and Afghanistan were selling the car 
with no engine,” explains Kanderian. “In Syria we are helping them to build the 
engine in the hope they will be able to build the car around it.”

But none of this is easy. They are, after all, trying to do it in Syria: a 
spitting fire of a war zone.

The landscape of Gaziantep from the Tamkeen offices is peculiarly beautiful. 
Blocks of apartments stretch as far as the eye can see, the silver water 
barrels on their roofs twinkling as they catch the sun; the horizon only broken 
by the minarets of this conservative city’s many mosques.

Prominent on a noticeboard in the main room in Tamkeen’s offices is a picture 
of the smiling Syrian activist and journalistNaji Jerf, 38 
<https://cpj.org/2015/12/syrian-journalist-naji-jerf-shot-dead-in-gaziantep.php>
. The photograph acts as a reminder to the close-knit staff that, five floors 
down, Gaziantep can be an ugly place.

Jerf, a friend of staff in the Tamkeen office, was shot dead in broad daylight 
as he walked down a busy road in the centre of the city in December. He had 
been due to join his family in France, where he had been granted asylum, the 
very next day. But he had made two anti-Isis films and the extremists wanted 
him dead.

Last month, Halab Today TV presenter Mohammed Zahir al-Sherqat, another vocal 
critic of Isis, was shot dead close to the road where Jerf was murdered. And 
last Sunday a car bomb believed to have been planted by Isis killed two 
officers and wounded two dozen others at a police station. More than 30 
suspects have been arrested since the attack.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tqg5%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tqg5%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8cadbdb859242c7b4b8dc2396c239245a92a3526%2F0_1152_3675_2205%2F3675.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gaziantep%3A%20home%20to%20Isis%20killers%2C%20sex%20traders%E2%80%A6%20and%20a%20quest%20to%20rebuild%20Syria&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tqg5%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gaziantep%3A+home+to+Isis+killers%2C+sex+traders%E2%80%A6+and+a+quest+to+rebuild+Syria&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tqg5%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8cadbdb859242c7b4b8dc2396c239245a92a3526%2F0_1152_3675_2205%2F3675.jpg>
 The sprawling city has seen the murder of activists and journalists in broad 
daylight. Photograph: Andy Hall for the Observer 
Before the war, Gaziantep’s claim to fame, if it had one, was being home to 
the world’s finest baklava, the honey-soaked pastry. Today, less than an hour’s 
drive from Syria, it is a modern-day Casablanca – a destination for spies, 
refugees, foreign-aid workers and – perilously for Tamkeen – Isis sleeper cells.

It was through here that the British teenagers Shamima Begum, Kadiza Sultana 
and Amira Abase were transported from Bethnal Green, east London, to join Isis. 
This is where 29 suicide vests, 330lbs of C4 explosive, and grenades and a 
cache of Kalashnikovs were found in an apartment by Turkish police in December. 
And this is where Ibrahim El Bakraoui, one of the two brothers identified for 
being responsible for the killing of32 people in Brussels in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/brussels-attacks>, was picked up by Turkish 
police as a suspected Isis fighter before the attacks, only to be deported to 
the Netherlands at his request when the Belgian authorities insisted he was not 
linked to terrorism.

Gaziantep has the feel of a modern city. There is a Starbucks, a Novotel and 
two shopping centres full of well- known stores. One British Foreign Office 
official says: “My mum worries when I go there but it has got a Marks & Spencer 
and I tell her it can’t be dangerous if it has a Sparks.”

But the apparent normality of the city cloaks real danger. Staff working on 
Tamkeen are advised to regard large parts of Gaziantep as being out of bounds, 
particularly the most obvious places such as the better restaurants where 
alcohol is served. Meetings at the elegant four-storey building that is home to 
the Syrian interim government, a white elephant of an organisation slowly being 
closed down by western donors due to its corruption and inefficacy, are avoided 
by non-governmental organisations because of the risk of a hit.

Those who could leave Syria have left. Those who stayed are the ones who can’t 
afford to leave
Lelja Catic, Tamkeen programme manager 
There are rumours that Isis operatives trail westerners who enter the city and 
anecdotes abound of jihadis on planes coming and going from Gaziantep airport 
with their beards covered by scarves and their socks pulled up high to reach 
their short trousers (a telltale sign of Isis fighters, who are forbidden the 
“lavish” wearing of garments below the ankle).

Perhaps it is the constant roar of the traffic combined with the strong sun 
and smell of petrol, but there is also something hypnotic about the place. It 
feels like anyone could disappear from one of the main roads or empty side 
streets, and the trance of those around would barely be disturbed.

Meanwhile, the sprawling apartments that make up much of the city are said to 
host thriving people-smuggling and sex-slave trading, where the wives and 
daughters of Sunni Muslims killed by Isis are sold on in order for the 
so-called caliphate to replenish its coffers. Indeed, while it was once a pit 
stop on the silk road trade route, through which goods and culture would reach 
Europe from the Orient, Gaziantep is now a key stop on the jihadi highway, with 
all the perils that brings.

“We avoid public places and carry alarms,” says Marwa Bouka, a Syrian who 
works for a local NGO.

“I worry about what could happen here, big style,” says Khatib. “My wife is an 
Australian journalist but she is in Sydney now. She left after Jerf was killed. 
She didn’t feel safe and I can understand that.”

Khatib says he believes his colleagues need to be more careful; that it should 
be a concern, he says, of their every waking minute. But then things are put in 
stark perspective when the Tamkeen field officers, and the people they are 
trying to help, deep in the toxic quagmire that is Syria, come to visit and 
tell their stories.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tqg5%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tqg5%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86e58b7893e05be8c9a7d1c12ddea033fe7bbfd1%2F0_3_5370_3222%2F5370.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gaziantep%3A%20home%20to%20Isis%20killers%2C%20sex%20traders%E2%80%A6%20and%20a%20quest%20to%20rebuild%20Syria&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tqg5%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gaziantep%3A+home+to+Isis+killers%2C+sex+traders%E2%80%A6+and+a+quest+to+rebuild+Syria&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tqg5%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86e58b7893e05be8c9a7d1c12ddea033fe7bbfd1%2F0_3_5370_3222%2F5370.jpg>
 Brita Haji Hasan, president of Aleppo city council. Photograph: Andy Hall for 
the Observer 
Brita Haji Hasan, the president of Aleppo city council, would be a busy man at 
the best of times. Aleppo was Syria’s biggest city before the war, with some 2 
million residents. Today, just 400,000 people remain in the opposition 
stronghold, which is under attack from the Assad regime, leaving just one road 
in and out.

In his efforts to avoid Assad and Kurdish forces, it had taken Haji Hasan 10 
hours to travel the 76 miles between Aleppo and Gaziantep for our interview. 
When the father of eight returned to Syria the next day he was seized by armed 
Kurdish secret police from his home and only released four days later.

But before that drama, talking in the leafy garden of a cafe, shielded from 
the hum of Gaziantep’s traffic, Haji Hasan tells me about the many departments 
that make up his council. He shows me pictures of meetings, waste disposal 
vehicles in action, street cleaning and engineers at work. His pride in these 
mundane details (and this is a tough man who was hung up by his wrists and 
lashed when the 2011 revolution started) is touching.

Then he shows me a photograph of the corpse of Hasan Amory, 29, a father of 
two and council engineer killed by a Syrian air force missile as he headed into 
work on the morning we meet.

It has been a horrendous period for the city of Aleppo. Haji Hasan says that 
since Assad restarted the missile strikes and barrel-bombings – dropping metal 
containers filled with high explosives, shrapnel, oil and chemicals – an 
average of 25 people have been killed every day. The busy al-Sakhour market 
placed has just been bombed for the 15th time, killing seven people. But, he 
says: “We have to try to live on.” And that, he adds, is where Tamkeen comes in.

The programme has provided Aleppo city council with £820,000 so far. In the 
past year, the money has helped repair the one road suitable for emergency 
vehicles, funded a water treatment centre, trained teachers, constructed a 
filter station to deal with the poor-quality fuel available to the city and 
built two centres for women to learn languages, vocational skills and first 
aid. “But it isn’t the sum of money that is important,” says Haji Hasan, whose 
council receives $500,000 every six months from the US. “The amount isn’t huge 
but the work is great. If we compare it with other programmes this is much 
better. This is sustainable.”

Aleppo council was until recently beset by internal disputes and, as such, 
struggling to make decisions and offer services to its people, a job difficult 
enough in the circumstances. Haji Hasan says the Tamkeen committee in the area 
offered the council a model of how to avoid accusations of corruption.

“The purpose of the programme is to promote good governance, and when you 
establish that the proper delivery of services follows,” Haji Hasan says. 
“Tamkeen also insists on projects to empower women, and now, I think because of 
that, we have seven female management staff at the council. It creates a 
culture where women are encouraged to participate, and that’s so important 
because so many have lost their husbands.”

It is almost impossible to judge how effective this attempt to disseminate 
good governance is. But the story of Aleppo doesn’t stand alone. Last summer 
the people of Termanin, in the province of Idlib, west of Aleppo, stood up to 
the al-Qaida-affiliated group Jabhat al-Nusra. The militia had used threats to 
get their placemen to the top of the council. Tamkeen, which won’t work with 
proscribed groups, had to withdraw its funding and committee. As a result the 
doctors and engineers in the area addressed villagers at the mosque, asking 
whether they had appreciated the open governance that had delivered a water 
wheel, construction vehicles and repairs for their schools. The positive 
response led the moderates on the local council to stand down. They threatened 
to establish a separate council with the villagers’ support. Al-Nusra gave in.

In Nashabiyeh, in Rif Damascus, the local council has asked Tamkeen to share 
the templates of its financial documents with it, so that it can copy the 
procurement processes that had freed Tamkeen from accusations of corruption. In 
Nawa, in Deraa province, the local council has started to hold public meetings 
to hear from the people, having seen how that model was embraced when Tamkeen 
arrived. And one local council north of Aleppo has started publishing its 
financial reports on Facebook and has installed comment boxes around the area, 
as Tamkeen had done when taking soundings on projects.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tqg5%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tqg5%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda134aa270f91431be3fb388e3d8212e81b24e04%2F0_0_5169_3101%2F5169.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gaziantep%3A%20home%20to%20Isis%20killers%2C%20sex%20traders%E2%80%A6%20and%20a%20quest%20to%20rebuild%20Syria&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tqg5%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gaziantep%3A+home+to+Isis+killers%2C+sex+traders%E2%80%A6+and+a+quest+to+rebuild+Syria&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tqg5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda134aa270f91431be3fb388e3d8212e81b24e04%2F0_0_5169_3101%2F5169.jpg>
 Syrian exile and Tamkeen activist Rami Al-Khatib on the streets of the old 
town in Gaziantep. Photograph: Andy Hall for the Observer 
For Nisreen Alzaraee, 34, Tamkeen’s research manager, it is a good start. 
“Working with Tamkeen is one of the things that helps me sleep at night,” she 
says. “It is not just relief, support for displaced people, or services for 
people who don’t have electricity. We are working with governance – we are 
working on the ideas of the revolution.

“Tamkeen is not easy. It is demanding – we ask so much of them; to implement 
really demanding concepts. But it is important because one day the donors will 
get tired. A more sexy crisis will come around and the money will dry up. 
Syrians need tools, they don’t need money.”

In the past three years Tamkeen has funded 63 education projects, including 
the rebuilding of war-damaged schools; built 78 training programmes for 
councillors; set up 42 health projects, including the building of clinics and 
the funding of new ambulances; ensured the construction of 127 pieces of vital 
infrastructure such as wells and electricity generators; established two food 
safety programmes and built six vocational centres. Some £3.8m of British cash 
has so far been spent out of a total of £17.2m allocated by DfID and the EU, 
with a new round of projects across Syria about to be launched. Above all, 
Tamkeen believes it has embedded the principles of legitimate, responsive 
government in areas where the concepts are almost entirely new. The American 
government has thrown huge amounts of money around Syria and, in the words of 
one senior foreign official, has a reputation for delivering “big expensive 
stuff”. But now it too is launching a similar programme, so impressed has it 
been by Tamkeen’s results.

There have been failures. In al-Teeba, in Deraa near the Jordanian border, a 
generator funded by Tamkeen was found in the mayor’s garden. Tamkeen pulled out 
because trust had been breached. In Aleppo city, road repairs were 
unsatisfactory, the supplier was sued for using substandard material and the 
cash recouped.

Related: Voices from Syria: 'This camp is a paradise compared to life back 
home' 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/15/voices-from-syria-refugees-camp-paradise-conflict-teacher-midwife>

Tamkeen finance officers, working behind a thick, secure door in a separate 
room from the rest of the staff in Gaziantep, scrutinise accounts and have 
people on the ground verifying projects, but recognise there will always be 
fraudsters or plain negligence. “Corruption happens in every country,” says 
Catic. “The difference between good and bad governance is how you deal with it. 
So we tell them: deal with it.”

But the military situation threatens Tamkeen and its work. In February, the 
opposition was driven out of the countryside north of Aleppo by an 
unprecedented bombing campaign by the Russian airforce and the Assad regime, 
allowing Kurdish forces affiliated to the regime to move in. “Three of our 
communities were taken over by the Kurds after 20 shells an hour were landing 
on the people there,” says Catic, who was a teenager during the Bosnian war, 
and hid in a basement with her family for three months as the Croat forces 
shelled them. “February was the worst month in Syria. In Bosnia, during 
shelling we would go to basement. With the barrel bombs they are using there is 
nothing you can do, nowhere for you to go, because it destroys everything.”

The result of the brutal assault was a mass exodus of people north towards the 
Turkish border from the towns of Tall Rifat, Marea and Deir Jamal, where 
Tamkeen had been working. Vast refugee camps have now spread around the border 
town of Azaz holding 150,000 people, some of whom have come under attack from 
Isis forces advancing from the east, burning down tents as they go.

Tamkeen decided to follow the people as they fled and is now working in the 
camps, providing waste management, building toilets and establishing health 
programmes. It is erecting 163 tents and putting whiteboards inside so that 
6,000 students can have an education. And it has established a course to train 
150 teachers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tqg5%2Fsfb%23img-6&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tqg5%2Fsfb%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd885ea77c18475a6ddae145fc8d23e2049f0d259%2F0_400_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gaziantep%3A%20home%20to%20Isis%20killers%2C%20sex%20traders%E2%80%A6%20and%20a%20quest%20to%20rebuild%20Syria&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tqg5%2Fstw%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gaziantep%3A+home+to+Isis+killers%2C+sex+traders%E2%80%A6+and+a+quest+to+rebuild+Syria&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tqg5%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd885ea77c18475a6ddae145fc8d23e2049f0d259%2F0_400_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
 Gaziantep has the feel of a modern city, but Tamkeen staff must be vigilant 
about their security. Photograph: Andy Hall for the Observer 
But that all starts to sound like humanitarian aid rather than the building of 
self-governing, capable communities. Can Tamkeen really operate on the move?

There has been a sudden, but perhaps inevitable, loss of people from Syria 
able to do the things Tamkeen asks of them. “We have seen a drop in capacity 
since May last year,” admits Catic. “I think what has happened is that after 
five years of conflict it has finally dawned on people that this is not going 
to end, our people are being killed, the kids are not receiving an education, 
and we have to leave.

“Those who could leave Syria have left. Those who stayed are the ones who 
can’t afford to leave. It took from April 2011 to May 2015 for this to happen. 
For four years people really tried.”

Catic has a solution. “This requires a no fly zone,” she says. “People are 
tired of the bombing. You lose strength.” But there is also the ominous 
question of whether Tamkeen needs to wake up to what the envelopment of 
opposition territory by the Assad regime might mean. Should Tamkeen stand its 
ground, and try to nurture the values it stands for in areas coming under the 
control of Assad’s brutal government? Views in the Syrian community are mixed.

Diad Abdullah, 32, a field officer working north of Aleppo, was tortured by 
the regime. He believes that anyone linked to Tamkeen would be immediately 
imprisoned or worse if they stayed to carry on their work. But Mazen Gharibah, 
29, a senior project manager at a Syrian opposition organisation coordinating 
relief efforts, says it would be unconscionable to leave people without working 
local government. Staying is a risk worth taking, he says.

Neil Fowler, head of Syria operations for Adam Smith International, has worked 
in Afghanistan and Somalia, and knows compromises often have to be made. He 
admits this might well be the next challenge as the military situation 
develops. “The programmes we implement are designed on the basis that people in 
awful situations still deserve basic services, livelihoods and a voice in the 
way they are governed,” Fowler says. “In that respect, all ordinary Syrians 
deserve the same, no matter who rules them.

“Working in regime areas, however, would mean finding a way to operate free 
from the interference of a highly centralised and controlling government 
authority and security services. We also have a profound respect for our Syrian 
colleagues – most of whom have been the victims of regime brutality – and that 
means respecting their views on how and where we work.

“What we can do is explore what has worked in other countries, and be ready to 
respond to shifting views and the peace process.”

In other words, as Rami al-Khatib implied: no one really knows what the future 
holds for Syria.

‘To have to leave Syria for ever is not acceptable. I would rather be killed’

Bakri Azzin, 28, Tamkeen field office, Aleppo
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tqg5%2Fsfb%23img-7&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tqg5%2Fsfb%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e010a04c7dffa43f30d03ded63fc8557285cf7a%2F697_56_4775_2865%2F4775.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gaziantep%3A%20home%20to%20Isis%20killers%2C%20sex%20traders%E2%80%A6%20and%20a%20quest%20to%20rebuild%20Syria&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tqg5%2Fstw%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gaziantep%3A+home+to+Isis+killers%2C+sex+traders%E2%80%A6+and+a+quest+to+rebuild+Syria&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tqg5%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e010a04c7dffa43f30d03ded63fc8557285cf7a%2F697_56_4775_2865%2F4775.jpg>
 Photograph: Andy Hall for the Observer 
Asked why he stays in Aleppo, as the missiles strike and the barrel bombs 
fall, Azzin says: “It’s another life in my country.” He doesn’t mean to say 
that it is a better life there, nor that it is worse. Azzin means to say, he 
explains, that it is the life he chooses to lead.

“For it to be decided that you have to leave your country for ever is not 
acceptable to me. That’s a decision that is very hard to be taken. I would 
prefer to be killed in my country.”

Azzin’s 21-year-old brother was killed in 2013 by an Assad regime tank shell. 
He was a photographer and had been documenting the carnage in Khan al-Assal, a 
town eight miles west of Aleppo. The opposition-held town had been the scene of 
brutal massacres, attributed to the al-Qaida-affiliated Jabhat al-Nusra 
militia, and a chemical attack attributed to the regime.

Azzin’s mother went into deep shock following her son’s death, becoming 
hysterical in response to the noise of war around her. In 2014, Azzin moved her 
and the rest of his family to Gaziantep. “My mother became terrified of the 
sounds of shelling and jets,” he says. “I stay in Syria because it is my 
country. We believe in our revolution; that we deserve some freedom in my 
country, and I don’t need to be a refugee for the rest of my life in Europe or 
Turkey. As humans we have the right to live in our country as humans.”

Azzin is responsible for overseeing the projects that the Tamkeen committee in 
Aleppo choose to undertake. “I oversaw road repairs and water filtering,” he 
says. “We were coordinating with the council. Our mission was to discuss with 
the community and find the quotation of everyone who wanted to supply.”

But as the Assad regime launches shell after shell, he is worried for the 
future. “They attacked the 700-metre area that is keeping Aleppo from being 
besieged, but I don’t know if we will be able to defend it. If they besiege it 
will be worse than Homs. There is nothing to support human life in the city.

“No farming, just buildings. There are no green spaces to farm. It will be a 
crazy situation. [There are] at least 350,000 in the city now. We won’t even be 
able to find baby food for the children.”

‘I vowed never to take my children back to Syria’

Iman Al-Zahrawi, 32, gender officer
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tqg5%2Fsfb%23img-8&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tqg5%2Fsfb%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ba45595192978dd21c9cec04c8c0a640880a008%2F0_1255_3580_2148%2F3580.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gaziantep%3A%20home%20to%20Isis%20killers%2C%20sex%20traders%E2%80%A6%20and%20a%20quest%20to%20rebuild%20Syria&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tqg5%2Fstw%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gaziantep%3A+home+to+Isis+killers%2C+sex+traders%E2%80%A6+and+a+quest+to+rebuild+Syria&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tqg5%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ba45595192978dd21c9cec04c8c0a640880a008%2F0_1255_3580_2148%2F3580.jpg>
 Photograph: Andy Hall for the Observer 
The stories Zahrawi tells are extraordinary. That she smiles so freely is 
almost incomprehensible.

After being told that her son was dead under the rubble of the family home in 
Aleppo, she refused to accept the news. Her 12-year-old was subsequently 
dragged from the ground alive.

A close friend, with whom she had been drinking coffee, was cut in two in 
front of her by the shrapnel from an Assad regime barrel bomb. “I can see it 
now: the bottom part remained standing while the top slid to the ground.”

On another occasion, Zahrawi, a mother of four, was forced by the bullets of 
Turkish guards to crawl across the Turkish/Syrian border on her stomach, just 
three weeks after giving birth by caesarean section. She was trying to reach 
Gaziantep to receive training on good governance, which she might pass on to 
others in Aleppo.

This slight woman was until last month working in the countryside north of 
Aleppo as a field officer, helping a female-only Tamkeen sub-committee achieve 
its project goals in that ultra-conservative part of Syria.

Little frightened her, although much left her frustrated. “The community 
wouldn’t support the women, no,” she says. “At one point I was being harassed 
by al-Qaida fighters. A guy stopped me when I was buying fruit for my children. 
He stopped and told me: ‘Please, if you are living in our community you should 
be dressed like us.’ I said: ‘Please, maybe you should fight on the front. If 
you are here, you are not a man. When I see a man, I will dress more 
appropriately.’ He walked on.”

Zahrawi adds: “The problem is that no one opposes them. They are used to being 
able to order people around.”

In February, the Russians started to bomb the area in which she worked and the 
population fled north. Tamkeen offered her a chance to come to Gaziantep with 
her children for a short break. It was there that the horror of all she had 
seen hit her.

“I was walking down the street and an aeroplane came over and my children 
freaked out,” says Zahrawi. “They were hiding and screaming, trembling. I had a 
breakdown in the street and vowed never to take my children back to Syria.

“But me? I would go back in a heartbeat.”

‘The regime arrested my friends and pursued us’

Kholoud Waleed, 31, Tamkeen, gender specialist
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tqg5%2Fsfb%23img-9&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tqg5%2Fsfb%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff096d2095de41e6297311627c79a43b48c36a8d4%2F0_179_5370_3222%2F5370.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gaziantep%3A%20home%20to%20Isis%20killers%2C%20sex%20traders%E2%80%A6%20and%20a%20quest%20to%20rebuild%20Syria&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tqg5%2Fstw%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gaziantep%3A+home+to+Isis+killers%2C+sex+traders%E2%80%A6+and+a+quest+to+rebuild+Syria&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tqg5%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff096d2095de41e6297311627c79a43b48c36a8d4%2F0_179_5370_3222%2F5370.jpg>
 Photograph: Andy Hall for the Observer 
Waleed, an English graduate from Damascus University, was hunted through the 
Syrian countryside by the Assad regime for her role as cofounder of a group of 
women activists.

“We were organising silent demonstrations against the corruption of the 
regime. We were calling for freedom, democracy and human rights,” she says. Her 
brother, who worked for the Syrian Red Cross, was taken by the regime in 2012 
and is still missing.

Waleed is from the town of Daraya, close to the Syrian capital, which was one 
of the regime’s early targets in clamping down on dissent. “We had checkpoints 
early in 2011 and demonstrators were shot at with live bullets,” she says. 
“Then a massacre happened. In August 2012, a thousand people were killed. We 
had a small group of people who held arms but they were all killed.

“We had lots of orphans who we had to look after who were completely 
traumatised. We worked with them for two months and then the regime broke in 
again and so we all fled the town. It was once a town of 500,000 people. Now 
there are only 8,000.”

Waleed fled into the countryside with her family. She says: “We found a shanty 
house to rent; it was a stable, although they called it a house. But the regime 
forces found and arrested a few of my friends and then started to pursue us.

“They arrested the first one of us and her mother. Her mum entrapped another 
two girls; she had no choice. She called them and said: ‘I want to meet you in 
this place.’ The two girls went to her and were taken by the intelligence 
forces.

“And then they started to call me. They said: ‘Are you the English teacher? 
Come and meet me. I want you to teach my kids. I want to meet you in half an 
hour.’ I turned off my mobile and took out the sim card and fled the country.”
