
Feminists rejoiced this week at the news that “politics A-level will give all 
students the opportunity tostudy the core ideas of feminism 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jan/11/feminism-reinstated-a-level-politics-syllabus-schools-minister>
”. Or, rather, we wearily celebrated yet another hard fought “win” that really 
should have happened automatically. But, like police campaigns that don’t blame 
the victim and funding for rape crisis services, the inclusion of feminism on 
the political syllabus was apparently something we still had to battle for in 
2016. Fortunately the battle was won, thanks largely toa petition 
<https://www.change.org/p/add-more-female-thinkers-to-the-politics-a-level-syllabus>
 launched by teenagerJune Eric-Udorie 
<http://www.theguardian.com/profile/june-eric-udorie> and pressure from the 
wider feminist movement 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2015/12/09/mps-and-feminist-campaigners-urge-nicky-morgan-to-reconsider-decision-take-feminism-out-of-a-level-politics_n_8757050.html>
.

Ministers have so far remained tight-lipped about the exact content of the 
syllabus, though schools minister Nick Gibb said in a Commons debate: “The 
final content will set out clearly those female political thinkers whose work 
should be studied. Suggestions have included Simone de Beauvoir, Hannah Arendt, 
Rosa Luxemburg, to name but a few.”

Related: Feminism to be reinstated to A-level politics syllabus, says schools 
minister 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jan/11/feminism-reinstated-a-level-politics-syllabus-schools-minister>

The reach and angle of the syllabus will be limited, in any case, to politics 
A-level, but just imagine the possible impact if every young person, in every 
school, learned a few vital facts about feminism. Here are the top five topics 
I would like to see on the curriculum:

Diverse feminism

If young people are aware of feminism at all, too often their knowledge is 
limited to a vague notion of “bra burners” and suffragettes. The suffragettes 
were important pioneers, of course, but alongside their history students should 
learn about women such asSophia Duleep Singh 
<http://www.bl.uk/learning/timeline/item124196.html>, a member of the Women’s 
Social and Political Union who fought bravely for women’s right to vote as well 
as battling for Indian independence.LGBT campaigners 
<http://www.autostraddle.com/100-black-lesbian-bisexual-queer-and-transgender-women-you-should-know-225375/>
, working-class women, disabled activists and women of colour whose voices are 
often written out of neat potted histories of the movement should also be 
included. Not to mention feminist movements around the world, crossing 
different countries, classes and religions.

Male allies

 Learning about gender inequality at school is the perfect way to bust the 
myth that feminism is about hating men, before it becomes ingrained. A feminist 
syllabus should teach young people how gender stereotypes limit and constrain 
us all and why it is in everybody’s interests to fight for equality, regardless 
of gender. From thehigher profits earned by companies with diverse boards 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/2/2d320562-f52d-11e2-94e9-00144feabdc0.html> to the 
greater stability enjoyed by countries where women are more empowered 
<http://www.endvawnow.org/en/articles/301-consequences-and-costs-.html>, there 
are endless factual arguments as to why feminism is beneficial for everybody.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fn6z%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fn6z%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6205df2a9033af7d076a277040ee1db3fa6ec50b%2F0_98_3277_1967%2F3277.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rewriting%20the%20school%20book%3A%20what%20should%20be%20on%20the%20feminist%20curriculum%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fn6z%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rewriting+the+school+book%3A+what+should+be+on+the+feminist+curriculum%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fn6z%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6205df2a9033af7d076a277040ee1db3fa6ec50b%2F0_98_3277_1967%2F3277.jpg>
 Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie, whose book We Should All Be Feminists is being 
distributed to every 16-year old in Sweden. Photograph: JB Reed/AP 
Media analysis

We already know that young people are bombarded by gender stereotypes and 
sexualised images of women, from music videos to advertising to online 
pornography. We can campaign to change those things but, in the meantime, young 
people are in desperate need of the tools to deal with them. Helping young 
people to critically analyse the media they consume, from Photoshop to the 
portrayal of sexual violence, would be a powerful and practical way to arm 
students against the body image pressure and hyper-sexualisation that forms the 
wallpaper to their daily lives. A feminist-focused syllabus should teach young 
people to recognise these stereotypes for what they are, and to form their own 
opinions, offsetting the impact of media stereotyping.

Consent and rights

The NSPCC has found that one in five teenagers have been physically abused by 
a partner 
<https://www.nspcc.org.uk/preventing-abuse/child-abuse-and-neglect/domestic-abuse/domestic-abuse-facts-statistics/>
, so no school feminism syllabus would be complete without information on 
sexual consent and healthy relationships. Many young women are unaware that the 
groping and touching they have come expect is actuallydefined as sexual assault 
under UK law 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2003/42/part/1/crossheading/assault/section/3>
. It’s time we taught young people about their absolute right to decide what 
happens to their own body. Educating pupils about gender-based violence could 
also play a crucial role in tackling rape and domestic abuse later on.

Modern voices

Feminism is sometimes seen as a historical movement, or a battle already won. 
Young people would benefit from learning about the rich and vibrant modern side 
to feminism, from authors such as Gloria Steinem and bell hooks to 
inspirational teen role models such as singer and actressZendaya 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/zendaya-feminism-flare_5638d383e4b079a43c049928>
 and Game of Thrones’Amandla Stenberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/26/young-women-feminism-intersectionality>
. Sweden is already leading the way by distributing a copy ofChimamanda Ngozi 
Adichie <https://www.theguardian.com/books/chimamanda-ngozi-adichie>’s book We 
Should All Be Feministsto every 16-year old 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/dec/04/every-16-year-old-in-sweden-to-receive-copy-of-we-should-all-be-feminists>
 – why shouldn’t Britain follow suit?


