
From the US <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2001/jan/29/uselections2000.usa>
 toUganda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/22/ugandan-opposition-leader-kizza-besigye-detained-election-row>
, most countries grapple with ademocratic deficit 
<http://eur-lex.europa.eu/summary/glossary/democratic_deficit.html>. Yet there 
is a popular perception that Africa lags behind the rest of the world in this 
most nebulous of political terms. This is despite the fact that millions of 
people elsewhere in the world live under regimes that can be described as 
authoritarian, oppressive and undemocratic, while millions of people within 
Africa enjoy the benefits of relatively good governance.

Former British leader Winston Churchill thought democracy was “the worst form 
of government, except for all the others”. His words lays bare the 
imperfections of what we call democracy, but also hint at how difficult it is 
to define.

1) Democracy is not spreading across Africa

Countries that describe themselves as democratic are members of a very broad 
church. They range from nations that respect citizens’ political freedoms and 
civil liberties to those that repress dissent and hold elections that are 
neither free nor fair. Just as other regions of the world displayvaried systems 
of governance 
<https://freedomhouse.org/report/freedom-world/freedom-world-2015#.VsRejWSJTAx>
, there are discrepancies among African countries too.

Related: Can democracy spread at the push of a button? | Stephen Abbott Pugh 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/datablog/2016/feb/24/can-democracy-spread-data-monitor-governments-africa>

The Economist Intelligence Unit’s democracy index 
<http://www.eiu.com/public/topical_report.aspx?campaignid=DemocracyIndex2015> 
identifies four categories of regime: full democracy, flawed democracy, hybrid 
and authoritarian. Its2015 index 
<http://www.eiu.com/public/thankyou_download.aspx?activity=download&campaignid=DemocracyIndex2015>
 shows uneven progress in sub-Saharan Africa, but notes a dramatic drop in 
successful “coups from within” since 2000, and says holding regular elections 
is now largely commonplace. Even so, the index only awarded full democracy 
status to Mauritius, a quiet achiever with strong rule of law.

Some countries defy the narrative of a democratic deficit in Africa, however. 
In its2016 Freedom in the World report 
<https://freedomhouse.org/report/freedom-world/freedom-world-2016>, Freedom 
House named Nigeria, Liberia and Ivory Coast among the countries with the 
biggest improvements in political rights and civil liberties. In Nigeria, 2015 
was the first yearan opposition party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/31/opposition-candidate-muhammadu-buhari-wins-nigerian-election>
 gained power through elections. Botswana, Ghana, Cape Verde and Benin have 
also been lauded as democratic examples.

This year, at least 16 African nations 
<http://www.africaresearchinstitute.org/blog/2016-elections-africa/> are 
holding presidential elections. Although elections do not automatically lead to 
representative governments, competitive, multi-party elections constitute a 
sine qua non for democracy, and regular ballots indicate progress towards 
ensuring citizens are able to choose their leaders.
Map showing countries expected to hold presidential elections in 2016 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/02/2016-polls/giv-27167JT9sgUgwCOfH/>
2) Africa is dominated by Big Men

A club of authoritarian leaders have maintained an iron grip on power in parts 
of Africa, either by amending laws to extend their terms of office, hosting 
rubber-stamp elections or repressing opposition and civil society. Of course, 
African countries are not alone in this – Singapore’s founding father,Lee Kuan 
Yew 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/22/singapore-lee-kuan-yew-dies-91>, 
led for more than three decades; Cambodia’sHun Sen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/14/hun-sen-cambodias-prime-minister-marks-30-years-of-hardline-rule>
 has also been in power for more than three decades; and in Kazakhstan,
Nursultan Nazarbayev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/19/kazakhstan-nursultan-nazarbayev-retire>
 has held office since before the collapse of the Soviet Union.

In Africa, nine leaders have wielded power for more than 20 years; three of 
them have been at the helm for more than 30 years. Equatorial Guinea’s President
Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/11/equatorial-guinea-human-rights-africa-dictatorship-tutu-alicante>
 seized power from his uncle in 1979, the same year that Angola’sJosé Eduardo 
dos Santos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/aug/30/angola-jose-eduardo-dos-santos> 
rose to power. Yoweri Museveni wonthis month’s election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/20/ugandan-election-yoweri-museveni-wins-arrests-opposition-leader-besigye>
 in Uganda to continue his rule after a vote marred by a lack of transparency.

Related: Democrats v autocrats in Africa: is there a winning formula? – podcast
 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/audio/2016/feb/25/democrats-autocrats-africa-winning-formula-uganda-podcast>

But Africa is about more than this club of big men. Aside from the growing 
number of leaders passing power peacefully after elections, there have also 
been cases of public backlash against leaders who have tried to prolong their 
tenures, such as Zambia’sFrederick Chiluba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2001/may/07/chrismcgreal> and Malawi’s 
Bakili Muluzi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2003/apr/01/rorycarroll>. In 
2014, Blaise Compaoré’s bid to extend his 27-year presidency in Burkina Faso was
thwarted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/31/burkina-faso-president-blaise-compaore-ousted-says-army>
 by a violent popular uprising, while upheaval in Burundi was sparked by
President Pierre Nkurunziza’s successful bid to prolong his term 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/05/violence-grips-burundi-president-nkurunziza-cleared-run-third-term>
.

Nor is leadership the sole preserve of men. In 2006, Liberia’s Ellen Johnson 
Sirleaf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/mar/08/ellen-johnson-sirleaf-100-women> 
became Africa’s first democratically elected female head of state. She was 
followed byJoyce Banda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/07/joyce-banda-africa-first-female-ex-president-interview>
 in Malawi andAmeenah Gurib-Fakim 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-mauritius-president-idUKKBN0OK12D20150604> in 
Mauritius.

Curiously, the Big Man moniker is generally applied only to African leaders. 
Some trace its roots to colonial masters and the choices they made when 
selecting rulers to succeed them after independence. As he prepared to step 
down as president in 2005, Tanzania’s Benjamin Mkapa called for a new, 
home-grown democracy. “That Africa ended up with big men at State House is not 
entirely unrelated to this colonial legacy. Colonialists did not prepare 
Africans for self-democratic rule,”Mkapa said 
<http://www.irinnews.org/report/56018/africa-continent-needs-home-grown-democracy-mkapa>
.
Presidents 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/02/longest-presidents/giv-27167G6eR3TIbdIKW/>
3) Elections are the sole indicator of a thriving democracy

Often the first things people point to as proof of democracy, elections are a 
precursor rather than thesole signifier of democratic rule 
<http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/africaatlse/2015/04/13/democracy-beyond-elections/>. 

When asked whether elections were giving democracy a bad name 
<https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/elections-giving-democracy-bad-name-kofi-annan>
, former UN secretary general Kofi Annan said: “Democracy is not just about one 
day every four or five years when elections are held, but a system of 
government that respects the separation of powers, fundamental freedoms like 
the freedom of thought, religion, expression, association and assembly and the 
rule of law … Any regime that rides roughshod on these principles loses its 
democratic legitimacy, regardless of whether it initially won an election.”

The Ibrahim index of African governance 
<http://www.moibrahimfoundation.org/iiag/>, an annual assessment produced by the
Mo Ibrahim Foundation <http://www.moibrahimfoundation.org/>, focuses on what 
happens between elections. It defines good governance as safety and rule of 
law, participation by citizens and a respect for human rights, sustainable 
economic opportunity, and human development.

Topping the 2015 index 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/oct/05/africa-governance-sliding-back-in-a-third-of-nations-warns-ibrahim-index>
 were Mauritius, Cape Verde and Botswana. Central African Republic, South Sudan 
and Somalia – all nations torn by conflict – were bottom.

4) High voter turnout means corruption

A common perception is that high turnouts indicate fraud or ballot box 
stuffing. The reality is complex.

A reported 89% of Rwanda’s voting population 
<http://www.idea.int/vt/countryview.cfm?CountryCode=RW> cast ballots in the 
most recent election in 2013. The party of President Paul Kagame, who has held 
hisposition for 16 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/commentisfree/2016/jan/03/paul-kagame-and-others-damage-africa-lust-to-rule-for-ever>
, won 93% of the vote. Was this a sign of a country freely giving a vote of 
approval to a popular leader, or a sign of coercion?

It is worth bearing in mind that 25 sub-Saharan African countries recorded 
voter turnouts of more than 50% at their last election, including in those 
widely viewed as democratic such as in Sierra Leone (88%), and Ghana (82%).

It’s easy to judge turnout by western standards of voter apathy – turnout in 
the UK’s general election in 2015was 66% 
<http://www.parliament.uk/about/living-heritage/transformingsociety/electionsvoting/chartists/contemporarycontext/electionturnout/>
; in the US, turnout is usually even lower, at54% in 2012 
<http://www.idea.int/vt/field.cfm?field=227&region=21>. Yet younger democracies 
often have higher levels of political engagement, with citizensqueueing for 
hours 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/apr/01/british-voters-learn-nigerian-elections-politicians-voter-apathy>
 to make sure their votes count.

5) The passing of power is often violent 

When voters believe there has been election fraud, the risk of violence is 
high. In some cases the violence is initiated by incumbent leaders who feel 
threatened by opponents and incite protests, further destabilising their 
countries. Recent cases of electoral violence include Kenya’s 2007 election 
which left 1,133 people dead, 600,000 people displaced and involved awave of 
sexual violence 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/15/kenya-failing-women-raped-election-sexual-violence>
, as well inSierra Leone in 2007 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/news/africa/2007/09/2008525135028542267.html> and 
Senegal in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/feb/19/senegal-protests-president-abdoulaye-wade>
.

Violence can also be triggered when the opposition feel cheated at the ballot 
box, either because of fraud, coercion and intimidation. When citizens feel the 
judiciary will back the incumbent elite, they may be more inclined to take 
their protests to the streets. Other options exist elsewhere – the 2000 US 
election ended up in the courts afterallegations of a miscount 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2000/nov/23/uselections2000.usa4>. 

While the elections in Africa that garner the most international attention are 
often those that turn violent, many more are peaceful. Voters in Central 
African Republic went to the polls in Februaryhoping to end years of conflict 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/12/central-african-republic-car-pray-presidential-elections-bring-peace-at-last>
, and the presidential run-offtook place peacefully 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/14/central-african-republic-holds-presidential-runoff-vote>
 despite months of sectarian and ethnic violence, albeit with a lower turnout.


 * This article was corrected on 29 February 2016. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf 
became president in 2006, not 2011. 