
Ruth Davidson <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/ruth-davidson>, the 
Scottish Tory leader, is studying proposals to cut income tax rates for higher 
earners after an expert commission urged her to support the so-called “squeezed 
middle”.

The Independent Commission for Competitive and Fair Taxation in Scotland 
<http://www.comtax.org/>, headed by former business leaders and tax experts, 
said Holyrood could take tens of thousands of taxpayers out of the higher 40% 
tax bracket by introducing a new 30% “middle band” when itstax powers come into 
force 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/02/holyrood-has-got-promised-powers-in-full-says-scottish-secretary>
 in April 2017.

Set up by Davidson last year, the panel said Scotland’s new house-sales tax, 
the land and buildings transaction tax, could eventually be scrapped as it 
penalises wealthier house buyers and damages the property market.

Council tax reforms proposed by the panel would, however, see annual charges 
for the most expensive homes increase and it rejected the Scottish government’s 
plans to abolish air passenger duty.Scotland 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> should instead have an airport 
“departure tax” based on the distance travelled.

With 100 days before May’s Scottish parliament elections, the commission’s 
recommendations pushed Scotland’s new tax powers higher up the political 
agenda, putting Nicola Sturgeon’s nationalist government under further pressure 
to set out its stance on tax rates.

John Swinney, Sturgeon’s deputy and Scotland’s finance secretary 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/16/scottish-government-freeze-income-tax-rates-budget>
, has hinted that he may tinker with income tax rates by reducing them for 
lower earners.


Labour has flagged up its general election pledge to introduce a new 50p 
additional rate for the highest earners – a pledge the Scottish National party 
then backed but is now distancing itself from, to fund education in deprived 
areas.

Related: Jeremy Corbyn ‘preparing Labour for losses in local elections’ 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/23/corbyn-preparing-labour-losses-local-elections-kezia-dugdale-scotland>

Davidson confirmed that she plans to be the only major party leader advocating 
tax cuts in May’s elections, as the Scottish Tories attempt to replace Labour 
as Holyrood’s second largest party, by endorsing the panel’s target of cutting 
taxes in future.

She is to study its proposals in further detail, but added: “The commission’s 
central recommendation is that the tax burden should be no higher in Scotland 
than in the rest of the UK, and lower when affordable – and I back that 100%.

“We need to show that Scotland is open for business, so I and my team will do 
everything we can to ensure that the SNP does not use the new tax powers to 
take more money from the pay packets of hardworking Scots.”

New income tax powers for Holyrood are being phased in over the next year 
under reforms pushed through by the pro-UK parties in response to the surge in 
support for the SNP. From 1 April, Holyrood has modest powers to cut or 
increase income tax rates.

Iain McMillan, former director of the employers’ organisation CBI Scotland, 
who chaired the commission, which included a former Scottish Labour adviser 
Paul Sinclair, and Rhona Irving, a former tax partner at the accountant PwC, 
said it was vital that Scotland’s tax system encouraged “aspiration and 
entrepreneurialism”, by supporting middle earners.

He admitted, however, that reducing the numbers paying income tax at 40p – a 
band which currently raises £2.4bn from 372,000 Scots, would cut Holyrood’s tax 
take. Davidson would need to decide how radical or cautious that new tax 
banding system would be.

Claiming the tax cut would eventually “trickle down” through the economy by 
stimulating employment and productivity, McMillan said: “We would probably 
raise less tax, but one would hope that the attractiveness of the tax rates and 
the incentive to work and earn more would actually result in more tax levied 
over time.”
