
More lawyers are to be recruited to a scheme that reviews “unduly lenient” 
sentences after a sharp rise in the number of complaints about judges’ 
decisions on jail terms.


The attorney general, Jeremy Wright QC, is to announce on Wednesday an 
extension of the legal programme that allows prosecutors to review cases on 
behalf of the government. The number of sentences considered by his office 
under theunduly lenient sentence (ULS) scheme  
<https://www.gov.uk/complain-about-low-crown-court-sentence> soared by 97% 
between 2010 and 2014, from 342 cases to 674.

For a sentence to be reviewed, the attorney general’s office must receive a 
complaint from at least one member of the public. Not every submission results 
in a referral, but between 2010 and 2014 the number of cases the attorney 
general’s office sent to thecourt of appeal 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/court-of-appeal> rose by 35%, from 90 to 122.


Complaints can only be made about crown court sentences imposed for particular 
types ofcrime <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/ukcrime>, including murder, rape, 
robbery, child sex crimes, fraud, drug offences and those committed because of 
the victim’s race or religion. They must be lodged within 28 days ofsentencing 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/sentencing>.


Legal reviews are currently conducted by a small number of highly qualified 
barristers, known as treasury counsel. But other senior lawyers – those classed 
as grade four prosecution advocates by theCrown Prosecution Service 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/crown-prosecution-service> – will now be 
recruited to the ULS scheme for a six-month pilot period.


Related: Dozens in custody freed by mistake in 2014-15 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/dec/28/prisoners-wrongly-released-england-wales-2014-2015>

At last year’s general election, the Conservative 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> party manifesto included a 
pledge to widen the scope of powers to refer sentences, in order to include 
less serious offences.


The attorney general said: “It’s vital that the public are able to legally 
challenge custodial sentences and to make sure offences are being properly 
punished.


“This trial extension is a great opportunity for experienced lawyers to 
develop their skills further while preserving the continued effective operation 
of the ULS scheme. With the number of referrals increasing, it is right that we 
look at ways to widen the approach.”


Wright and the solicitor general, Robert Buckland QC, appear in many of the 
court of appeal sentencing cases. In some cases, prison terms are significantly 
extended.


In one recent case, a sentence for rape was increased from five and a half 
years to 12 years in prison. In 2014, it has been calculated, more than 100 
years of additional jail time was added to sentences reviewed under the ULS 
scheme. The prison population in England andWales 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> is currently more than 85,000.


Related: How a prisoner’s letter led to jail reading scheme | Eric Allison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/05/jail-reading-scheme-letter-tom-shannon-trust>

Responding to statistics on ULS cases, the president of the Queen’s bench 
division, Sir Brian Leveson, said: “The number of sentences found to be unduly 
lenient following consideration by the attorney general or solicitor general 
continues to be low.


“In 2013 and 2014, only 166 offenders had their sentence increased, a very 
small fraction of the many thousands of offenders sentenced for relevant 
offences in the crown court that year.


“Sentencing is a complex process where the judge must take into account a 
number of factors in reaching a balanced decision. In order to maintain public 
confidence in sentencing, it is important that any member of the public may 
request a review by the attorney general of a sentence imposed in the crown 
court.”
