
Congratulations to Nick Weller, executive principal of Dixons academies, on 
his knighthood in the Queen’s birthday honours list. Weller was the only 
headteacher to get the top honour, which was announced only days after he faced 
having to respond in the media to a teacher being stabbed at one of his 
schools, inBradford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jun/12/bradford-school-stabbing-boy-charged-attempted-murder-teacher>
 – a reminder of the challenges of the job.

A quick check reveals, though, that out of 30 state schools-related people 
knighted or appointed dames since June 2010, 22 have been from the academies 
sector. And in the two sets of honours during 2015, all five have been from 
academies.

For any head seeking this sort of recognition, it should be clear what type of 
institution you need to lead to give yourself the best chance.

Here one moment, gone the next


News arrives of another “disappearing head”: a school leader, apparently very 
popular with parents, who is in school one moment and gone the next.

Last year 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/jan/14/weyfield-headteacher-free-school-in-airport-building>
, we followed the case of Simon Wood, much-praised head of Weyfield primary in 
Guildford, Surrey, who vanished with few reasons given by the school’s sponsor.

Now parents in Croydon, south London, are unhappy after Della Williams, the 
head at South Norwood primary since 2007, left suddenly at half-term, leaving 
children and staff reportedly in tears.

The school has been in difficulty in recent months. Governors were sacked and 
replaced by a council-appointed board after an investigation into Sats tests in 
2013. But there have been no details of the investigation’s conclusions, say 
parents, although maths results for that year were annulled. At a meeting 
earlier this month, the board did not explain why Williams had left and said 
the Sats investigation was ongoing, say parents. They say they were told a move 
to academy status was a possibility.

Croydon council told the local paper 
<http://www.croydonadvertiser.co.uk/Parents-demand-answers-departure-head-teacher/story-26713203-detail/story.html#ixzz3dW1c9vLy>
 that an interim head had been installed after the Sats investigation. “For the 
staff affected there is an appeal process and in the intervening time we cannot 
comment,” it added.

Disappearing heads … Sats investigations whose details are not disclosed … 
education in England in 2015 seems all very secretive.

York plan attacked


Controversy is raging in York, where 30 academics have joined the new local 
Labour MP in calling for more time to be taken over controversial plans for 
three schools. Governors of Millthorpe secondary and Scarcroft and Knavesmire 
primaries want to form a multi-academy trust, saying it will enable the schools 
to work together more closely. But they are facing concerted opposition, with a 
community campaign arguing the move will reduce local accountability and that 
the three schools are doing well as non-academies.
 Kate Pickett. Photograph: Linda Nylind for the Guardian 
The Yorkshire Post 
<http://www.yorkshirepost.co.uk/news/debate/yp-comment/june-9-time-for-clarity-on-europe-vote-1-7299573>
 has now joined with the academics – who include high-profile names such asKate 
Pickett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/mar/09/society-unequal-the-spirit-level>
, professor of epidemiology at the University of York and joint author of the 
influential bookThe Spirit Level: Why More Equal Societies Almost Always Do 
Better <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/mar/13/the-spirit-level> - in 
calling for a ballot of parents.

A consultation on the plans ended on Friday. Trevor Burton, Millthorpe’s head, 
has said the consultation, at six weeks, was longer than suggested in 
government guidance, at four, and that a ballot would be tricky because of 
problems in defining who could take part.

The school’s neighbourhood harbours more than the occasional left-leaning 
voter. Theirs, possibly, are the kind of views that the government is seeking 
to bypass in moving to speed up the academisation process in the current
education bill 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jun/03/education-bill-loopholes-academies-schools>
.

De Souza defends loss of Sure Start space


This month, one of education’s recent dames sought to defend her academy 
chain’s decision to end the lease of a Sure Start nursery that has been 
operating on its premises.

Rachel de Souza, chief executive of the Inspiration Trust, wrote 
<http://www.edp24.co.uk/news/the_robber_barons_are_back_norwich_mp_clive_lewis_uses_maiden_speech_to_launch_blistering_attack_on_inspiration_trust_1_4107133>
 that the decision to move Earlham early years centre out of the building at 
Norwich primary academy had been taken only because “the school’s success means 
we now need that space to further improve the education of our pupils”.

The decision has been a bone of contention in the row between the trust and 
campaigners fighting the proposed conversion of Norwich’s largest secondary 
school, the Hewett, to an Inspiration-sponsored academy. It was mentioned by 
new local MP Clive Lewis in a tirade against the trust in hismaiden Commons 
speech 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jun/10/labour-mp-norwich-south-academy-maiden-speech>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4axa7%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4axa7%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F19%2F1434728870797%2F68a50d0c-4f77-4054-978b-50f8d8351dd1-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=State%20school%20honours%20uneven%2C%20as%20academies%20notch%20up%20another%20knighthood&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4axa7%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=State+school+honours+uneven%2C+as+academies+notch+up+another+knighthood&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4axa7%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F19%2F1434728870797%2F68a50d0c-4f77-4054-978b-50f8d8351dd1-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Rachel de Souza. Photograph: Teri Pengilley for the Guardian 
But we were puzzled by de Souza’s comments, which seemed to imply the primary 
was growing beyond its capacity and so needed the space. In fact, official 
school census data shows it has spare places. As of January, the school had 347 
pupils against a capacity of 420. Pupil numbers were one fewer than in January 
2014, and only 12 higher than before the trust took it over in 2013.

Tessa Holledge, the school’s principal, said: “Success for a school isn’t just 
about student numbers, it’s also about the quality of education. We need more 
space so we can reduce class sizes and ensure even more focused learning.

“The changes we are making will see Year 6 moving into the area previously 
occupied by the Sure Start centre, Year 4 and Year 5 will be split into three 
classes and a brand new library [will be] built during the next academic year.”

Inspiration is also offering to give up space on the school’s playing field 
for the local authority to build a new Sure Start centre. The trust said the 
NPA changes were being funded through “careful use of both our main funding and 
the pupil premium”.

The cashless society? 


Can a school federation’s governing body exist without a bank account? That 
was one intriguing question hanging over a recent employment tribunal hearing, 
back in Croydon.

Jenny Kirby, a former human resources manager for the Leathersellers’ 
Federation of three schools in Lewisham, south London, appeared before the 
tribunal two weeks ago to claim unfair dismissal. But at the start of the 
hearing, the barrister for the Leathersellers’ said any settlement would be 
paid not by it, but through the bank account of one of its schools, Prendergast 
school, as “the governing body of the Leathersellers’ [federation] has no bank 
account”.

In the end, the case was settled outside the tribunal, with Kirby believed to 
have been paid a five-figure sum. We asked David Sheppard, the three schools’ 
executive headteacher, who footed the bill. He said: “[Leathersellers’] 
governing body [confirms] that it has access to financial resources to satisfy 
any award.”

The case had been watched with interest by the school communities. Governors 
have been trying to push through a move to academy status, but a threatened
legal challenge 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jun/02/pearson-sats-marking-problems-software>
 by a parent last month meant the plans had to be put on hold.
