
Eurosport will make broadcasting history at Wimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wimbledon> when it becomes the first 
commercial pay-TV broadcaster to air live UK coverage from the All England Club.

The Discovery-owned pay-TV channel will broadcast live coverage of the finals 
weekend as well as a daily highlights package following the deal with theBBC 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>, which was approved by media regulator 
Ofcom on Thursday.

The BBC retains all of the free-to-air rights, with its coverage unaffected by 
the deal with Discovery which will begin with this year’s championships and run 
until 2020.

It will be the first time a commercial pay-TV broadcaster has screened live 
coverage from Wimbledon, which will begin this year on 27 June.

However, it will not be the first commercial broadcaster to cover the event, 
as ITV relayed live coverage of the championships, along with the BBC, in the 
1960s.
— Les Sheehan (@lessheehan) June 16, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/lessheehan/status/743418928857235456> 
@johnplunkett149 <https://twitter.com/johnplunkett149> 1966 
pic.twitter.com/e92V1AMFyb <https://t.co/e92V1AMFyb>
 <https://twitter.com/lessheehan/status/743418928857235456> 
The BBC and Discovery have been long-time partners, from natural history 
programming to the Olympics.

The BBC faced the prospect of losing the Olympics after the rights were bought 
by Discovery last year, but the corporation retained the games after signing a 
sub-licensing deal with Discovery in February.

Speaking earlier this month, Eurosport chief executive Peter Hutton said it 
would be a “real privilege to be first pay broadcaster to be allowed into 
Wimbledon”.

Discovery and Eurosport have been on drive to buy more sports rights since 
Discovery became a majority shareholder in 2014.

Related: Eurosport poised to broadcast Wimbledon live after BBC deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/02/eurosport-wimbledon-live-bbc-ofcom>

Susanna Dinnage, executive vice president and managing director, Discovery 
Networks UK and Ireland, said: “It is fantastic to offer fans the chance to 
watch one of the most iconic events in British sport on Eurosport for the first 
time.

“Adding the Wimbledon rights means we now have live coverage of all four top 
tournaments and cements our position as the home of grand slam tennis in the 
UK.”

In a statement, Ofcom said it had “given its consent to requests from the BBC 
and Discovery Networks to broadcast live coverage of the Wimbledon 
Championships 2016 to 2020.

“We consulted in May 2016 on these requests and Ofcom received one response in 
support of the proposals.

“After considering the response and information supplied by the BBC and 
Discovery Networks in support of their applications, Ofcom has decided to grant 
consent to the proposals for coverage.”
