
Many seem to imagine the counter is a soundproof wall, as if in this tiny room 
I can’t hear everything you’re saying. Although I do hope you keep the juiciest 
bits for when the coffee grinder is off.

When we opened, people used to remark about the price of the flat whites, 
murmuring about gentrification as if they (or at least, their landlords) 
weren’t at the forefront of it. I dreamed of pointing out that, even though I 
worked without any contract, the £2.50 they paid for that beautifully made, 
locally roasted coffee barely enabled the cafe to break even. A year later and 
recent arrivals hand over £50 notes to pay for their £3.50 almond milk mochas; 
I wonder if they realise the cost of their coffee is half what I get paid an 
hour.

Regulars who know us take comfort in the romantic illusion that we are all 
struggling artists, waiting for a break. They don’t know that most of us have 
at least one degree and needed two years’ experience to get the job. There is 
nothing romantic about the struggling artist who is too tired from listening to 
your #middleclassproblems to ever create anything.

Related: What I’m really thinking: the teenage amputee 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/13/teenage-amputee-interview> 

We talk, too, but you can’t hear us. We’ve rolled our eyes behind the espresso 
machine at you, Skimmed Latte Lady, with your loud opinions on the neighbours’ 
benefits. And yes, Extra Hot Flat White Guy, I do think your latest buy-to-let 
property sounds lovely, but the more investments you make, citing our cafe as a 
selling point, the less we can afford to live and work here. And who is going 
to make your brunch then?

• Tell us what you’re really thinking at mind@theguardian.com 
<mailto:mind@theguardian.com>
