
Stuck for ideas on what to cook this evening? Bored of eating alone? Why not 
go to a stranger’s house for dinner. Social dining facilitatorWeFiFo 
<https://www.wefifo.com/>, based in Sussex, opened for business in April and 
enables people to do just that.

“I’d heard about it from a friend. I’m single and I love meeting new people,” 
says Jo Webber, a 35-year-old digital marketing consultant from London Bridge 
who attended one of the meals recently. It took place in someone’s home not far 
from where she lives. “It was hosted by a really nice chap who put on a lovely 
vegetarian meal for about 12 of us. There was a fun mix of people and it made a 
change from going to a restaurant. The food was great. I’ve already lined up 
another one, and might host one myself.”

As people’s lives get busier, the opportunities for technology-enabled 
convenience services are seemingly unlimited. And one of the latest trends is 
serving more imaginative meal options to consumers.


WeFiFo’s founder, Seni Glaister, who describes herself as a “lifelong foodie”, 
says her own experiences of seeing how people in different parts in the world 
share food inspired her to take a leading role in an emerging “social eating 
revolution”.


Related: Stay local – and freshen up your supply chain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2015/dec/04/stay-local-and-freshen-up-your-supply-chain>

Hosts don’t have to be Masterchef hopefuls: anyone from hard-up students to 
the retired can sign up, deciding their own menus and price points. They don’t 
have to provide a sit-down meal, either. Initial WeFiFo events have included a 
Caribbean feast in Carshalton, a barbeque in Brixton and lemon tart in 
Leamington Spa.

Potential hosts register on the website where they can create personalised 
pages, menus and photos that showcase their food – and their home (the 
environment is just as important). Guests buy a seat at the table; WeFiFo takes 
a 10%–20% cut. Hosts gain rankings based on successful events and positive 
feedback from guests. If they’re good enough they can go on to mentor novice 
cooks (for a fee).

WeFiFo, which has attracted £350,000 of funding, has already brokered 100 
events across the UK. It wants to sign up 30,000 UK hosts as quickly as 
possible, so that there is something going on every evening within a mile of 
someone if they’re in a city (four miles if they’re more rural).

For VizEat <https://fr.vizeat.com/> (short for Visit-Eat), social dining is 
about providing a more authentic experience for travellers. The Paris-based 
venture, which came to the UK last September and has already spread to Italy, 
Spain and Portugal, connects visitors to home-based dining in major city 
locations.

Business travellers have turned out to be a surprise user group, according to 
Jean-Michel Petit, VizEat’s CEO and co-founder. “Travelling to another city or 
country can be a lonely experience; social dining helps overcome that,” he 
notes. VizEat has also found a market among locals and nationals visiting a 
multi-cultural city, who may want to try cuisines other than the national dish 
– on the basis that “Italians don’t go to Rome to eat pasta carbonara.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k57t%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k57t%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60010074da1d1820690ea1909bae34b9e7b647cb%2F0_3_877_526%2F877.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Real%20life%20Come%20Dine%20with%20Me%20is%20the%20next%20'social%20eating%20revolution'&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k57t%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Real+life+Come+Dine+with+Me+is+the+next+%27social+eating+revolution%27&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k57t%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60010074da1d1820690ea1909bae34b9e7b647cb%2F0_3_877_526%2F877.jpg>
 ‘Travelling to another city or country can be a lonely experience; social 
dining helps overcome that.’ Photograph: Antoine Kienlen 
It’s also a way for travellers to avoid paying over the odds for tourist 
staples (eg £75 for four crepes in Paris). Public reviews help to keep prices 
realistic and fair, and the full spectrum is represented – from simple student 
fare to the more bourgeois fine-dining experience.

Hosts have as much to gain socially and culturally. In London, VizEat host 
Jane Simon signed up as a non-native living in the city, seeing it as a way to 
expand her own social network. “It combines two things I love to do – cooking 
and meeting new people, which is hard outside of work,” she says.

VizEat is two years old and its 60,000 members come from 65 countries, ranging 
from millennials to families with children, and older generations. Its growth 
was boosted by the acquisition of Paris-based social dining pioneer Cookening 
last year, as well as £760,000 in seed funding. To date, meals are booked via 
its website; a mobile app for VizEat is due for release soon.

Trybe <https://try.be/>, on the other hand, is a pure mobile app. It is highly 
location-based (“hyperlocal”): users can quickly find out what’s cooking in a 
kitchen nearby and pick up something tasty and different when hunger strikes 
(its model is home-cooked takeaways and deliveries). The venture is four months 
old, and so far operates only in the E1 and E2 postcodes of London, although it 
expects to be London-wide by the end of the summer.

It is app-enabled services like Deliveroo <https://deliveroo.co.uk/> that have 
given diners a more sophisticated palate. The London business, founded in 2013 
to deliver restaurant meals to home- or office-based diners, has to date 
attracted £130m in investment, serves 30 cities in the UK and 20 others around 
the world, and is valued at several-hundred million pounds.

“People expect to be able to get food from a wider variety of sources now,” 
comments Jo Allison, a consumer behavioural analyst at consultancyCanvas8 
<http://www.canvas8.com/>. Consumers have become more health conscious too: a 
2015 report 
<http://www.nielsen.com/content/dam/nielsenglobal/eu/nielseninsights/pdfs/Nielsen%20Global%20Health%20and%20Wellness%20Report%20-%20January%202015.pdf>
 [pdf] from Nielsen found that 88% will pay a premium for better food. “This 
has had a marked impact in the prepared meals market,” Allison says.

Recipe-kit startups including Blue Apron <https://www.blueapron.com/>, Hello 
Fresh <https://www.hellofresh.co.uk/> and Mindful Chef 
<https://www.mindfulchef.com/> take some of the hassle out of home cooking, but 
still require time in the kitchen.

Trybe’s target customers include city professionals who are late leaving the 
office. They can now pick up something healthier than a typical greasy takeaway 
or a microwavable ready-meal, co-founder and CEO of Trybe, Ilkka Salo, explains.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k57t%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k57t%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb3e3e5571d1a10d57a1f4a5c8c9c6e492b7df07%2F0_121_3625_2175%2F3625.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Real%20life%20Come%20Dine%20with%20Me%20is%20the%20next%20'social%20eating%20revolution'&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k57t%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Real+life+Come+Dine+with+Me+is+the+next+%27social+eating+revolution%27&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k57t%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb3e3e5571d1a10d57a1f4a5c8c9c6e492b7df07%2F0_121_3625_2175%2F3625.jpg>
 Ilkka Salo. Photograph: Trybe 
The “home meals on demand” market may be young, but it’s already hotly 
contested. Other startups includeDish Next Door <http://www.dishnextdoor.co.uk/>
,Cookisto <https://www.facebook.com/cookisto.co.uk/>, which emerged during the 
Greek economic crisis,Bonappetour <https://www.bonappetour.com/> and Travelling 
Spoon <https://www.travelingspoon.com/>. It’s a worldwide phenomenon too, 
stretching from the US (egJosephine <https://josephine.com/>) to Australia (
Homemade <http://www.eathomemade.com/>). India is emerging as a big market (eg 
ZuperMeal <https://www.facebook.com/zupermealindia/>, Feazt 
<http://www.feazt.com/> and Fromahome <http://fromahome.com/>).

“Food-sharing may well take off in other ways too,” Allison says. “People are 
more concerned over food waste, driving consumers to share their leftovers. 
There are already apps for this:OLIO  <http://olioex.com/>connects neighbours 
and local businesses to exchange their edible surplus food and lower levels of 
food waste in their community. It has drop boxes all around London and has 
plans to launch internationally.”

So how can entrepreneurs maintain their edge in a market that will quickly 
become crowded?

Allison says: “Like anything else in the sharing economy, these services will 
rely on trust. The smaller set ups may well not have hygiene standards, for 
example, so this could be the source of differentiation.”

WeFiFo will pay for hosts to get their Level 2 food hygiene certificate. 
VizEat is insured with Lloyds of London, covering hosts and guests for up to 
£250,000 (eg against food poisoning or other problems), but notes that there is 
no better guarantee of quality than eating food that hosts have also prepared 
for their own families. Bonappetour prides itself on its host curation, vetting 
households not only for food hygiene but also hosting personality and style. It 
also plans to roll out additional service differentiators including wine 
delivery and chauffeur services.

And what of traditional restaurants: are they under threat? Petit believes 
not. “Our hosts don’t see themselves as restaurants, and the guests understand 
this. And as they get talking, they’ll probably discuss restaurant 
recommendations. This isn’t a replacement.”

Home is where the heart is, though. “And what better way to cheat a dinner 
party than get someone else to do the home cooking for you,” Allison says.

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
