
Billionaire media baron Sumner Redstone 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/sumner-redstone> axed his former confidant 
and protege Philippe Dauman from the board of Viacom, where Dauman is CEO, on 
Thursday. Dauman oversees MTV, VH1, Comedy Central, Nickelodeon, movie studio 
Paramount Pictures and a host of other valuable properties.

If the instruction holds up in court, Dauman will exit with four more 
directors on the Viacom board amid an increasinglyacrimonious boardroom battle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/23/sumner-redstone-philippe-dauman-lawsuit-trust>
 that has pitted the 93-year-old Redstone and his family against the media 
combine’s management. One analyst called the day’s events “the Red Wedding” 
after one of the goriest episodes of Game of Thrones.

A statement from Viacom said the board members apparently fired today would 
fight the order in court. Dauman remains as CEO for now. But the new board, if 
it survives a court challenge, would “evaluate the current management team and 
take whatever steps it deems appropriate to ensure thatViacom 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/viacom> has in place strong, independent and 
effective leadership”, Redstone’s team said in a statement.


Related: 'A living ghost': Health questions haunt reclusive mogul Sumner 
Redstone, 92 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/18/sumner-redstone-health-viacom-cbs-lawsuit>

National Amusements, Redstone’s holding company, through which he maintains 
majority control of voting shares in Viacom, said in a detailed five-page 
statement that it was explicitly allowed by Viacom’s bylaws to abruptly 
terminate everyone involved “without a meeting, without prior notice and 
without a vote”. In the same statement, the company said it had removed George 
S Abrams, Philippe P Dauman, Blythe J McGarvie, Frederic V Salerno and William 
Schwartz.

Newly installed are Kenneth Lerer, chairman of Buzzfeed, Thomas May, Judith 
McHale, Ronald Nelson of rental car company Avis Budget, and former Sony 
America president Nicole Seligman.

Salerno blamed Redstone’s daughter, Shari, for the coup. In a statement 
provided by Viacom he said the senior Redstone is being manipulated. “With the 
support of the independent directors of the board, I am filing today a lawsuit 
in Delaware Chancery Court seeking an expedited determination that Ms 
Redstone’s attempted removal and replacement of Viacom directors is invalid and 
that the directors elected at the 2016 Annual Meeting continue to serve. I am 
also seeking an expedited hearing, expedited discovery and an order of the 
court to maintain the status quo pending resolution of the litigation.”

Rich Greenfield, an analyst with BTIG who has followed the conflict closely, 
said that whether the Viacom board is fighting with Sumner Redstone or Shari 
Redstone is immaterial. “If Sumner does not have capacity then the SMR trust 
[Redstone’s trust, which governs National Amusements] kicks in and Shari has 
four votes out of the seven,” Greenfield said. For the board to win the fight, 
it would have to prove not that Shari was manipulating her ailing father but 
that Sumner was entirely compos mentis and wanted the current board intact. 
“Eventually, yes, this will stick, I believe. The only thing I don’t know is 
how long it will take.”

“I no longer trust Philippe or those who support him,” Sumner said on 
Wednesday in a letter addressed to Salerno, according toVariety 
<http://variety.com/2016/biz/news/sumner-redstone-snipes-back-war-of-words-viacom-1201796524/>
. Salerno was perceived to be an ally of Dauman’s in the battle for primacy at 
the company between its CEO and its primary shareholder. Redstonestepped down 
from his position as chairman 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/04/sumner-redstone-resigns-viacom-chairman>
 in February; the company stopped paying the salary he drew as chairman 
emeritus altogether in May. National Amusements also filed an injunction to 
keep the current board from taking any further action.

Related: Humiliation of Sumner Redstone continues despite case being tossed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/10/sumner-redstone-trial-lawsuit-shari-manuela-herzer>

Greenfield has predicted what he called a “red wedding” at the company for 
weeks. Corporate dramaspilling over from Redstone’s personal life 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/06/sumner-redstone-competency-trial-viacom>
 into the workings of some of the most influential media properties on the 
planet are “confusing and surprising and would likely make for a great movie at 
Paramount one day combining family drama, love, rage, corporate intrigue and 
more”, Greenfieldwrote 
<http://www.btigresearch.com/2016/05/22/is-it-na-na-na-na-hey-hey-hey-goodbye-time-for-viacoms-philippe-dauman-or-cbs-les-moonves/>
.

Over Redstone’s objections, Dauman had been exploring the sale of a 
significant minority stake in Paramount to prop up the company’s growing list 
of troubled assets – ratings and ad sales at Viacom have suffered from 
declines, with Comedy Central losing more than a third of its viewers in the 
past two years.

Tom Freston, the CEO replaced in the previous unceremonious ouster of senior 
leadership at Viacom in 2006 after Freston declined to outbid News Corp for 
MySpace, broke a long silence on the topic of the company’s leadership on CNBC 
yesterday, saying the Dauman should be replaced.
