
Barbara’s tells the story: ‘I’m not a teacher but I don’t have a choice’

It’s 40 years since I did my A-levels: two idyllic years of history, RS with 
philosophy and sociology brought my academic life to an end. I left home and 
started my indentures as a trainee journalist. And these days I am more likely 
to qualify for a bus pass, yet I find myself once again surrounded by A-level 
textbooks. This time I am the teacher, and my daughter is the pupil. Parents 
say they will do anything for their offspring. I suspect teaching them A-level 
courses at home is one of the exceptions. I’m not a teacher: in fact I don’t 
have a degree. I also don’t have a choice.

My eldest daughter, Thea, is exceptionally bright. She has normal ambitions of 
getting top grades and going to a top university, getting a degree and a job. 
However, she is deaf. She has also been seriously ill, and because of that she 
is now in an academic hinterland. She should be in year 13, getting offers for 
degree courses. Instead she is at the dining table trying to work to a teaching 
scheme we have found on an examination board website.

Like thousands of disabled children before her, she has been ground down 
trying to survive mainstream education. After five years at a top state 
grammar, living on her wits, trying to follow conversations with people whose 
heads were turned away, being left behind in friendships, straining to listen 
in class against the backdrop of a humming whiteboard that interfered with her 
hearing equipment, she just crashed.

On some days her cochlear implant would fail and she would go through the day 
profoundly deaf, talking to no one and no one talking to her. She didn’t ask 
for help because she didn’t want to bother anyone. I came to recognise those 
days well, because back at home the words would tumble out of her mouth, and 
she would laugh and joke and be her normal self. I know what six hours of 
suppressed verbosity sounds like: it sounds like a heart breaking.

By the time she was taking her GCSEs she was showing signs of anxiety. She was 
taking more and more time off, yet she achieved nine out of nine A* passes. Her 
anxiety tipped over into panic disorder after her GCSEs when she was diagnosed 
with food allergies. She became too frightened to eat for fear of an 
anaphylactic reaction. Finally, when her dad had a stroke, she went into 
freefall.

The results of a survey of the parents of deaf children reveal a picture of 
confusion and worry

During the five years she was there her school was incredibly sympathetic. 
They had never had a deaf pupil, and all staff underwent deafness awareness 
training and rallied round. They wanted to help so much, but ultimately they 
could not tackle the crippling isolation.

Such was Thea’s determination to do her A-levels 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/alevels> that she started in the school’s 
sixth form in September 2014. Her last ever parents’ evening was bizarre: 
spectacular results were predicted for her A2 year, but there were also serious 
concerns. From the start of this year her attendance crashed and her weight was 
plummeting dangerously. She tried to teach herself with work sent home from 
school, but it was decided she shouldn’t take her AS-levels on health grounds. 
In September this year Thea begged us to let her be home schooled. She promised 
to get a job, volunteer, to find reasons to get out of the house. We agreed to 
give it a go.

According to government statistics 
<https://www.england.nhs.uk/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/act-plan-hearing-loss-upd.pdf>
, twice as many deaf children as hearing ones will suffer depression or other 
mental illnesses. Forty per cent of those will have a crisis around the time 
they leave secondary school. It isn’t a whim of Thea’s not to go back to the 
classroom. She isn’t the first child to be home schooled on the grounds of 
illness.

All local authorities have a duty of care to ensure young people have a 
suitable education. The main stumbling block for us has been a change in 
provision for disabled children,introduced by the coalition in September 2014 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/feb/17/new-special-educational-needs-laws-support-chaotic>
. For the past 20 years children with disabilities in mainstream education have 
had a “statement” – a document that outlines the level of support they get in 
the classroom from specialist teachers and support assistants. The Children and 
Families Act 2014 aimed to transfer those statements to an Education Health and 
Care Plan (EHCP). The entire transfer is due to be completed by July 2016. 
However, many families like ours are finding the process far from complete.

Some councils are taking up to 20 weeks to process the transitions. We 
received the letter starting proceedings just a month ago. At the moment, 
procuring services to supply Thea with a teaching plan and funding for 
materials, tutors etc, are all linked to the ECHP.

The difficulties facing parents of teenagers with disabilities in a time of 
austerity was highlighted on a recent Question Time.Sally Wheatman 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JV17VUw-BmM>, a former colleague of mine, 
brought the issue to national attention when she castigated Tory MP Matthew 
Hancock for writing off those with disabilities. Her son George, 18, who has 
learning difficulties, has yet to get an EHCP. His funding for transport is 
under threat and his place at college has been taken away. The feedback she has 
received since then suggests there are thousands of children suffering in 
similar ways.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJV17VUw-BmM&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJV17VUw-BmM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJV17VUw-BmM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJV17VUw-BmM&media=>
 Sally Wheatman on Question Time 
The National Deaf Children’s Society (NDCS) has conducted a survey with 
parents about EHCPs. Theresults 
<http://www.ndcs.org.uk/news/ndcs_news/sen_report.html> reveal a picture of 
confusion and worry. Three-quarters of parents whose children have moved over 
to them had no confidence their child would get the support they need following 
the change.

Case studies include parents of a girl with profound hearing loss being told 
their local authority won’t even assess their daughter for an EHCP because she 
is considered to be doing “too well”.

Significantly, 80% of those surveyed said it had not been made clear that they 
had the right to request a personal budget for their child.

Luckily, the staff dealing with Thea’s case have been trying to find ways of 
helping her while the EHCP goes through the system. They’ve recently agreed a 
package that will allow a tutor company to help us. This finally means Thea can 
start studying for her A-levels full-time at home. She will take her exams in 
summer 2017 along with the current year 12 cohort. Had she not been ill she 
would be completing her A-levels this summer.

I fear not many parents have been as bloody-minded as us, or have stood up to 
authority as much as we have. It is intimidating: and when parents have had to 
watch their children struggle to understand the world around them, having the 
energy to fight for their rights is really hard to do.

We seem to have an LEA that is willing to listen. The NDCS survey suggests we 
are in the minority.

Thea’s story: ‘The extrovert in me disappeared going into school’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fxfh%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fxfh%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d82ee0958fef12dff5426a6af892556ccee7d39%2F1435_202_2199_3299%2F2199.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Suddenly%20I%E2%80%99m%20teaching%20my%20child%20A-levels%20in%20the%20kitchen&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fxfh%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Suddenly+I%E2%80%99m+teaching+my+child+A-levels+in+the+kitchen&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fxfh%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d82ee0958fef12dff5426a6af892556ccee7d39%2F1435_202_2199_3299%2F2199.jpg>
 Thea Trollope. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
My education was mainstream from the start. My parents felt that I could meet 
the challenge. Although I was still developing speech, I could read books by 
myself thanks mainly to subtitles on TV and in films. So with intensive support 
from a brilliant teacher of the deaf and wonderful support assistants, I was 
able to start school at the same time as my hearing peers and access the 
curriculum, the first deaf pupil in my school to do so.

Initially, I felt I belonged. When children are that young they don’t know 
what stigma is, they just want to have fun. But as I got older, I became aware 
of the differences. I was mocked on my “questionable” pronunciation of words. 
My mum told me to come back at them with “I’m deaf, not stupid”.

However, there were incidents I just couldn’t tell my mum and dad. One 
happened when I was about six. It was a maths lesson and it was “carpet time”. 
The teacher was asking questions on multiplication. “Nine times 10 is …?” That 
stumped the others but I knew the answer. I put my hand up as did others. After 
endless incorrect answers the teacher saw my arm was about to fall off, and 
said: “Yes, Thea?”

Beaming with pride I answered “Ninety”. Everyone stared at me, then the 
teacher cackled. The punch line? “We finished that ages ago, didn’t you know?”

I had to change myself to fit in. This is wrong … there needs to be a renewed 
focus on the wellbeing of SEN pupils

We all took up her cue and chuckled along, including me. It was that or cry. 
The teacher was given deaf awareness training and hopefully saw her mistake. 
But I blamed myself. I should have been like the others, I should’ve heard, I 
should just have not put my hand up.

Despite events like that one I enjoyed primary school. When it came to an end 
I got into the local grammar school, again the first profoundly deaf pupil to 
do so. Many of my new classmates had no idea how to speak to a deaf person. It 
was an environment full of unknowns and unexpected problems which added to my 
growing self-contempt. Isolated and painfully shy for the first time in my 
life, I developed a coping mechanism. I made myself invisible. The extrovert in 
me disappeared the moment I walked into school.

Also problematic were the situations where I would have to admit that I needed 
help: another taboo for me. If my cochlear implant needed new batteries 
mid-lesson, I would wing it to the end of the lesson rather than asking the 
teacher if I could go to get some.

Over the next five years I pushed through, spurred on by the need to prove 
myself equal to or above my peers in ability and, in spite of creeping anxiety, 
I got nine GCSEs at A*.

But that inner drive needed a lot of energy and after my exams I had nothing 
left to give. I have had to go down the route of home schooling because my 
mental health had to come first.

It has taken me 11 years to forgive that little girl with her hand up. But I 
will not forget her or those still suffering in silence.

The biggest lesson I have learned is that I have been educated in a system 
where I had to change myself to fit in. This is wrong. The mainstream education 
of SEN children has come a long way but there needs to be a renewed focus on 
the wellbeing of the pupils as well as their academic progress.

When asked what my proudest achievement is, I often reply that it’s my GCSE 
results. If I am honest, these come second to my greatest success of all: 
learning that there is nothing wrong with me.
