
Q: I have just bought a beautiful peach chiffon dress for the summer. But my 
lace bras are visible through the fabric, and you can even see the line of my 
'T-shirt' bras. Any suggestions? I am a 34C.
Kathleen, Edinburgh

A: Hi Kathleen, that's the problem with pale chiffon. In bright or direct 
light, the fabric becomes alarmingly transparent. To avoid a Lady Godiva 
moment, I would recommend investing in underwear that covers and gives great 
shape. The good news is that the boudoir look stormed the spring/summer 2008 
catwalks. Models wore substantial underwear (and nothing else) at Bottega 
Veneta, Helmut Lang and John Galliano. The lingerie came in light creams, 
coffee and nude shades and was so pretty it seems a shame to cover it up. If 
you're not looking for a designer solution to your chiffon problem, I'd 
recommend some high-waisted control briefs in nude tones with matching bras to 
give you the catwalk look at a cheaper price. Triumph has a very feminine 
control brief in a caffe latte colour for £19, and Sloggi has a hipster brief 
with lightly scalloped edging that is invisible under clothing (both from
figleaves.com <http://www.figleaves.com>). They also look very cute in caramel, 
£7. For key, simple and affordable pieces look at Bodas's (bodas.co.uk 
<http://www.bodas.co.uk>) smooth Tactel collection - a hit with fashionistas, 
especially in the nude-maquillage colour, which works well under sheer clothes. 
Camisoles start at £36, bras at £40 and briefs at £15. Finally, I think you 
should invest in a nude slip that's simple and will work under your summer 
dresses. You can either search secondhand shops for vintage slips or go for my 
favourite - the Spanx Hide & Seek full slip. The fabric doesn't cling to your 
clothes. Perfect.

· If you have a wardrobe question for Jo Jones, email her at 
ask.jo@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.jo@observer.co.uk>
