
1 Divorce <http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/divorce> doesn’t have to 
involve lawyers, although they can be useful if things aren’t straightforward. 
If it is fairly simple and you and your partner agree about sharing of assets 
and childcare arrangements, you can do it yourself. For £600 – £550 to apply to 
the court and £50 for the decree absolute –you can get divorced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/11/life-after-divorce-end-marriage>
. But be aware that although the divorce will be legal, anything you agree 
about finance (even if lawyers are involved) is not legally binding unless it’s 
been signed off by a judge. You don’t have to go to court to do this, but you 
will need to send the court the formal agreement for approval and pay another 
fee of £50.

2 If you do get a lawyer, get one who suits your personality. Some people love 
aggressive, adversarial lawyers because they’ve watched too much TV and want to 
teach their partners a lesson. Be aware that, yes, you may end up with more 
money and property with such a lawyer, but very little else. Again: think long 
term, think future family gatherings. It’s so much easier if you treated each 
other civilly in the divorce.

Related: Life after divorce: what it really feels like to end a marriage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/11/life-after-divorce-end-marriage>

3 If you prefer a more human approach you may want to consider a lawyer who 
practises collaborative family law. This is where you sit around a table with 
your partner and your lawyers. You talk and thrash it out.

4 Going to court should be a last resort. You could be looking at fees of 
£50,000 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/17/price-of-getting-divorced-to-soar-by-a-third>
 and upwards if you go all the way to trial with barristers, witnesses being 
cross examined and the judge imposing a decision on you – and no guarantee that 
things will go your way. Be pragmatic about what you want to walk away with and 
don’t let things drag on. A divorce case in 2012 ended up with a wealthy couple 
(both, ironically, lawyers) spending almost their entire wealth onlitigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/18/michael-gove-orwellian-world-justice-divorcing-couples>
.

5 You can represent yourself in court (called a litigant in person), but it’s 
about rather more than having lots of coloured files under your arm and saying, 
“I give it to you, ladies and gentleman of the court …” If you don’t know what 
you’re doing and are disrespectful to the judge, it could backfire. Don’t lie 
about your assets. The chances are you’ll be found out, lose credibility and 
end up being awarded even less.

6 It’s understandable to hate your partner and want to make voodoo dolls of 
them, but do it in a safe place. Don’t underestimate the power of a few 
counselling sessions with a professional. Friends and family will all have 
agendas and may project their own history on to you by telling you things like 
“go for the jugular” but descending to this rarely results in a positive 
outcome. Also their divorce was their divorce – this is yours.

Related: In Michael Gove’s Orwellian world, justice for divorcing couples is 
for sale | Joshua Rozenberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/18/michael-gove-orwellian-world-justice-divorcing-couples>

7 If you have children remember the mantra “what’s best for the child” before 
you do anything else. This is your conflict, not theirs. The marriage may be 
over but your relationship as parents continues. No matter how wronged – or 
triumphant – you feel, now is not the time to start Photo-shopping your partner 
out of pictures. Think long term. You’re not running an election campaign 
either, so no social media smearing or public putting down of your partner – 
both could end up being used against you.

8 Don’t make the children choose. You wouldn’t stand at the opposite end of 
the room to your partner, put your children in the middle and shout “Choose!” – 
yet that’s how it can feel to a child. Break the news together if possible and 
listen to their concerns, which are often intensely practical, such as, “Where 
will we live?” It’s helpful to talk such things through with your partner 
before you tell the children so you can reassure them with concrete answers. 
Where you don’t have answers, don’t be afraid to say: “We don’t know yet.” Make 
sure they know they can ask questions at any time and let the school know what 
is going on. Remindchildren that you will both always be their parents 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/24/sharing-custody-childrens-mental-health-divorce-separation>
.

9 Think about what really matters to you – and why – when dividing assets. 
Human nature is such that if you relinquish certain things, your partner will 
too. If you are headstrong, they will be too.Divorce 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/divorce> can bring out the child in 
every adult.

• With thanks to Philippa Dolan, partner at law firm Collyer Bristow, and 
Chris Mills, couples therapist and family mediator and author ofThe Complete 
Guide to Divorced Parenting 
<http://www.chrismills.uk.com/training/the-complete-guide-to-divorced-parenting/>
