
Late night dates with a 600-page textbook and a multipack of Red Bull are a 
familiar encounter for many people. Whether in school, university or work, we 
all find ourselves in situations where we have to learn a vast quantity of 
information in a very short period of time.

In these instances, almost all of us 
<http://www.facultyfocus.com/articles/teaching-professor-blog/rereading-material-good-study-strategy/>
 resort to the age-old study technique of reading through the textbook over and 
over again in the hope that some of it will stick.


However, this study technique is not only tedious and repetitive, it’s also 
ineffective. It is completely misaligned with how our brains actually work, 
according to basic neuroscience and psychology research.


Fortunately, that same research paves the way for alternative study methods 
<http://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/jul/12/neuroscience-solve-mystery-how-students-learn>
 which work with, rather than against, our brain. And of those methods, spaced 
repetition is one of the most interesting. It can help if you’re trying to 
learn a new language, remember your entire musculoskeletal anatomy, or 
preparing for a big exam.

Spaced repetition


A simple way to do spaced repetition is to use flashcards organised into a 
box. Set up a schedule for when you will revise the cards in each of the 
sections in your box. If you answer a card correctly, you put it into a section 
that you will revisit less frequently in the future, whereas if you get the 
answer wrong, you move the card into a section scheduled for frequent visits.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D33DIo8iU7ws&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D33DIo8iU7ws&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D33DIo8iU7ws>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D33DIo8iU7ws&media=>
You could set up this system 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=5&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwit0tDEt7DJAhXDORoKHXGMALIQtwIIPDAE&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D33DIo8iU7ws&usg=AFQjCNG-yHQaKN6dIHi3x5K8agvuf5ZMhg&sig2=CNw_OCS1Nqwc6W2ULqbcFg>
 yourself, though software is now available to handle card organisation 
automatically and has gained aloyal online following 
<https://www.supermemo.com/english/users.htm>. Why does it work? By taking 
advantage of the way our brain has evolved.

Understanding the brain


Something as inherently complex and mysterious as the brain is difficult to 
describe in literal terms. If asked “how does the brain work?”, we’re likely to 
say something along the lines of “like an organic computer”. It’s not 
surprising that, living in a digital world, we connect the two so readily.

However, it’s easy to forget that there are also fundamental differences in 
how brains and computers process and store information.

Computers store whatever information they are told to store. A video camera is 
designed with the sole purpose of capturing light and sound information within 
its field of view, when it is told to do so. The brain, however, is something 
we have very little direct control over. So you have no more direct control 
over your how much of a textbook you can remember than you do over your blood 
pressure.

Related: What happens in your brain when you make a memory? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/sep/16/what-happens-in-your-brain-when-you-make-a-memory>

The second major difference between the brain and a computer is in how 
information is processed. It’s tempting to think our memories are stored as 
discrete “files” somewhere in the brain, like a camera. We might imagine that 
when we remember an event in our lives, or a piece of information we studied, 
we’re “opening” that file.

But science tells us this isn’t true. A “memory” doesn’t exist in any one 
place in the brain, but is an emergent feature of many different parts of the 
brain firing in a certain way. When we learn something, it isn’t stored in a 
single location, but is instantlyscattered across many different regions 
<http://www.scientificamerican.com/article/the-memory-trace/> of the brain.

Finally, the brain has limitations that are, at least for now, impossible to 
overcome. Studies have consistently shown that we can only remember five to 
seven new pieces of information 
<http://www.psych.utoronto.ca/users/peterson/psy430s2001/Miller%20GA%20Magical%20Seven%20Psych%20Review%201955.pdf>
 at a time. It’s fascinating research, but it also has practical implications 
for how we should learn.

Related: How anxiety scrambles your brain and makes it hard to learn 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/nov/21/how-anxiety-scrambles-your-brain-and-makes-it-hard-to-learn>

Hacking your brain

Any effective approach to learning has to be developed with the brain’s 
inherent limitations in mind. If we know that the brain cannot effectively 
store and recall lots of information in a short period of time, then “cramming” 
is a recipe for disaster.

Similarly, we know that the brain preferentially stores information it deems 
to be important. It strengthens and consolidates memories of things it 
encounters regularly and frequently. So spaced repetition –revisiting 
information regularly <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1876761/> at 
set intervals over time – makes a lot of sense.

Spaced repetition is simple, but highly effective because it deliberately 
hacks the way your brain works. It forces learning to be effortful, and like 
muscles, the brain responds to that stimulus by strengthening the connections 
between nerve cells. By spacing the intervals out, you’re further exercising 
these connections each time. Itproduces long-term, durable retention of 
knowledge <https://www.supermemo.com/english/ol/background.htm>, and in my 
experience, once people start using it, they swear by it.

Related: Where does 'creativity' happen in your brain? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/dec/28/where-does-creativity-happen-in-your-brain>

Work smart, not hard

The way we think about health has been revolutionised by our growing evidence 
of how the body works. Yet the way most of us approach learning remains the 
same as it has for centuries. Spaced repetition is just one of the ways we can 
become evidence-based learners, allowing us to learn more in less time.

James Gupta (@gupta_james <http://twitter.com/gupta_james>) is a medical 
student at Leeds University, and the CEO ofSynap <https://synap.ac>, an online 
learning platform influenced by spaced repetition and other learning techniques.

Get involved with the Use your head 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/series/use-your-head> series by joining 
the discussion on #useyourhead or pitching your ideas to
natalie.gil.casual@theguardian.com <mailto:natalie.gil.casual@theguardian.com>

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.



