
Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicola-sturgeon>, has criticised the cover 
of the New Statesman magazine as “crass” for portraying her and other childless 
politicians standing round a cot with a ballot box inside.

The Scottish National party leader praised the “good analysis” within the 
article, entitled The Motherhood Trap 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/2015/07/motherhood-trap>, which looked at 
some of the reasons why female MPs in the UK on average have 1.2 children, 
while their male counterparts have 1.9.

However, she objected to the way she was pictured on the front of the 
magazine, alongside the Labour leadership contender Liz Kendall, the German 
chancellor,Angela Merkel <https://www.theguardian.com/world/angela-merkel>, and 
the home secretary, Theresa May, who also do not have children.

After the cover was released, but before the article was published, Sturgeon 
tweeted: “Jeezo ... we appear to have woken up in 1965 this morning!”

Later, the SNP leader added that it was a good article but the front cover 
“reinforces the very prejudices she talks about”.

The Conservative party leader in Scotland, Ruth Davidson 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/ruth-davidson>, tweeted “oh do sod off” in 
reference to the cover.

The article won praise from many quarters, though, for highlighting the 
discrepancy between the proportions of male and female MPs who are parents.


It cited research by the academics Sarah Childs and Rosie Campbell in 2013 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/dr-rosie-campbell/women-in-politics_b_4608418.html>
, who found 45% of female MPs were childless, compared with 28% of men.

Helen Lewis, deputy editor of the New Statesman 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/new-statesman>, who wrote the piece, urged 
people to read it before criticising, while pointing out that it analysed why 
both motherhood and childlessness caused problems for women in politics.

The analysis was published the week after a row erupted when the Labour MP 
Helen Goodman wrote in a blog that she was backing Yvette Cooper for leader
because she was a mother 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/helen-goodman/yvette-cooper_b_7736816.html?1436198772&ncid=tweetlnkushpmg00000067>
.

Some of those in Kendall’s camp believed this was an attempt to undermine a 
rival candidate for not being a parent.

The MP Toby Perkins, a supporter of Kendall, told the BBC: “I think the idea 
you say that because one of the candidates is a mother, they are the one you 
should back suggests a paucity of intellectual argument, which theLabour 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party should really have moved 
beyond.”

Julia Gillard <https://www.theguardian.com/world/julia-gillard>, the former 
prime minister of Australia, has also spoken recently about the misogynist 
abuse aimed at her during her time as a politician, when rivals and even some 
colleagues repeatedly drew attention to the fact she did not have children.
