
Timing is important. Just before I go out, I play I Wanna Be Your Dog by the 
Stooges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/oct/14/the-stooges-10-of-the-best>
, which gets you in the mood for anything. But I have to make sure I am not so 
into the music, and haven’t kicked into the ale too early, that I go out in my 
pants.

I’ve stopped wearing suits on stage; the bloke who made them, Colin in 
Sheffield, has retired, so they are precious. I learned about clothes from my 
grandfather. He was a steel worker but went to a tailor. He’d buy well and wear 
it until it fell off his back. I don’t do designer or labels, so on stage I 
wear bog-standard double denim. I buy my boots from a friend who is a master 
cobbler and runs Peter’s Shoes in Sheffield. I love it that my clothes and 
boots are made by people I know in the city I live in.

I am not someone who goes out looking like a Christmas tree. I’ve a pocket 
watch that is a family heirloom – it was made in 1815, the year of the battle 
of Waterloo – a wedding ring and an earring that reminds me of my first band,
Treebound Story <http://www.last.fm/music/Treebound+Story>. The original 
members were all born within 18 days of each other and we had our ears pierced 
for our 14th birthdays. The silver ring on my right hand is one of four in the 
world. I had them made forJarvis Cocker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/jarvis-cocker>’s 50th. He’s got one, as has 
Steve Mackey,Pulp <https://www.theguardian.com/music/pulp>’s bass player, and 
Jeannette Lee at Rough Trade <http://www.roughtraderecords.com/about>. It’s a 
picture of the middle of an old-fashioned 45 single, because we are all into 
tunes.

Related: Frankie Dettori: ‘I use perfume four times a day’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/apr/30/how-i-get-ready-frankie-dettori>

I have a mirror so I can check the back of my quiff for insects and bits of 
leaves. I useBlack & White <http://blackandwhitewax.com/> – if it’s good enough 
forElvis <https://www.theguardian.com/music/elvispresley> and Eddie Cochran 
<http://www.allmusic.com/artist/eddie-cochran-mn0000793988>, it’s good enough 
for me.

• Richard Hawley is playing at the Royal Festival Hall in London on 16 June as 
part ofGuy Garvey’s Meltdown 
<http://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/whatson/festivals-series/Guy-Garveys-meltdown>
.
