
For now, last Thursday’s election results cement the place of police and crime 
commissioners (PCCs) in the rapidly-shifting constitutional landscape in 
England and Wales.

With turnout more than double the 2012 level, those elected have a far 
stronger democratic mandate, notwithstanding the fact that higher turnout was 
almost entirely because voting took place on the same day as local and Welsh 
Assembly elections.

Related: Independents swept aside in police and crime commissioner elections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/06/hillsborough-inquests-alan-billings-one-of-the-winners-in-police-elections>

The big story was the slump in the number of independent candidates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/06/hillsborough-inquests-alan-billings-one-of-the-winners-in-police-elections>
: down from 12 to three, with the Conservatives the main beneficiary. Again, 
this was largely a result of other elections being held at the same time: many 
voters will have simply voted for the party they support rather than making a 
decision based on policy differences between the candidates.

Successful candidates this time round will be better prepared than in 2012. 
Many then didn’t know how tough the job could be. Now PCCs know it can be 
uncomfortable under the spotlight: the revelations of widespread child sexual 
exploitation in Rotherham led to the eventual resignation in September 2014 of
South Yorkshire Labour PCC Shaun Wright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/sep/16/rotherham-child-sex-abuse-pcc-shaun-wright-resigns>
.

PCCs are here to stay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/12/police-commissioners-stay-northumbria>
, and have been made more powerful now the home secretary has given them 
oversight of fire and rescue services. But they must prove their worth.

During their campaigns, PCC candidates offered rather familiar messages 
<http://www.alderleyedge.com/news/article/13500/cheshire-police-and-crime-commissioner-candidates-announced>
: to protect funding, to secure more “bobbies on the beat”, and in a few cases 
to protect police station closures. Some promised investment in police 
technology, but the harsh reality is that while the government recently 
confirmed that overall police funding would not fall before 2020, there is no 
extra money to fund these promises.

PCCs need to stop thinking that crime is just about the police and 'bobbies on 
the beat'

The government’s pledge bakes in an assumption that PCCs will raise a part of 
the council tax known as the “police precept”, which some PCCs have indicated 
they will not do. A portion of police funding will be drained by rising police 
pension costs, an ongoing pressure to deal with historic as well as current 
cases of sexual abuse, and a local landscape in which other agencies are 
cutting back on services such as drug treatment that can support policing 
activity.

This means PCCs face difficult choices. They can either club together to put 
pressure on the government for increased resources. Or they can find ways of 
spending more effectively.

Unfortunately, the endearing pledges of Lincolnshire PCC candidates to give up 
<http://thelincolnite.co.uk/2016/04/lincolnshire-pcc-candidates-make-pledges-as-campaign-revs-up/>
 their privileged parking spaces and turn down a small part of their salary 
just won’t cut it. And there are limits to the savings that can – or should – 
be found through “back office” efficiencies. Cutting back on staff who provide 
vital technology, training and other support often just leaves frontline 
officers less equipped to do their jobs well, or back at the station filling in 
forms that others used to do much more effectively and for much lower salaries.

Related: How to tell if the police and crime commissioner experiment has failed
 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/apr/08/police-crime-commissioner-pcc-election-may>

PCCs therefore need to get creative, and recognise that policing is only part 
of their remit. Crime is influenced by the police, but it has never been the 
police alone that can reduce it. Businesses can design their shops to minimise 
the risks of theft, local health and housing services can be provided (or 
withheld) from those likely to commit crime, and transport connections can be 
designed to minimise or increase risks.

Prisons, courts and probations services, run largely by national government 
can make good – or bad – choices both about how to tackle crime and how to 
treat victims.

PCCs need to recognise this and stop thinking that crime is just about the 
police and the number of “bobbies on the beat”. Unless they take a broad view 
and start leading crime reduction efforts across agencies, they will fail the 
voters who have just elected them.

Tom Gash is a senior fellow at the Institute for Government and a visiting 
senior fellow at the London School of Economics’ Mannheim Centre for 
Criminology.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
