
Nigeria has scored important successes against Boko Haram. The military 
campaign thatPresident Muhammadu Buhari launched after his election last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/26/nigerian-election-muhammadu-buhari-pledges-defeat-boko-haram>
 is stronger and better coordinated. The insurgency is nowless of a military 
threat <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/21/nigeria-boko-haram-buhari>
, afterseven years of conflict that have killed tens of thousands of people 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/23/boko-haram-nigeria-civilian-death-toll-highest-acled-african-war-zones>
, uprooted millions, damaged local economies and cross-border trade, and spread 
to the Lake Chad basin states of Cameroon, Chad and Niger.


However, as regional states and their international partners gather in Abuja 
on Saturday 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=2&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwiNz8um5tbMAhVkGsAKHbegCf4QFggiMAE&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.cblt.org%2Fen%2Flake-chad-basin-commission-0&usg=AFQjCNEPoqjgJcQIdOyTJJQ6zqD9eI9pDw&sig2=c9F0JDUt5NZXcvKaOw8eEw>
 to discuss their strategy, Boko Haram remains a major security challenge 
requiring a coordinated response. It may prove tough to eradicate, and the 
toughest challenge remains: to dry up its pool of recruits through better 
development and governance.

Related: Women freed from Boko Haram rejected for bringing 'bad blood' back 
home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/16/women-freed-boko-haram-rejected-for-bringing-bad-blood-back-home-nigeria>

The jihadist group has in recent months carried out fewer attacks, has chosen 
softer targets like remote villages andrefugee camps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/10/nigerian-refugee-camp-hit-by-double-suicide-bombing-boko-haram>
, and has had less success. This is a dramatic departure from December 2013, 
whenhundreds of fighters overran a Nigerian air force base 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/03/boko-haram-attack-nigeria-leaves-many-dead>
 in the Borno state capital, Maiduguri. Additionally Boko Haram has produced 
fewer statements and videos since the end of 2015, and no credible proof in 
over a year that its leader, Abubakar Shekau, is alive.

Cameroon, Chad, Niger and Nigeria have targeted the group’s criminal 
racketeering or direct participation in certain businesses. It has difficulties 
levying tolls since trade has dried up. The regional pushback hasforced Boko 
Haram to change tactics 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/09/boko-haram-loans-recruit-members-crackdown-nigeria-traders-spy>
. It can still mount occasional large-scale attacks, such as itsmid-April 
counter-offensive against Nigeria’s 113th battalion 
<http://www.dailynigerianews.com/2016/04/18/troops-repel-boko-haram-attack-on-113-battalion-at-kareto/>
 in northern Kareto.

But increasingly denied territorial control, its mobile guerrillas are using 
terrorist tactics as proof of their continued existence, as in asuicide bombing 
attack on a government compound in Maiduguri 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-nigeria-security-idUKKCN0Y31HN>that killed at 
least four people on Thursday. Boko Haram may be becoming more like other 
regional jihadist groups, such as al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM), that 
are not attached to a specific area.

Structural challenges make it hard to root out Boko Haram: massive, oil 
income-fed corruption; chronic bureaucratic mismanagement;growing pressure on 
natural resources 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jul/21/nigeria-dire-finances-show-it-cannot-grease-economy-fickle-oil-alone>
;deepening poverty since the 1990s 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/mar/17/nigeria-gold-mining-farmers-lead-poisoning-poverty>
; northern Muslim elite manipulation of religious sentiment; a history of 
violence; and the fundamental dysfunction of Nigeria’s federal structure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/11/buhari-agrees-nigeria-is-corrupt-but-how-is-he-tackling-it>
.

A new study of ex-Boko Haram fighters’ attitudes 
<https://www.mercycorps.org/research-resources/motivations-and-empty-promises-voices-former-boko-haram-combatants-and-nigerian>
 notes that “about half of former members said their communities at some time 
generally supported Boko Haram, believing it would help bring about a change in 
government”. Moreover, there are stillmany troubling reports by human rights 
NGOs <https://www.amnestyusa.org/sites/default/files/report.compressed.pdf>. A 
culture of impunity remains too often unchallenged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/03/nigeria-army-countless-acts-torture-8000-deaths-amnesty-boko-haram>
 and counter-insurgency often remains too crudely oblivious of the rule of law.

A sclerotic patriarchal social system is also to blame. Some rural youths lose 
hope as they are forced to delay marriage and formal adulthood. Access to 
brides, via coercion or otherwise, seems an important attraction to Boko Haram. 
Outside analysis has usually centred, understandably, on theplight of female 
captives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/30/boko-harams-former-catives-need-intensive-psychological-care>
 andgirls used as suicide bombers 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/12/children-suicide-attacks-boko-haram-unicef-nigeria>
.A recent study notes 
<https://www.mercycorps.org/research-resources/motivations-and-empty-promises-voices-former-boko-haram-combatants-and-nigerian>
 however that for some, particularly young women, the group offered access to 
Islamic education and an escape from inflexible, paternalistic social 
structures.

The stifling of the region’s economies both weakens Boko Haram’s resource base 
and also deepens desperation. Nearly half of the20 million people living in the 
Lake Chad basin need more food 
<http://reliefweb.int/report/nigeria/lake-chad-basin-humanitarian-needs-and-response-overview-2016-january-2016>
; more than 50,000 people in Nigeria’s Borno state arecritically food insecure 
<http://reliefweb.int/report/nigeria/lake-chad-basin-humanitarian-needs-and-response-overview-2016-january-2016>
. There are now2.8 million displaced persons in the region 
<http://www.crisisgroup.org/en/regions/africa/west-africa/nigeria/b120-boko-haram-on-the-back-foot.aspx>
, about 200,000 of them refugees, fleeing a war that has killed at least28,000 
people since 2011 in Nigeria alone 
<http://www.cfr.org/nigeria/boko-haram/p25739>. 

The Abuja regional security summit is a major opportunity for Nigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria>, its Lake Chad basin neighbours and 
their international partners, notably the EU, US, France and the UK, to 
consolidate regional and wider international cooperation.

Related: Nigeria: helping the women made widows by Boko Haram – in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2015/dec/20/nigeria-helping-the-women-made-widows-by-boko-haram-in-pictures>

More aid, both humanitarian and developmental, is needed, with priority on 
establishing local security to allow a lasting return of IDPs and refugees to 
rebuild local economies. The rehabilitation of populations that lived underBoko 
Haram <https://www.theguardian.com/world/boko-haram>, willingly or not, should 
also be thought through.

Nigeria and its neighbours should consider building on recent initiatives to 
reintegrate into the mainstream ex-Boko Haram combatants who are not 
ideologically violent extremists or war criminals; improve the rule of law; and 
end controversial and counter-productive state counter-insurgency tactics. The 
same goes for the use of regional vigilante groups, which could exacerbate 
local, communal violence. The Nigerian government should accelerate the 
expansion of crucial basic services like education and health to the 
marginalised peripheries of the country.

All this may all help reduce the appeal of Boko Haram to individuals. But the 
LakeChad <https://www.theguardian.com/world/chad> states should not too quickly 
proclaim “mission accomplished”. Boko Haram is losing ground, resources and 
fighters, but defeating the group and preventing the spread of its terrorist 
attacks to new areas needs more than military success.

• Vincent Foucher is senior west Africa analyst for International Crisis Group 
<http://www.crisisgroup.org/>, the independent conflict-prevention organisation
