
Taxpayers are footing an annual bill of nearly £500,000 for one small free 
school to rent premises from a private investment company, Education Guardian 
can reveal. Is this what we must now expect from the education system: 
taxpayers’ money going into the hands of private landlords, instead of the 
old-fashioned network of state schools operating free on state-owned land? If 
so, it might be expensive.

The yearly lease being paid from next month for Brook House primary free 
school in Tottenham, north London, is £468,000 – more than £3,000 for each of 
the 153 pupils who were registered on its books as of January this year.

The story of Brook House involves two academy chains, the Department for 
Education, a financial firm, a housing association andPremier League football 
club Tottenham Hotspur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/oct/30/tottenham-new-stadium-local-business-demolition>
.

In 2012, proposals were agreed for the football club to build the school in 
partnership with a housing association, Newlon Housing Trust, as part of a 
regeneration project, also to feature Spurs’ new stadium. Called Hartsbrook at 
the time, the school was initially in temporary premises under the E-Act 
academy chain.

[The school] represents an attractive opportunity to access a long-term secure 
income stream, backed by the government
LGP press release 
Last year, the school failed an Ofsted inspection and control was transferred 
from E-Act to the east London-basedLion Academy Trust 
<http://www.lionacademytrust.net/>. Then, last month, Spurs sold the school 
building for £11m, with the cash reported to have been a possible boost its
player transfer fund 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/sport/football/tottenham-handed-11m-transfer-kitty-boost-after-unusual-sale-10390017.html>
.

The buyer was Legal and General Property (LGP), an investment fund, which then 
put out apress release 
<https://www.dropbox.com/s/xhc9p1n96y5a1lb/landgpressrelease.pdf?dl=0> 
proclaiming it had made its first “school investment”. This said that the 
education secretary,Nicky Morgan 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicky-morgan>, was guaranteeing the fund 
would receive rental payments, index-linked to inflation, for the next 25 
years, so the DfE will pay to rent the building so the school can use it.

We asked what the rental bill was. LGP told us the charge was “a low” £18 a 
square foot. As the plush new premises, which the school will move into next 
month, has 26,000 square feet, the total annual bill, LGP confirms, is £468,000.

Given that comparable local primary schools typically receive about £6,000 per 
pupil a year to cover all costs, and state schools usually operate in their 
buildings rent-free, this seems a huge sum. If all England’s 17,000 primaries 
were funded similarly, the DfE would be shelling out about £8bn on them just 
for rent.

We asked Lion for comment and it said the rent was provided as “ringfenced” 
funding from the DfE. This is guaranteed in the school’scontract with ministers 
<https://www.dropbox.com/s/zr95ic1m3er9goc/hartsbrookfundingagreement.pdf?dl=0>
. Lion predicts the school will reach its 420-pupil capacity in two years. The 
DfE did not want to comment, though it indicated the overheads were in line 
with local commercial rents.

LGP’s press release said its purchase of the school “represents an attractive 
opportunity to access a long-term secure income stream, backed by the 
government”. We bet it does. But is this value for the taxpayer?

Gatwick school plan fails to take off

At least Brook House has a permanent home sorted for next term. The same 
cannot be said for several free schools. For example, Gatwick school in 
Crawley, West Sussex, had planning permission refused last week; it had applied 
to make the office block where it has been operating for the past year its 
long-term premises. The school is reportedlycontinuing in this building 
<http://www.crawleynews.co.uk/New-school-s-future-uncertain-plans-rejected/story-27544296-detail/story.html>
 temporarily basis while it sorts out a permanent plan. We will be keeping a 
close eye on a number of free school moves as the new term approaches.

Norfolk ‘mugged’ by creation of academy

“It’s liked being mugged, repeatedly, and then being asked to tip the mugger 
afterwards.” So says George Nobbs, Labour leader of Norfolk county council, 
reacting to news that other local schools will effectively be left with the 
bill for a controversial new academy.

Related: Academy trust head ‘sick’ at school’s good Ofsted rating 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jul/28/academy-trust-sick-hewett-school-norwich-ofsted-inspiration-trust>

Ministers confirmed last week that the Hewett school, Norwich, is to become an 
academy as part of the Inspiration Trust chain. The trust will also gain the 
freehold to the school’s sprawling site. And the local authority says the 
Hewett’s existing deficit, estimated at up to £350,000, will be paid out of the 
budget for its remaining 300 schools.

That is happening as, under DfE rules 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/416430/School_balances_on_conversion_submission.pdf>
, schools forced by ministers into academy status have to hand over any 
financial reserves to the incoming sponsor. But where there are debts, they 
have to be paid off by the local authority.

The trust defended itself, saying Nobbs’s “mugging” comments, while 
“colourful” were “wholly inaccurate”, as the Hewett was already run by a 
charitable trust – though it is not an academy – and ministers were simply 
transferring it to another one. It added that academy deficit rules were set 
out in law.

The DfE indicated it would be unreasonable for a “new school” to start with 
inherited debts and that local authorities should have dealt with deficits. But 
we do wonder if this is fair: by the same argument, should not local 
authorities be repaid any surpluses?

Full marks from Ofsted, despite high turnover 

Finally, eyebrows have been raised after a high-profile academy won an 
“outstanding in all aspects” verdict from inspectors, including on leadership, 
but with little mention in the report of a seemingly very high turnover of 
senior staff there.

Related: Chobham Academy: the school with an Olympic playground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/nov/22/chobham-academy-olympic-legacy-school>

Chobham academy, a school with both primary and secondary phases that opened 
on the Olympics site in Newham, east London, two years ago, is already on its 
third overall principal and its third principal of the primary section. Three 
primary deputies have also left since its opening.

There are no explicit references to this in the school’s Ofsted report 
<http://reports.ofsted.gov.uk/inspection-reports/find-inspection-report/provider/ELS/139703>
, which just seems perplexing.

The school is one of a string of academies run by the Harris chain to have 
received outstanding Ofsted verdicts recently.Ofsted 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> tells us: “The inspection team 
found that, while there have been a number of changes to senior posts as the 
school has expanded, the quality of leadership and management has remained 
consistently high.” We remain perplexed why this manager turnover hardly 
features in the report itself.
