
How does a displaced boy being raped by an international civil servant in a 
war-torn country benefit from the UN resolution to end violence against 
children? Does a humanitarian worker who is sexually harassed or assaulted by a 
peacekeeper or contractor know where to turn for help? Who investigates and 
punishes the perpetrators? It’s high time for the UN to take action on how 
these matters are resolved in a way that respects the human rights of everyone 
affected.

Related: Sexual assaults against aid workers: it's time to take a stand 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/aug/19/sexual-assault-rape-against-aid-worker-its-time-to-take-a-stand>

When aid worker Megan Nobert went public 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jul/29/aid-worker-rape-humanitarian-south-sudan-sexual-violence>
 in July 2015 about the lack of UN investigation into her rape in a UN compound 
in South Sudan, the Guardian’sSecret Aid Worker 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jul/29/secret-aid-worker-sexual-harassment-and-discrimination>
 series received many testimonies about similar incidents. The UN may have 
sackedBabacar Gaye, the envoy to Central African Republic (CAR) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/12/un-peacekeeping-chief-central-african-republic-resigns-babacar-gaye>
 in connection with the child sex abuse claims against peacekeepers, but 
there’s so much more to do.

A recent report on sexual exploitation and abuse 
<https://oios.un.org/page/download2/id/13> (pdf) from the UN’s own Office of 
Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) was damning. “Each part of the enforcement 
architecture, with distributed roles and partial responsibility, tends to see 
the others as responsible for performance shortfalls,” it said.

In 2007 I was working at the UN high commissioner for refugees (UNHCR) and 
helped to write astrategy 
<http://www.un.org/en/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/RES/62/214> on tackling 
this issue. I heard through the grapevine that UN member states refused to 
contribute even a few thousand US dollars to a victims’ fund for legal help and 
healthcare. We had proposed to pool donations from willing countries, in order 
to strengthen the strategy’s impact.

Related: Sex abuse poses 'significant risk' to UN peacekeeping, says leaked 
report 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/mar/24/sex-abuse-un-peacekeeping-leaked-report>

In the years since, I have searched for clues on UN websites that the strategy 
was being implemented, but it’s been difficult to find updates. Tragically, the 
OIOS report mentioned above illustrates how little attention has been paid to 
ensure justice and restitution for victims of abuse by UN staff and related 
personnel.

UN policies in this area have clearly failed, including the supposed “zero 
tolerance <http://www.un.org/en/peacekeeping/issues/cdu.shtml>” for sexual 
exploitation and abuse. One part of the problem is that the UN addresses 
sexualised violence in field missions differently based on whether the 
perpetrators or victims are local aid beneficiaries, international staff, 
street children, soldiers or others. Why? That is discrimination.

In my view, the sloppy approach of international organisations and their 
partners is rooted in a lack of accountability for human rights, including 
gender equality. This is due to the failure of member countries and donors to 
demand concrete results. If the UN was serious about enacting its ownuniversal 
human rights 
<http://www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/UniversalHumanRightsInstruments.aspx>
 in peacekeeping operations, a child’s risk of being raped with impunity would 
be greatly reduced, and aggressors would know that they would face justice.

Male over-representation in political leadership is a serious problem. It 
matters greatly who decides on policies and budgets. They must represent the 
people they serve, or at least be aware of their challenges.

I’m not aware of a single UN manager’s career going down the drain for not 
executing official policy in gender equality

The UN has adopted countless resolutions calling for gender equality globally 
and gender parity among its own leaders and staff. However, the issue is not 
crucial enough for the UN or governments to put sanctions in place when 
implementation is lacking. With gender equality enshrined in its1945 Charter 
<http://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/1945/jun/27/fromthearchive>, the UN 
has, for example, setgender targets 
<http://www.un.org/womenwatch/osagi/fplegbasis.htm> among employees and 
management since 1986.

Back in 1995, the Beijing conference reaffirmed 
<http://www.unwomen.org/~/media/headquarters/attachments/sections/library/publications/2015/representation%20of%20women%20in%20the%20un%20system%201995%20-%202030.pdf>
 (pdf) a target of women holding 50% of managerial and decision-making 
positions by the year 2000. Decades and numerous resolutions later there is no 
gender parity in sight. I’m not aware of a single UN, development bank or other 
international organisation manager’s career going down the drain for not 
executing official policy in this area. Unless member states mandate the UN and 
other entities to hold management accountable, it is doubtful if the share of 
men in UN senior positions will move from70% in 2011 
<http://www.unwomen.org/~/media/headquarters/attachments/sections/library/publications/2015/representation%20of%20women%20in%20the%20un%20system%201995%20-%202030.pdf>
 to 50% by 2030, which is the next target date.

Related: Secret aid worker: sexual harassment and discrimination in the 
industry 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jul/29/secret-aid-worker-sexual-harassment-and-discrimination>

Today at the UN, some 85% of the ambassadors are men 
<http://www.guide2womenleaders.com/UN_Representatives.htm>. They exert major 
influence on what activities the UN should carry out and how much funding their 
country should contribute. Of the world’sdefence ministers 
<http://www.guide2womenleaders.com/Defence_ministers.htm>, 90% are male, while 
men make up 80% offinance ministers 
<http://www.guide2womenleaders.com/finance_ministers2000.htm>. Nigeria’s former 
finance minister, Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala, launched aGender Equality Community of 
Practice for Finance Ministers 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/gender/publication/gender-equality-community-of-practice-for-finance-ministers>
 in 2013 that meets every six months. This group could improve the funding and 
financial accountability for gender equality policies.

This is not just about numbers. Leaders on taxpayers’ money should be selected 
in open and inclusive processes.Project Implicit 
<https://implicit.harvard.edu/implicit/takeatest.html> at Harvard University 
has found that people’s unconscious biases influence whom they trust or hire. 
Targets and quotas for under-represented groups such as indigenous peoples, 
persons living with disabilities and sexual minorities should be set and acted 
on as well. In terms of long-standing international and national goals on 
gender equality and parity, it will be business as usual in the coming years 
unless governments demand that their own policies result in visible change.

Gry Tina Tinde is a senior adviser at a Norwegian development cooperation 
agency. Follow@TinaTinde <https://twitter.com/TinaTinde> on Twitter. 

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
