
As we all contemplate the prospect of Jeremy Corbyn as Britain’s next prime 
minister 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/aug/10/anyone-but-jeremy-corbyn-labour-leader-alastair-campbell>
, it’s worth remembering it is little more than 50 years since Sir Alec 
Douglas-Home emerged as the new Tory party leader and claimed the keys of No 10 
on the basis of a secretive process denounced at the time as “the magic circle”.

 Are there clues as to a new leader’s prospects for success with the wider 
electorate to be found in the way their party goes about choosing between rival 
candidates? Then as now, I think there are. After all, the rules have changed 
greatly, the party franchise expanded – as the grassroots Corbyn insurgency 
dramatically shows.

As it usually is in matters of internal party democracy and accountability, 
Labour <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> was ahead of the Tories in 
1963. It elected its leaders by a series of exhaustive ballots among MPs at 
Westminster, the contender with least votes eliminated until a winning 
candidate emerged with more than 50%.

 The previous winter Harold Wilson had just beaten the volatile George Brown 
and Jim Callaghan (Wilson’s successor in 1976) inthe contest to succeed Hugh 
Gaitskell 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Labour_Party_(UK)_leadership_election,_1963> – 
who had died suddenly – as opposition leader, soon to be PM.

Contrast that with the last gasp of the patrician Tories. Shaken by the 
Profumo scandal and other difficulties, including a prostate operation,Harold 
Macmillan <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/harold-macmillan> bailed out 
just ahead of the October 1963 party conference in Blackpool. Predictable 
mayhem ensued, from which a handful of party grandees advised the Queen to call 
for the foreign secretary, Douglas-Home (a 14th earl at the time) instead of 
the assumed favourite, Rab Butler.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4bcqy%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4bcqy%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe7854dc23362b96e50a7cceb9a3b5b887ae8f79b%2F0_349_2226_1335%2F2226.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20past%20party%20elections%20reveal%20about%20next%20Labour%20leader's%20chances%20of%20success&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4bcqy%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What+past+party+elections+reveal+about+next+Labour+leader%27s+chances+of+success&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4bcqy%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe7854dc23362b96e50a7cceb9a3b5b887ae8f79b%2F0_349_2226_1335%2F2226.jpg>
 Alec Douglas-Home in 1960. Photograph: Derek Berwin/Getty Images 
 The process was denounced by modernisers like Iain Macleod (who coined the 
“magic circle” phrase) and Enoch Powell, who both refused to serve. When 
Douglas-Home narrowly lost to Wilson in 1964, the Tories finally copied Labour 
– as they would again much later over female candidates – by letting MPs pick 
the new man. Abrasive Ted Heath, currently in the news,prevailed over the 
charming-but-idle Reggie Maudling and also-ran Powell 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conservative_Party_(UK)_leadership_election,_1965>
.

 Two years later, Jeremy Thorpe was elected leader of the Liberal party to 
succeed the gallantJo Grimond 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/1993/oct/26/obituaries>. As with Heath, 
Thorpe won 50% of the votes but was left slightly shy of victory under the 
rules, though his rivals conceded.

 Life was about to get more complicated. Labour’s five turbulent years of 
office from 1974 to 1979 came during the global oil crisis and also saw 
domestic unrest – from militant unions, inflation, IRA and coup talk – which 
stimulated growing attacks on the Westminster leadership for betrayal and 
incompetence in the face of harsh choices.

 The mood in the Labour party then was much like it has been since 2010, 
albeit in an age with no social media and – as Patrick Wintour’sexcellent 
analysis shows here 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/aug/09/labour-leadership-jeremy-corbyn-result-partys-democratic-experiment>
 – crucial ballast in the shape of dictatorial union bosses and obliging 
Scottish MPs who helped steady the ship.

 In 1979-80 Jim Callaghan had stayed on as leader a year after his defeat (the 
grownup thing to do) in the hope of helping Denis Healey to the succession. It 
backfired when Labour MPs (some of them about to defect to the breakaway SDP) 
narrowly electedMichael Foot 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Labour_Party_(UK)_leadership_election,_1980> 
instead. Whereas Healey had led by 112 MP votes to 83 in round one, the 
also-ran votes fell to Foot by 139 to 129 in an atmosphere where many MPs were 
eager to appease the unions and the left, thereby avoiding the new mechanism 
known as “mandatory reselection”.

 But the game was up for the parliamentary version of the magic circle. 
Callaghan and Foot had conceded the principle of a wider “electoral college” in 
which the unions would have 40% of the votes (then cast in winner-takes-all 
union blocs), and the parliamentary party (PLP) and activists 30% each.

 All that was denounced as disgraceful and irresponsible at the time, but 
versions of the wider franchise have since extended to all three main 
Westminster parties – even the Tories, who let MPs pick the finalists but party 
members chose between them.

 The case against MP-only ballots was and remains that it is elitist. The case 
against the ever-wider franchise which now allows Tories and Trots to pay £3 
and join Labour’s open primary season is that it is both anti-elitist and 
irresponsible in the deeper meaning of the word. But neither argument is 
watertight.

 In 1981 Tony Benn had used the new electoral college to challenge for 
Healey’s job as Foot’s deputy, albeit against the advice of many leftwing 
colleagues, who saw a left-left ticket (Benn’s disloyalty had alienated Foot) 
as less attractive than a left-right one. He was defeated by less than 1% and 
lost his seat in the Thatcher landslide of 1983.

 That left the road open to Neil Kinnock’s “coronation” 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Labour_Party_%28UK%29_leadership_election,_1983> 
victory in all three selections of the electoral college to succeed Foot, a 
71.27 % share of the ballot. He got almost half the MPs’ vote (14.778% of their 
30% share), with Roy Hattersley, his rival and elected deputy, getting a 
quarter. The pair became the “dream team” which lost to Thatcher (1987) and 
John Major (1992).

 What is conspicuous about Labour leadership contests in the new era is that, 
unlike those confined to the PLP only – let alone Tory elections – they have 
more often than not been foregone conclusions. In 1992 it was clear from the 
start thatJohn Smith would defeat Bryan Gould 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Smith_(Labour_Party_leader)> and he did in 
all three sections, including winning over almost three-quarters of MPs: 90% of 
the college in total.

With Gordon Brown having refused to stand against Smith, Tony Blair faced him 
down <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Labour_Party_(UK)_leadership_election,_1994>
 when Smith dropped dead in 1994 and went on to win both the leadership and 
three general elections. In view of the way Blair is now seen by many 
activists, including those who – as Patrick Wintour says – either left in 2003 
or were too young, it is worth noting that John Prescott and Margaret Beckett, 
both on the left, did better: they got 43% of the college between them, 
including almost half the union votes. Blair got two-thirds of the MPs. The 
ballot was more democratic because the union bloc votes were replaced (Smith’s 
legacy) by “one member one vote” (OMOV) rules.

Related: Jeremy Corbyn: in the new politics only the now matters | Matthew 
d’Ancona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/09/jeremy-corbyn-donald-trump>

 Is it tempting to say that MPs are the better judges of a leader’s potential 
to win elections and govern Britain? Certainly the Tory record points that way. 
In 1975 Thatcherunexpectedly beat 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conservative_Party_(UK)_leadership_election,_1975>
 both Heath and the likely magic circle candidate, Willie Whitelaw, and went on 
to be a dominant vote-winning leader until her own backbenchers – much more 
ruthless than Labour – pushed her out via a leadership challenge in 1990. They 
then picked the emollient John Major over the charismatic but divisive Michael 
Heseltineto lead them to a fourth term 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conservative_Party_(UK)_leadership_election,_1990>
. Major was backed by 185 MPs to Hezza’s 131.

 When the Tories finally lost power after 18 years in 1997 the party did what 
parties often do in the wake of defeat. Backbenchers and activists relish the 
chance to embrace old principles and passions, tempered by the realities of 
office: they pick the candidatethey want, not the one the voters warm to.

 As with loveable bruiser Denis Healey in 1980, so with blokeish Ken Clarke 
now. In 1997 he led the field on the first two ballots butlost by 90 votes to 72
 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conservative_Party_(UK)_leadership_election,_1997>
 when John Redwood’s 38 votes went to rightwinger William (“Save the pound”) 
Hague, in round three. As Hague later warned David Miliband, he was too much of 
a “geek” to win elections. Clarke might have dented Blair’s 170-seat majority 
as Hague failed to do (he gained one net seat in 2001). MPs are not infallible.

 By 2001 the Tories finally embraced a wider electoral system with disastrous 
immediate results. Party members got the final pick, as Julian Glover explains
here <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2001/jul/10/qanda.conservatives>. 
Michael Portillo, the bookies’ favourite, topped the first ballot but managed 
to be eliminated – doomed to linger on as a TV railway buff – leaving Iain 
Duncan Smith and Clarke, who had won the third ballot, to face the party 
voters. Again theyrejected the pro-EU liberal Tory 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conservative_Party_(UK)_leadership_election,_2001>
 in favour of a certified loser. Activists are not infallible either.

 IDS didn’t even make it to polling day, a fate which some predict will befall 
whichever candidate becomes the next Labour leader (if Labour finally gets 
ruthless). When he wasforced out in 2003 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conservative_Party_(UK)_leadership_election,_2003>
, Michael Howard enjoyed a Gordon Brown-style coronation and went on to reduce 
the Blair landslide to 67 seats in 2005 with some help from Iraqi Sunni 
insurgents and a disastrous US-UK occupation.

 Howard stayed on to secure an orderly election (and promote his protege, 
David Cameron). He reviewed the widely criticised rules but decided not to 
change them. This time David Davis entered the race as favourite, a working 
class boy from a tough background, but gotovertaken by the Etonian 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conservative_Party_(UK)_leadership_election,_2005>
 after a smooth conference speech. Clarke was eliminated first and Cameron 
picked up most of his votes to emerge with 90 MPs to Davis’s 57 and a 
significant 42 to the rightwing populist Liam Fox – arguably the nearest Tory 
equivalent to Corbyn in outlook and instinct.

 Cameron won power by beating Gordon Brown, the man whose own “coronation” in 
2007 undermines MPs otherwise better claim to electoral wisdom. When Blair 
finally quit after 10 years as PM, Brown succeeded in winning the nomination of 
no less than 313 Labour MPs of the 355 electedin 2005 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Labour_Party_(UK)_leadership_election,_2007>. 
Many felt sceptical but there was also a sense of inevitability.

No heavyweight challenger could be found, still on their feet and willing to 
face the Brown machine. Leftwinger John McDonnell’s plucky effort did not 
gather enough support to make the contest, as Diane Abbott did in 2010 and
Jeremy Corbyn <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> (“It’s my 
turn,” he joked at the outset) did in 2015.

Matthew D’Ancona offers a smart explanation here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/09/jeremy-corbyn-donald-trump>
 as to why he’s doing better than they did: in the age of social media it’s all 
about NOW.

 As everyone knows “Jez We Can” Corbyn has only modest support among fellow 
MPs and is on the ballot paper because some colleagues thought he would enliven 
the contest. They certainly got that bit right. What the record of a wider 
franchise seems to show is that MPs are better at picking winners, but far from 
infallible.

 After all, the Liberals, who like their modern incarnation the Liberal 
Democrats prided themselves on a fastidious electoral process, picked Thorpe 
when the contest was confined to MPs. He was very lucky not to go to jail for 
conspiracy to murder. In the 2007 Lib Dem leadership election, the activists
narrowly picked Nick Clegg over Chris Huhne 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liberal_Democrats_leadership_election,_2007>. 
One led them into a coalition trap, the other really did go to jail. It’s never 
easy.
