
Teaching can be an enormously rewarding and attractive career, but it’s not 
for everyone. A growing number of teachers are choosing to walk away (the 
numbers of new recruits leaving the profession has tripled in the last six years
 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/mar/31/four-in-10-new-teachers-quit-within-a-year>
) with a large number blamingheavy workloads 
<http://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/jan/27/workload-new-teachers-work-life-balance/>
.


But the decision to quit means turning your back on job security, good pay and 
the students you love. When I talk to teachers, and increasingly headteachers, 
looking for a career change they are often highly capable, but unsure how to 
make the best use of their skills and stay true to their personal values.

There is no need to worry, however, as teachers have very marketable skills 
and experience that stand them in good stead in the job market. In addition to 
their knowledge about student learning and development, they often have great 
communication and presentation skills, high levels of creativity, and lots of 
experience in dealing with difficult situations – emotional, pastoral, 
practical and logistical. There are many education-related jobs outside of the 
classroom which could suit, as well as opportunities in the commercial sector 
where an education background would be an asset.

So if you are thinking about life after teaching, here are a few ideas that 
could be worth investigating as an alternative career.

Related: Why are teachers leaving education? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2013/aug/01/why-are-teachers-leaving-education>

Museum educator

If you have been to a museum (or any other visitor attraction) lately, you 
will have noticed how much effort goes into making your visit an interactive 
and meaningful learning experience. The sector has become increasingly 
sophisticated in how it engages visitors, providing fun activities and lectures 
as well as digital and audio content.

So for ex-teachers interested in creating fun learning environments in unusual 
settings, this could be a great career move. Former teachers bring expertise 
around learning innovation and engaging different audiences. You could help 
with liaising with schools to encourage them to visit and by developing 
teaching resources. Check out organisations like theHistoric Royal Palaces 
<http://www.hrp.org.uk/> for some great examples of how learning is now used in 
visitor attractions.

Education liaison roles

If you still feel passionate about the teaching profession, you might be 
interested in taking a behind-the-scenes role. You could get involved in the 
recruitment and training of new teachers for organisations such asTeach First 
<https://www.teachfirst.org.uk/>, or become a school partnership manager and 
organise teaching placements. How about working in a liaison role between 
schools, higher education and employers, advising on admissions, training 
courses, apprenticeships or vocational training?

Many sector skills councils, such as People 1st <http://www.people1st.co.uk/> 
(in the retail and tourism trades) orCreative Skillset 
<http://www.creativeskillset.org/> (in the creative industries), have these 
types of role. Professional institutes, such as theRoyal College of 
Psychiatrists <http://www.rcpsych.ac.uk/> or British Science Association 
<http://www.britishscienceassociation.org/>, also need these skills. Your 
educational background could be a real asset in helping them encourage new 
entrants into their respective industries and supporting them with their 
training and professional development.

Work for an educational supplier

There are thousands of companies who see schools as their target market. This 
includes educational software companies, those selling curriculum resources, IT 
and furniture suppliers, facilities management, training courses – the list is 
endless. As a teacher you could add valuable insight into their sales process, 
become an account manager, help with their marketing and develop new products 
and services. You will need to show you are commercially savvy and perhaps even 
go on some additional business-related training, but having a teacher on board 
is undoubtedly an advantage for any company trying to win new customers in 
education. The school suppliers trade bodyBesa <http://www.besa.org.uk/> will 
give you an idea of the type of suppliers that could benefit from your 
experience.

Tutoring

If teaching students is still your passion, but working in a school is wearing 
you down, you could consider teaching in a different environment. Private 
tuition or home tutoring, whether it is one-to-one, small groups or even via 
Skype could provide the more individual-centred learning and work-life balance 
that is often difficult to find in a school setting. You could also branch out 
into teaching for adult and community education classes whether it is 
subject-based teaching, access to education or employability courses for young 
people.

You could even set up your own freelance tutoring business or consider an 
educational franchise likeStagecoach <http://www.stagecoach.co.uk/> or Kumon 
maths <http://www.kumon.co.uk/>, where you can manage and run your own 
independent learning school, or direct a tuition centre withExplore Learning 
<http://www.explorelearning.co.uk/>.

Related: Fact or fiction? The reasons teachers choose the job – and quit 
<http://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/oct/23/fact-or-fiction-the-reasons-teachers-choose-the-job-and-quit>

Corporate learning and development

Your understanding of how people learn can also be used to good effect in a 
corporate environment. Learning and development in organisations can include 
everything from in-house induction and training courses, to e-learning, 
coaching and mentoring. You could also work freelance as a trainer delivering 
particular courses (such as those in ICT) or as a member of the in-house team 
(assessing training needs for the organisation or creating learning resources).

The above are a few ideas, not an exhaustive list. Depending on your 
particular skills and expertise there are likely to be many other alternatives.

While you might not always be able to step into one of these roles right away 
– you might need to get some business experience or an additional qualification 
– this shows that if you do decide to leave teaching, your years of experience 
are far from wasted.

And who knows, maybe one day you’ll decide to come back to teaching and then 
you can bring that rich outside experience back into the classroom.

Corinne Mills is managing director of Personal Career Management 
<http://www.personalcareermanagement.com/>. Click here 
<http://www.theguardian.com/guardian-masterclasses/2015/nov/17/new-year-new-you-how-to-make-a-living-doing-something-you-love-career-masterclass>
 for more details of the career masterclasses Corinne will be running for the 
Guardian.

 * This article was amended on Monday 11 January 2016 to clarify that Explore 
Learning is not an educational franchise.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
