
Does the phrase “save the rainforest” conjure up visions of: a) Brazil, b) 
Borneo, or c) north Wales? You may not know it but Britain is home to 70,000 
hectares (173,000 acres) of rainforest, in areas including western Scotland, 
Cumbria, south-west England and, yes, northWales 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales>. And these temperate forests are just as 
precious – and under just as much threat – as their tropical counterparts.


I travelled to Maentwrog, a tiny village in Snowdonia, to visit two 
neighbouring woodlands, Llennyrch andCoed Felinrhyd (also known as Melenrhyd) 
<https://www.woodlandtrust.org.uk/visiting-woods/wood-information/coed-felinrhyd/>
. The woods date back an astonishing 10,000 years to the last ice age. These 
ancient places, found above the Vale of Ffestiniog, are two of Europe’s best 
remaining examples ofAtlantic oak woodland, otherwise known as temperate 
rainforest <http://www.forestry.gov.uk/forestry/uplandoakwood>. They are wet 
and wild: crisscrossed with streams and gullies, bordered by the Ceunant 
Llennyrch gorge, drenched with river spray and more than 200 days of rain a 
year. On the autumn afternoon that I visited, it was unseasonably hot and 
humid, making it feel as though we were stepping into the jungle – I 
half-expected to glimpse a tiger through the ferns.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dpna%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dpna%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F3%2F1446562968045%2F3c6a5126-fa45-4922-8a4e-029aaf6acfb1-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Walking%20in%20a%20Welsh%20rainforest&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dpna%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Walking+in+a+Welsh+rainforest&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dpna%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F3%2F1446562968045%2F3c6a5126-fa45-4922-8a4e-029aaf6acfb1-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Lichen love ... botanist Ray Woods helps Rachel identify rare species. 
Photograph: Gareth Phillips. 
My guides were Kylie Jones Mattock of the Woodland Trust, which owns Coed 
Felinrhyd and iscurrently fundraising to buy Llennyrch 
<https://www.woodlandtrust.org.uk/support-us/support-an-appeal/llennyrch/>, and 
plant expert Ray Woods. We wandered the woodland for hours, stopping to examine 
the trees – enormous gnarled oaks, plus ash, hazel and birch – and the rare 
lichens, mosses and liverworts.The lichen here is particularly amazing 
<http://www.dailypost.co.uk/news/local-news/rare-ice-age-lichen-maentwrog-8611383>
, home to species including “blackberries in custard”, which is not found 
anywhere else in the country. I examined it through Ray’s magnifying glass and 
a secret world was revealed, as brightly coloured and complex as any coral 
reef. We are only beginning to understand the value of such plants – for 
example, it is thought that tree lungwort contains properties that may have 
potential to cure BSE. What we do know is that they are irreplaceable, at least 
for the hundreds of years it takes for them to grow.

As well as the rare plants and fungi (Ray foraged for several kinds of 
mushroom, including one as big as my head) the forest is home to birds 
including wood warblers and redstarts, whose populations are declining 
elsewhere in Europe. There may be no tigers but there are brimstone butterflies 
and the rare lesser horseshoe bat, a tiny bat species, and also otters in the 
turbulent Prysor river at the forest’s edge.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dpna%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dpna%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fedf460774fe108422b75b5ddd09ae3f0ac8a6956%2F0_0_6144_4096%2F6144.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Walking%20in%20a%20Welsh%20rainforest&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dpna%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Walking+in+a+Welsh+rainforest&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dpna%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fedf460774fe108422b75b5ddd09ae3f0ac8a6956%2F0_0_6144_4096%2F6144.jpg>
 It’s well lush ... Rachel walks across a bed of moss. Photograph: Gareth 
Phillips/Gareth Phillips for the Guardian 
There are also waterfalls galore, though too icy for many swimmers by autumn 
(including me; dipping a toe in was enough). The most spectacular is the 20m 
Rhaeadr Ddu, or Black Falls; hundreds visit the falls each year without knowing 
that there is a Celtic rainforest to explore too.

Britain’s native woodland faces multiple threats: invasive species including 
conifer and rhododendron; pollution, particularly acid rain; overgrazing of 
livestock; encroaching development. But there is hope. Since the 1980s, 
environmental organisations have worked to protect these wild places though 
there is still much to be done.

It isn’t an entirely unspoilt idyll. Around Llennyrch, classed as a site of 
special scientific interest (SSSI), huge electricity pylons stretch for miles, 
marring the farmland; a hydroelectric power station is visible from the hills 
above the woods; the Trawsfynydd nuclear power station is nearby – it stopped 
generating in 1991 but won’t be fully decommissioned for several decades. In a 
way, though, these man-made blots on the landscape serve to underline the 
natural beauty of the rainforest and its importance.

So how can we save our rainforests? Visit them (and stick to the paths). 
Volunteer at a conservation day. Go to a fundraising event. Join a campaign. 
Make a donation. That way future generations will have a rainforest in their 
backyard – and not just in Brazil.

Travel and accommodation provided by visitwales.com 
<http://www.visitwales.com/> and oakleyarms.co.uk 
<http://www.brunningandprice.co.uk/oakley/>

woodlandtrust.co.uk 
<http://www.woodlandtrust.org.uk/support-us/support-an-appeal/llennyrch/>
