
Long working hours and commutes can seriously eat into quality garden time for 
us planty types. But if you are often only home in time to see the sun dip over 
the horizon, a few design tricks can not only extend the amount of time you can 
enjoy your plot, but can also make it look its best in twilight.

White and silver plants reflect the last rays, making them visible long after 
others have faded into the gloom

As light levels drop in the evening our perception of colour changes. The hot 
reds and yellows that look so fiery in bright afternoon sun appear flat and 
dull, as our eyes are less able to detect the longwave light that these 
reflect. Our vision switches from using specialised structures at the back of 
our eyes, called cone cells, to a different group called rod cells, which are 
semi-colourblind. Under these conditions blues and greens are far easier to 
detect, explaining why everything looks cooler and fresher in the evening.

Of course you can go one better and opt for whites and silvers, which reflect 
the last rays even better, making them visible long after others have faded 
into the gloom. This may help explain why spring flowers tend to be paler than 
the richer, redder flowers of high summer, with their comparative lack of red 
pigment helping them shine out in lower light. Fortunately, white mutations are 
fairly common in plants, meaning almost every popular garden plant is also 
available in an ivory-flowered form. The wordalba (Latin for “white”) in a 
plant’s scientific name is a dead giveaway.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j2e6%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j2e6%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe51b5feb53f27b83aa1d86e2b05173672bc1d090%2F615_956_2330_3476%2F2330.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gardens%3A%20let%20there%20be%20light&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j2e6%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gardens%3A+let+there+be+light&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j2e6%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe51b5feb53f27b83aa1d86e2b05173672bc1d090%2F615_956_2330_3476%2F2330.jpg>
 Colchicum flowers. Photograph: Getty 
Starting with snowy white narcissi and tulips in spring, you can get a good 
succession throughout the summer with jasmines, lilies, roses and gardenias, 
rounding the season off withacidantheras 
<http://www.rhsplants.co.uk/plants/_/gladiolus-murielae/classid.2000015189/>, 
colchicums 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/92234/Colchicum-speciosum-Album/Details?returnurl=%2Fplants%2Fsearch-results%3Fform-mode%3Dfalse%26query%3Dcolchicum%26aliaspath%3D%252fplants%252fsearch-results>
 and Japanese anemones in autumn.

A curious bonus with many of these plants is that white-flowered species are 
often the most intensely fragrant, because the structures that create their 
aromatic oils replace those responsible for generating pigment in their petals. 
When do many of these emit most fragrance? Sunset.

Variegated plants work a treat to add a cool glow to evening gardens, and 
despite common belief they don’t have to be tacky. I particularly like some of 
the larger-leafed hostas and grasses which provide a lush, understated backdrop 
to the cream-coloured flowers. A flash of silver from the fuzzy leaves of 
astelias or stachys, which have evolved to reflect light, will help add an 
ephemeral texture and shimmer.

Finally, add a light-coloured mulch to paths, or paint walls and decks in a 
fresh pastel. They will act like big reflectors, bouncing even more light in 
and allowing you to eke out every last minute from your garden.

Email James at james.wong@observer.co.uk <mailto:james.wong@observer.co.uk> or 
follow him on Twitter@Botanygeek 
<https://twitter.com/Botanygeek?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
