
Be seen
 Lululemon’s Lucent vest and shorts. 
Running in summer ought to mean visibility isn’t really an issue. But with the 
summer we’re having in these parts, it’s more likely that you’ll develop damp 
than heatstroke. There have also been days so grey it seems the sun has a 
hangover, and it never quite gets light. Proving that visibility does not 
always need to mean neon yellow comes this beautifullimited edition Lululemon 
Lucent range 
<http://www.lululemon.co.uk/products/clothes-accessories/view-all-women-tops/Lucent-Jacket?cc=0001&skuId=uk_3638220>
. The pieces are black, but the thread with which they are embroidered is 
reflective. That means they just look really nice by day, but enhance your 
visibility to passing cars by night. As with all Lululemon gear, the technical 
properties are impressive. I’m a huge fan of the Canadian company, and would 
highly recommend everything from theirspeed socks 
<http://www.lululemon.co.uk/products/clothes-accessories/view-all-women-accessories/High-Speed-Sock?cc=0024&skuId=uk_3654606>
 to theStuff Your Bras 
<http://www.lululemon.co.uk/products/clothes-accessories/women-sports-bras-medium-support/Stuff-Your-Bra-II?cc=0002&skuId=uk_3675837>
. It’s amazing what you can fit in those clever pockets. Watch out for their 
sales online and in store.

Runderwear
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t5v5%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t5v5%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff14aa79e432d0fc3b6aee6a4ab1e23086ab9f38b%2F0_0_2681_1935%2F2681.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kit%20stop%3A%20running-kit%20reviews%20and%20your%20questions%20answered&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t5v5%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kit+stop%3A+running-kit+reviews+and+your+questions+answered&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t5v5%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff14aa79e432d0fc3b6aee6a4ab1e23086ab9f38b%2F0_0_2681_1935%2F2681.jpg>
 Runderwear low-rise hipsters. Photograph: PR 
Anyone who hasn’t felt the need for running-specific underwear should take a 
look at running forums and articles galore. “You wouldn’t wear a regular bra 
during a speed workout, so why skimp on your bottoms?” asksWomens Running 
<http://womensrunning.competitor.com/2014/04/shoes-gear/our-favorite-specialty-runderwear_24037#bdFY08FZit6k85kD.99>
. Um, well, because … anatomy? I can see the point of the men’s design, so to 
speak, but women’s pants are just, well pants, right? Apparently not. The 
dreaded Chafe (an issue so irritating it deserves a capital) crops up time and 
time again, with plaintive online pleas for a solution. Shorts are often the 
culprit – particularly those with ill-fitting or just plain unlucky lining – 
but pants, too, must apparently bear their share of the blame. Multiply an 
irritation such as this over the course of a long run, and you’ve got, well, 
miles and miles of misery. So Runderwear were designed to be chafe-free, 
comfortable and sweat-wicking. And they certainly are all of those things – 
even if, as one reviewer on Wiggle put it: “I’ll never race without them … They 
look like Bridget Jones’ knickers though!”

At £16 a pair, they certainly don’t come cheap, but if chafing is a serious 
issue for you than that’s probably £16 you would happily spend, right? They are 
super comfy, sweat wicking and come in all black, sky blue and pink. The 
company also makes mens pants, of course, as well as crop tops for women.

Stay cool

 Adidas Adizero singlet. 
Despite the rubbish weather, summer means vests, particularly when it comes to 
races or speed work. Every summer I search for the lightest weight vests I can 
find, because so many of them seem just too heavy and too tight. Looser fitting 
to me usually feels lighter and cooler. My ideal running vest would be similar 
to the type that elite men tend to wear –if it’s good enough for Mo 
<http://www.athleticsweekly.com/featured/mo-farah-to-compete-at-birmingham-diamond-league-38867/>
 … But as Project Oregon/Nike have inexplicably failed to send me Mo’s 
cast-offs, the best I’ve found so far are theNew Balance range of Ice tanks 
<http://www.newbalance.co.uk/women/apparel/short-sleeve-and-tank-tops/> (good 
price, at around £20) and thenew super light Adidas Adizero singlet 
<http://www.runnersneed.com/pws/UniqueProductKey.ice?ProductID=radi0574ww&channel_code=1746&s2m_product_id=181301_117&gclid=CP_Kg87Hts0CFbYK0wod-wUPng&gclsrc=aw.ds>
, though that has a cropped design that might not appeal to all.

Skorts
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t5v5%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t5v5%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F142df59df8e42ff69d86a5c54489b57740e6aec6%2F119_71_644_386%2F644.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kit%20stop%3A%20running-kit%20reviews%20and%20your%20questions%20answered&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t5v5%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kit+stop%3A+running-kit+reviews+and+your+questions+answered&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t5v5%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F142df59df8e42ff69d86a5c54489b57740e6aec6%2F119_71_644_386%2F644.jpg>
 Howies summer running skort, £35. 
I used to raise a sceptical eyebrow in the direction of skorts. Why make 
running kit more girly, I thought? I’ve long changed my mind on this – some of 
the most hardcore female runners I know wear them, not to mention many of the 
top ultrarunners. Thislightweight Merino skort from Howies 
<http://www.howies.co.uk/womens/womens-clothing/run/run-skort-w.html?colour=26> 
(£35) is particularly good – the cut is quite close to the legs, rather than 
flared out (though if you prefer the latter, I again point you in thedirection 
of Lululemon 
<http://www.lululemon.co.uk/products/clothes-accessories/view-all-women-bottoms/Pace-Rival-Skirt-II-Regular-Four-Way-Stretch?cc=0001&skuId=uk_3596981>
) but it moves with you when you run. As you’d expect from merino, it’s 
brilliant at moisture wicking – it looked a hell of a lot better when I got 
caught in one of the recent thunderstorms than the rest of me did … Thesimple 
matching black merino vest 
<http://www.howies.co.uk/womens/womens-clothing/run/run-vest-m.html?colour=26> 
is also a superb buy.

Kit questions?

Reviewing running gear can be hit and miss – one person’s trainer heaven can 
be another’s blister-inducing nightmare. But if you have any kit questions 
you’d like answered,email me <mailto:kate.carter@guardian.co.uk>, and I’ll do 
my best to track down the perfect item for you.
