
I work front of house in a London museum. My colleagues and I are the face of 
the organisation. We provide a warm welcome to members of the public, assist 
them with their visit, address their enquiries and bring the exhibitions to 
life by sharing our knowledge and enthusiasm. Without us the place could not be 
open. Yet, my job is undervalued, endangered even.

I wish we could tell visitors we are trying our best to do a good job but 
simply haven’t been given the means to do so

Front-of-house teams have greatly suffered from budget cuts in the museum 
sector. Jobs have been replaced with volunteers or agency staff who are more 
“affordable”. When I started working in this field six years ago, only small 
museums were entirely reliant on volunteers to help visitors. Now even the big 
national museums are bringing in volunteers to staff shops, invigilate 
galleries, lead education workshops and deliver guided tours. Theprivatisation 
of visitor services teams at the National Gallery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/oct/02/national-gallery-privatisation-strike-ends-union-pcs-visitor-security-services>
 last year shows just what is happening in the sector at the moment. I’ve no 
hard feelings towards the volunteers and casual staff – they are usually highly 
qualified young graduates desperately trying to find their way into employment. 
I have been there.

I have been in my current position for more than two years and I am lucky to 
be on a permanent contract. But I have witnessed changes over the years. When I 
started, everyone in my team was a permanent member of staff; today, half of 
them are casual staff on zero-hours contracts sent to us from agencies. We used 
to call external staff as an extraordinary measure, when we were unexpectedly 
busy, or short on staff. Now it’s just the way things are.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jj5q%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jj5q%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec80a803389015767bb1265c74a9a4fedf66aa9d%2F0_268_4256_2555%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I'm%20worried%20this%20government%20will%20extinguish%20the%20passion%20of%20museum%20staff&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jj5q%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%27m+worried+this+government+will+extinguish+the+passion+of+museum+staff&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jj5q%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec80a803389015767bb1265c74a9a4fedf66aa9d%2F0_268_4256_2555%2F4256.jpg>
 A strike outside the National Gallery last year was not enough to prevent 
privatisation of its visitor services. Photograph: Matthew Chattle/REX 
Shutterstock 
Again, agency staff are usually qualified and motivated professionals who are 
ready to work all sorts of crazy shifts to make a living and would kill for my 
£20,000 entry-level job. I have been there too. And for this reason I find 
working with casual staff uncomfortable: it creates a hierarchy within the 
team. They are called in to cover the most unsocial hours, left to stand around 
in galleries for hours, and have none of the benefits of being employed by the 
museum, such as training opportunities and healthcare.

Agency staff will often cover busy shifts, such as the opening or closing day 
of an exhibition, where they face thousands of visitors and are unable to 
answer questions or take initiative because it is their first shift. This 
reflects badly on everyone. We have received complaints saying our customer 
service is not good enough. I wish we could tell visitors we are trying our 
best to do a good job but simply haven’t been given the means to do so.

The entire hierarchy is a fraud. I am overqualified for my job and so are the 
people above me

Sadly, this is not the only challenge faced by front-of-house staff. Once you 
have been through some time (easily a year) of volunteering, temping and so on, 
and managed to secure a satisfying (though underpaid) job, you will realise 
that it is a professional dead-end. All my colleagues and I have master’s 
degrees in relevant topics, like art history, or museum studies. Some even have 
PhDs. Yet, there is a stigma around our role and we are often considered as 
only being capable of pointing to the toilets.

There is so much more to my job. Outstanding customer service, communication 
skills, problem solving, public engagement, research, content development, the 
list could go on. However, evolving into a higher position in roles as varied 
as education, communication, events and curatorial is very difficult. I lack 
“more directly relevant experience” as stated in many of the rejection letters 
I have received.

The truth is that museums are increasingly dependent on the income generated 
by the exhibitions, lectures and workshops they offer. So in order to ensure 
success and attendance they prefer to hire externally someone with years of 
experience rather than train internally a qualified young professional.

The entire hierarchy is a fraud. I am overqualified for my job and so are the 
people above me. At the same time thousands of young people come out of 
university every year with fancy qualifications in cultural studies, curating, 
visual arts and the like, which will only allow them to join the long queue to 
employment that starts with volunteering.

Related: Volunteering kept me going but now austerity has killed my museum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/mar/26/volunteers-museums-job-cuts-community>

So why do I do it to myself? Would it not be easier to switch to a career with 
more opportunities? Maybe. I used to spend hours on the National Career Service 
website looking at how I could “recycle” my career into something else. Could I 
be a teacher? Then, after I’d exhausted myself contemplating all the options, 
I’d realise I will never do anything else. I just don’t want to.

Like most people working in the cultural sector I am absolutely passionate 
about museum collections.Museums <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/museums> 
teach us about our past, they have the power to inspire us. But for years the 
government has been making it harder and harder for young professionals to 
start a career in the field. I’m afraid one day this might end up in 
extinguishing that passion.

This series 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/series/public-servant-my-letter-to-the-public>
 aims to give a voice to the staff behind the public services that are hit by 
mounting cuts and rising demand, and so often denigrated by the press, 
politicians and public. If you would like to write an article for the series, 
contacttamsin.rutter@theguardian.com <mailto:tamsin.rutter@theguardian.com>.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
