
Will ministers really stand by their wish to deny parents the legal right to 
be consulted in cases of their child’s struggling school becoming an academy?

The question seems likely to arise early in the New Year, as Labour and Lib 
Dem peers have tabled an amendment for debate in the House of Lords tomorrow 
that would write consultation with parents, staff, governors and local 
authorities on to the education and adoption bill.

If this passes, as seems likely, the government would then face the 
politically tricky task of taking this legal right out of the bill again when 
the legislation returns to the Commons next month.

Ministers have said throughout the bill’s passage that they want to remove 
consultation in cases of failing schools, insisting that this would delay 
improvement.

Meanwhile, the extent to which ministers are on the back foot on the issue 
seems to have been underlined by anotheramendment 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/bills/lbill/2015-2016/0064/amend/su064-R-I-c.htm>
, put forward by the government. This would force potential sponsors to provide 
information to parents about improvement plans. Lord Nash, the academies 
minister, seems to want to avoid a fight over this legislation, and we wonder 
how much the law will change before royal assent.

Academies offered free school ‘surgeries’ 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f2t5%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f2t5%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff571187c53ec2a199f1923c2d82ca484d109ab72%2F0_0_3004_1803%2F3004.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20the%20Lords%20save%20parent%20consultations%20over%20academies%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f2t5%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can+the+Lords+save+parent+consultations+over+academies%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f2t5%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff571187c53ec2a199f1923c2d82ca484d109ab72%2F0_0_3004_1803%2F3004.jpg>
 Regional schools commissioner Dr Tim Coulson has offered to give academy 
chains advice on opening free schools. Photograph: Denise Bradley/Archant 2014 
How desperate is the government to meet its target of 500 new free schools 
during this parliament?

We wonder, after seeing an invitation 
<https://www.dropbox.com/s/6dqr4w6ycpvypd0/freeschooleventjan16invitation.docx?dl=0>
 from one of England’s regional schools commissioners, Tim Coulson, to academy 
chains asking them to discuss with him how many free schools they might like to 
open.

It sees Coulson inviting school leaders in his East of England region for a 
“free schools event”. The gathering, in Cambridge, promises to offer academy 
chains “one-to-one half-hour ‘surgery’ sessions with the regional schools 
commissioner”.

“These sessions are limited to existing sponsors or multi-academy trusts who 
want to set up a free school. You will be able to talk about how many free 
schools you feel your trust can open in the coming years based on your 
available time and expertise,” says the invitation. “I will then be a position 
to assess your capacity and capability and could choose to confirm a number of 
schools to you in writing.”

Free schools were originally supposed to be parent-led, but there seems little 
sign of that in this initiative. Last month, it wasreported 
<http://schoolsweek.co.uk/sixty-free-schools-coming-to-an-area-near-you/> that 
England’s eight RSCs had been set targets of granting 60 free schools each this 
parliament.

One school leader wonders if this will be a late Christmas present to some 
ambitious academy chains, with Coulson playing Santa. “It looks like this is 
part of what is a huge commercialisation of education, with essentially one 
party privately handing over a set of booty to another,” our source sighed. The 
Department for Education, which employs Coulson, did not respond to a request 
for comment.

Green belt body and DfE on collision course 


The DfE appears to be on collision course with the Campaign to Protect Rural 
England over numerous development plans for free schools across London, we have 
learned.

The CPRE’s London office has published a document 
<http://www.cprelondon.org.uk/resources/item/2300-a-done-deal-how-new-schools-are-being-built-on-green-belt-and-metropolitan-open-land-in-greater-london>
 warning the DfE’s Education Funding Agency, which funds and oversees academies 
and free schools, “is involved with identifying and acquiring green belt and 
[protected urban] metropolitan open land sites” outside of the usual local 
authority planning process.

Yet the government supposedly supports such a planning system, the CPRE says. 
Its document highlights 23 cases in the capital of schools being earmarked for 
protected green spaces.

CPRE London is also challenging Hounslow council’s approval this month of 
plans to build Nishkam free school on metropolitan open land in Osterley, west 
London. We reportedlast month 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/nov/10/tory-donor-misuse-funds-free-school-warwick-mansell>
 how the government had paid £11.75m for the site before planning permission 
was granted.

The CPRE says if the EFA buys up sites in advance of approval this is 
“prejudicial” to the planning process. It is urging the London mayor, Boris 
Johnson, to overturn Hounslow’s decision.

Steve Curran, leader of Hounslow council, says the need for school places and 
the lack of available alternatives means the site has to be built on. The DfE 
did not respond to a request for comment.

Executive head’s pay up by 48% – to £221,600 


Is this the highest pay rise for anyone leading an academy chain in 2013-14? 
Sir John Townsley, executive principal of the seven-school Gorse academies 
trust, based in Leeds, saw his remuneration rise 48%, from £150,000 in 2012-13 
to £221,600 the following year, plus a £22,785 pension contribution.

With classroom teacher increases pegged at 1%, the rewards heading chief 
executives’ way continue to make interesting reading. The chain could not be 
reached for comment.

Keep on eye out for exam ethics code 


Finally, we are interested in what has happened to a union’s exploration of 
the possibility of devising an ethical code for teachers governing the way they 
administer exams and coursework.

In March, the exams regulator Ofqual held a seminar 
<http://www.slideshare.net/ofqual/ofqual-ethicssymposiummichellemeadows> in 
which teachers’ reservations about some of the things they are asked to do in 
the pursuit of better results for their schools – from telling pupils what to 
write for coursework to opening exam papers early – were discussed.

Ofqual said 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/teacher-ethics-in-assessment-symposium> at 
the time that the Association of School and College Leaders was investigating 
the introduction of an “assessment ethics framework” to set out what was 
acceptable and what was not. But things seem to have gone quiet since then.

Brian Lightman, ASCL general secretary, tells us, though, that it is still a 
priority and a publication on the issue could be out by spring. File under “one 
to keep an eye on”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f2t5%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f2t5%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f799606613c410a0a47e1b011162c0f21ccec04%2F0_0_2359_1415%2F2359.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20the%20Lords%20save%20parent%20consultations%20over%20academies%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f2t5%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can+the+Lords+save+parent+consultations+over+academies%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f2t5%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f799606613c410a0a47e1b011162c0f21ccec04%2F0_0_2359_1415%2F2359.jpg>
 The proposesd Nishkam School in west London. Photograph: Nishkam West London 