
Two different protests, two different countries, but the same continent and 
the same cause: violence against women in “macho” Latin America.


Demonstrators in Brazil and Argentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/argentina> will join rallies on Friday that 
highlight both the persistence of gender violence and a growing campaign to 
stop it.

Coincidental rather than coordinated, the protests have been sparked by 
separate outrages: thealleged gang rape of a 16-year-old in Rio de Janeiro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/27/gang-rape-brazil-twitter-shock> 
last week and themurder of a pregnant 14-year-old girl 
<http://in.reuters.com/article/argentina-womensrights-femicide-idINKBN0O61UK20150521>
 in Argentina’s Santa Fe province last year.

These and other high-profile cases have helped to stir a debate about 
femicide, rape, domestic violence and other forms of abuse in a region where 
such maltreatment has long been swept under the carpet.

While gender violence occurs worldwide, the problem has come to the fore in 
several countries in Latin America through the work of prominent feminist 
groups, many of which argue their region is particularly plagued by social 
insecurity and male-dominated traditions.

In the past 12 months, there have been protests in Mexico 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/world/2016/04/25/state-violence-against-women-mexico/83488114/>
,Bolivia 
<http://america.aljazeera.com/articles/2015/4/30/bolivia-struggles-with-gender-based-violence.html>
,Colombia 
<http://colombiareports.com/colombias-women-protest-against-gender-based-violence/>
, Argentina and Brazil.

Related: Gang-rape images posted on Twitter shock Brazil as investigation 
continues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/27/gang-rape-brazil-twitter-shock> 

Rio has had two in the past week, with another scheduled on Friday. The 
rallies were prompted by the alleged rape of a girl by more than 30 men, at 
least two of whom postedimages of the assault and its aftermath on social 
networks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/27/gang-rape-brazil-twitter-shock>.

The case has dominated headlines and divided opinion. Hundreds of people 
“liked” the video of the semi-conscious victim before it was removed from 
Twitter. Many commentators insinuated the girl was to blame because of her 
clothing, because she has used drugs, because she had a child at the age of 14, 
and because her boyfriend is reportedly a gang member who lives in a favela.

The girl’s family say she was gang-raped as a punishment because her boyfriend 
suspected she had cheated on him. With her life now threatened by the gang in 
the Morro do Barão, Jacarepaguá, she has had to flee to another neighbourhood 
and is attempting to change her identity.

In an interview with local media, she said the policeman who initially heard 
her testimonywas hostile and critical 
<http://g1.globo.com/rio-de-janeiro/noticia/2016/05/o-proprio-delegado-me-culpou-diz-menor-que-sofreu-estupro-no-rio.html>
. Otherofficers posted mocking comments 
<http://ponte.org/adolescente-estuprada-exposta/> and pictures on their 
Facebook and Instagram pages.

But amid a growing outcry at her treatment, the authorities have promised 
action. A female officer, Cristiana Bento, has been put in charge of the 
investigation and gone on record to state the video alone proved there was a 
rape. Several of the alleged perpetrators have been arrested.

Extra, the newspaper that first broke the news, has published a letter to its 
readers to explain why the case should be considered a rape. Michel Temer, the 
acting president, has condemned the attack and said he will establish a special 
task force in the federal police to handle cases of violence against women.

Campaigners say the case has raised awareness and shown that women need not be 
silent in the face of physical and psychological abuse.

Studies suggest between 7.5% and 10% of Brazilian women report cases of sexual 
violence. Patrícia Nogueira, coordinator of theBrazilian Forum of Public 
Security <http://www.forumseguranca.org.br/>, said there has been little change 
in the number of cases of sexual violence, but there is much more awareness of 
the crime than in the past.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k8bc%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k8bc%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09aa7071bc297ee30b578717869181cf546f3fe9%2F0_187_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brazil%20and%20Argentina%20unite%20in%20protest%20against%20culture%20of%20sexual%20violence&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k8bc%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brazil+and+Argentina+unite+in+protest+against+culture+of+sexual+violence&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k8bc%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09aa7071bc297ee30b578717869181cf546f3fe9%2F0_187_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 A protester in Sao Paulo stands before a police barricade with a sign reading: 
‘Rape never more’. The demonstration followed the gang-rape of a 16-year-old 
girl in Rio. Photograph: Andre Penner/AP 
“What we see is that people are mobilising around this theme. People are 
discussing it and I think this is a positive point,” she said. “These cases 
reveal thoughts and a part of our culture that has been around for a long time 
and wasn’t being made explicit. There is a cultural aspect that is similar in 
other Latin American countries. We live under a similar matrix that is 
patriarchal and machista.”

Andrea Machado, who organised a protest on Wednesday in the centre of Rio, 
said the online abuse of the girl “shows how deep-rooted machismo is in our 
society”.

“I think we have two options: we can either fear or fight. And I’m happy to 
see that the great majority chose to fight,” she said. “Women are starting to 
discover that we’re not alone, so have more courage to report, to say ‘Enough’, 
to ask for help. But it’s still just a start.”

She said more women are now asking for assistance as a result of online 
forums, greater information and the growth of support groups and helplines. But 
there are still an alarming number of women who suffer in silence.

The issue is complicated by inequality and race. Lizandra Córdova Vieira, who 
is organising Friday’s protest in Nova Iguaçu, said the problem of sexual 
violence in poor communities was hugely under-reported, partly because of the 
generally high levels of crime. She said a friend committed suicide last week 
because she could no longer bear the abuse she was suffering. In January, the 
mother of another acquaintance was killed by her ex-husband while she was 
having her nails done at a beauty salon.

“We always find out about these case through social media. They are never 
published,” she said. “The objective of our protest is to give more visibility 
to what is happening here, so that we stop being silenced and ignored.Women 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> on the periphery die all the 
time and no one cares.”

Brazil has the fifth highest rate of femicide in the world, according to a 
recent study 
<http://www.mapadaviolencia.org.br/pdf2015/MapaViolencia_2015_mulheres.pdf> 
that found seven of the worst nations are in Latin America. Insight Crime 
attributes this togenerally high levels of violence in the region <http:// 
http://www.insightcrime.org/news-analysis/why-does-latin-america-have-the-world-s-highest-female-murder-rates>
, as well as organised crime, human trafficking and domestic abuse. “Women 
seldom occupy higher positions in a [criminal] organisation, and are rather 
used for menial, butoften dangerous tasks 
<http://www.insightcrime.org/news-analysis/centam-street-gangs-reject-rely-on-women-study>
,” it notes.

Another factor is that justice systems often fail to penalise men who kill 
women. Societies – both at a national and neighbourhood level – are reluctant 
to intervene in cases of domestic abuse.

‘Not one less’

This is one of the reasons for Friday’s demonstration in Argentina, which will 
be the second mass protest against gender violence,following rallies in several 
cities last year 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jun/08/argentina-murder-women-gender-violence-protest>
.

According to the supreme court’s domestic violence office, 286 women were 
murdered in Argentina as a result of gender violence in 2015. The attacker was 
the woman’s ex-partner in 49% of cases and current partner in 30%.

Almost as alarmingly, of the 57,000 reports of domestic violence received by 
the office in the past six years, only 22 came from neighbours. “It’s a social 
mandate, people don’t get involved,” says Genoveva Cardinali, a Buenos Aires 
prosecutor specialising in gender violence.

The initial demonstration by hundreds of thousands of women on 3 June last 
year was led by nine female journalists who demanded government action and 
greater public awareness of the endemic problem.

“My job included rushing to interview the families of victims of gender 
violence,” says one of them, Marcela Ojeda.

The murder of a 14-year-old pregnant schoolgirl, Chiara Paez, who was found 
buried in her boyfriend’s garden three days after being reported missing in the 
town of Rufino in central Santa Fe province, shocked Ojeda to the core.


“They’re killing us,” she tweeted last year, a cry of despair that women 
across Argentina immediately understood. Ojeda’s tweet spread like wildfire, 
accompanied by the hashtag #niunamenos (“not one less”), meaning no more 
women’s lives lost to gender violence.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k8bc%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k8bc%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82bff3eb887b10d8a0fa101c98ec916cc1f122fc%2F75_0_3351_2010%2F3351.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brazil%20and%20Argentina%20unite%20in%20protest%20against%20culture%20of%20sexual%20violence&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k8bc%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brazil+and+Argentina+unite+in+protest+against+culture+of+sexual+violence&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k8bc%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82bff3eb887b10d8a0fa101c98ec916cc1f122fc%2F75_0_3351_2010%2F3351.jpg>
 A woman wearing a mask with the slogan ‘Not one less’ embraces a fellow 
demonstrator during a protest against femicide in Buenos Aires. Photograph: 
Marcos Brindicci/Reuters 
A year on, there is still a long way to go in terms of government action and 
public awareness.

“There’s been no drop-off in the number of cases,” says Ojeda, “and the 
government has still to respond to most of our demands.”

Among those marching will be Jorge Taddei and Beatriz Regal, whose daughter, 
Wanda, was among the most high-profile victims.

Her husband was Eduardo Vázquez, the drummer of Callejeros, one of the most 
famous rock acts in Argentina. The marriage was far from idyllic. Vázquez 
physically abused his wife on repeated occasions. Finally, in the middle of a 
heated discussion, Vázquez threw alcohol at Taddei, grabbed a lighter and set 
her on fire. Taddei died from the burns caused by his attack 11 days later, 
unable to relate what had happened to her.

It’s only going to change when the paradigm of this macho, patriarchal society 
shifts
Jorge Taddei 
It was hoped that Taddei’s horrific death, in the early hours of 10 February 
2010, would be a turning point. Gender violence remained an open secret until 
the judges in the Taddei case reduced Vázquez’s sentence, ruling that his crime 
had been committed in a fit of passion. Although a higher court latersentenced 
Vázquez 
<http://www.buenosairesherald.com/article/103553/taddei-case-eduardo-v%C3%A1zquez-sentenced-to-18-years-in-prison>
 to life imprisonment, the public outcry was so loud that Congress changed the 
law to exclude “violent emotion” as an attenuating circumstance in crimes 
against women.

But the public clamour and the changing of the law had no immediate effect on 
the number of gender crimes. On the contrary: in the three years after Taddei’s 
death, 132 women were set on fire by men, half of them dying as a result of the 
attacks, in what came to be known as the “Wanda Taddei” effect. In the two 
years before Taddei’s death, there had been only nine reported cases.

Those marching on Friday are well aware that progress in Argentina’s 
macho-dominated society is glacially slow. “Nothing changed since last year,” 
Taddei’s father said inan interview 
<http://www.lanacion.com.ar/1904770-niunamenos-el-conmovedor-testimonio-de-los-padres-de-wanda-taddei?utm_campaign=Echobox&utm_medium=Echobox&utm_source=Twitter#link_time=1464825122>
 published by the Buenos Aires daily La Nación this week. “And it’s not going 
to change in one year, or two, or 10 or 20. It’s only going to change when the 
paradigm of this macho, patriarchal society shifts.”

Meanwhile, Ojeda and her group of female journalists are launching a survey of 
gender violence in Argentina <http://niunamenos.com.ar/> to coincide with 
Friday’s march.

“It will be an anonymous, web-based survey, where women will be able to answer 
multiple-choice questions regarding not only physical violence, but also 
psychological violence, discrimination and the quality of natal care at public 
hospitals, which is an enormous problem that poorer women face in the provinces 
of ‘deep Argentina’, where pregnant women are often treated like cattle,” says 
Ojeda. “We need this survey because killings are just the last step in a long 
crescendo that includes discrimination and psychological abuse.”



• Additional reporting by Shanna Hanbury
