
According to the knitting activist Betsy Greer <http://craftivism.com/>, most 
people who knit have a realisation that leads them to it – a kind of woolly 
“Aha” moment. For some, it’s about learning at their grandmother’s knee, but 
for an increasing number of us it’s an experience in our 20s or 30s (or beyond) 
when a friend teaches us how to wield a pair of needles and we suddenly 
realise, “Hey, this is quite easy. And relaxing. And I get a scarf out of it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ck42%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ck42%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F6%2F1444140509307%2Fdf5bf017-e179-410c-a97d-deb6244a8e45-1416x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20wool%20got%20cool&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ck42%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+wool+got+cool&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ck42%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F6%2F1444140509307%2Fdf5bf017-e179-410c-a97d-deb6244a8e45-1416x2040.jpeg>
 The 99% ... a knitted mouse protestor by Deadly Knitshade AKA Lauren 
O’Farrell. Photograph: Lauren O'Farrell 
My “Aha” moment was a nasty bout of flu that left me bedbound for weeks. My 
eyes couldn’t cope with box sets or books, so in desperation I taught myself 
how to arm knit a throw. (Arm knitting, in case you’re wondering, is literally 
using your arms to knit, as if your limbs are the needles.) In an afternoon, 
I’d made a lumpy but satisfyingly chunky blanket, and I was hooked.

More and more people – young and old – are getting involved, joining knitting 
groups (try theYarn Cake in Glasgow 
<http://www.theyarncake.co.uk/The%20Yarn%20Cake/>, Wild and Woolly in Hackney, 
London <http://www.wildandwoollyshop.co.uk/>, or Close Knit in Manchester 
<https://closeknitmanchester.wordpress.com/about/>), sharing beautiful patterns 
on knitting siteravelry.com <http://www.ravelry.com/tour/getting-started> and 
knitting everything you can think of, frompot plants 
<https://www.etsy.com/listing/73834413/knit-your-own-cyclops-pot-plant-pdf> to 
stationery 
<https://blog.etsy.com/en/2010/how-tuesday-petite-pencil-from-mochimochi-land/>.

Even actor Ryan Gosling is passionate on the theme – he told one interviewer 
he learned from “old ladies” while filming Lars and the Real Girl. “If I had to 
design my perfect day, that would be it,” he said. “And you get something out 
of it at the end. You get a nice present. For someone who wants an oddly 
shaped, off-putting scarf.”

If you want to go beyond an oddly shaped scarf, here’s some inspiration.

Protest tapestry

Chances are you’ve seen an example of “yarn bombing” or guerrilla knitting 
over the past few years, whether it’sKnit the City’s <http://knitthecity.com/> 
“phonebox cosy” in Parliament Square orWool Against Weapons’ 
<http://www.woolagainstweapons.co.uk/> seven-mile-long pink scarf, which 
activists draped between the bomb factories at Aldermaston and Burghfield last 
year.

“Craft is great for slow, gentle activism,” says Sarah Corbett, founder of the 
Craftivist Collective <https://craftivist-collective.com> in the UK. One of her 
most recent projects involved embroidering handkerchiefs to present to Marks & 
Spencer’s board members at their AGM in July to protest about the firm not 
paying a living wage to staff (shortly after the protest, M&S announced a new 
policy).

“People were really moved by it and we got to have long conversations with 
different members of the board, which I don’t think we would have done 
otherwise,” she says.

Give it a go: Sarah Corbett is running Craftivist workshops from her Brick 
Lane, London, base from 23 September.craftivist-collective.com 
<http://craftivist-collective.com/>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ck42%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ck42%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F6%2F1444140824876%2F9143ca25-96e6-43de-b3fb-15fa47f0a2eb-2060x1769.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20wool%20got%20cool&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ck42%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+wool+got+cool&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ck42%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F6%2F1444140824876%2F9143ca25-96e6-43de-b3fb-15fa47f0a2eb-2060x1769.jpeg>
 Snappy ... a knitted croc by Sincerely Louise Photograph: Graeme Robertson 
Faux taxidermy

Louise Walker learned to knit when she was studying photography at university. 
“I wanted to do an anti-hunting campaign for an editorial project I was working 
on and thought I’d use knitting to create props, so I made a bear skin rug, 
antlers and a fox scarf,” she says.

Before she knew it, she had her own online shop as well as commissions from 
the likes of clothing retailer Boden. Herfirst book 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Faux-Taxidermy-Knits-knitting-patterns/dp/1446304531> 
of “wild knitting” patterns was published last year.

Walker’s designs are fun, but for some awe-inspiring designs, check out the 
“pelt textiles” of Australian artist Ruth Marshall.

Marshall uses traditional knitting techniques to recreate the stretched out 
skins of endangered species.

One of her works, Tasmanian Tiger #3 
<http://blogs.rmg.co.uk/collections/2015/06/01/strange-creatures-the-art-of-unknown-animals-at-the-grant-museum/>
, has just featured in the Strange Creatures exhibition at the Grant Museum of 
Zoology in London.

Give it a go: buy Louise Walker’s patterns from her Etsy shop 
<https://www.etsy.com/uk/people/SincerelyLouise>.

ruthmarshall.blogspot.co.uk <http://ruthmarshall.blogspot.co.uk/>

etsy.com/uk/shop/sincerelylouise <https://www.etsy.com/uk/shop/sincerelylouise>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ck42%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ck42%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F6%2F1444140915170%2F2f4dfe6b-aeec-4293-8f23-d9dcef11103d-2060x1520.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20wool%20got%20cool&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ck42%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+wool+got+cool&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ck42%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F6%2F1444140915170%2F2f4dfe6b-aeec-4293-8f23-d9dcef11103d-2060x1520.jpeg>
 A mouldy but a goody ... brooch by Elin Thomas. Photograph: Graeme Robertson 
Science knitting

What could be less cutesy than knitted frog entrails 
<https://www.etsy.com/shop/aKNITomy>? Science knitting, it turns out, is one of 
the fastest growing trends in knitting and crochet – try a quick search on 
Pinterest and you’ll find patterns for woolly vivisections, knitted hearts (the 
kind with four chambers and aortic valves), crocheted neurons and anatomically 
correct embroidered versions of the human spine. The Biotechnology and 
Biosciences Research Council (BBSRC) even ran aGreat British Bioscience 
Knitting competition 
<http://www.bbsrc.ac.uk/engagement/exhibitions/gb-bioscience-festival/> last 
year.

Some of the things knitted are cuddly but some, such as Bristol-based artist 
Elin Thomas’s crocheted mould and lichen, 
<http://www.elinthomas.com/section371257.html>are delicate and beautiful. 
Thomas was inspired by a touring exhibition of a crocheted coral reef by twin 
sisters Margaret and Christine Wertheim. “I don’t think there’s a lot of 
crocheted mould in the world, so my work tends to be quite popular with 
scientists buying gifts for their colleagues,” she says.

Give it a go: you can download free patterns for cuddly cholera bacterium, 
swine flu or salmonella typhi from bbsrc.ac.uk 
<http://www.bbsrc.ac.uk/documents/knit-a-bug-a4-patterns-pdf/>

The best of the rest

Plastic bags make good yarn (or “plarn”). Instructions online on repurposing 
your plastic bags.instructables.com  
<http://www.instructables.com/id/How-to-Make-Plarn-Plastic-Bag-Yarn-For-Knitting-/>

Make your own cuddly cacti

Knitted succulents are a strange but bona fide new trend in knitting. Search 
Pinterest or Ravelry for patterns.

Crocheted sardines

Kate Jenkins painstakingly crochets everyday items with an emphasis on seafood 
– her crocheted sardines are a thing of beauty. An exhibition of her work is at 
theKnitting <http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/knitting> and Stitching 
show in London, until 11 October, or see her work online.cardigan.ltd.uk

Arne and Carlos

These Norwegian knitting maestros are responsible for the global spread of 
kitsch knitted Christmas baubles. Catch them today at McAree Brothers in 
Stirling. Or buy their book 55 Christmas Balls to Knit, £12.99.

Knit your own vulva <http://emilytbm.blogspot.co.uk/2008/10/knitted-vulva.html>

Yep. It’s a thing. Google it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ck42%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ck42%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F6%2F1444145140788%2F178e5dee-6f8e-46d6-a761-d7493d25db1a-2060x1374.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20wool%20got%20cool&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ck42%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+wool+got+cool&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ck42%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F6%2F1444145140788%2F178e5dee-6f8e-46d6-a761-d7493d25db1a-2060x1374.jpeg>
 Knit wit ... graffiti knitter Deadly Knitshade conjures clever creations with 
her needles. Photograph: Deadly Knitshade 
The graffiti knitter

Deadly knitshade AKA Lauren O’Farrell

I started knitting when I was diagnosed with Hodgkin’s lymphoma in 2005, as a 
way of keeping myself sane during treatment. I ended up knitting through nearly 
three years of chemotherapy, radiotherapy and a stem cell transplant.

Once I recovered I wanted to do something to celebrate. I’d spotted a lot of 
street art, in particular the space invader mosaics by street artist Invader. I 
decided to try knitted graffiti – a squishy version of normal graffiti that 
comes off easily. I knitted a little grey mouse holding a placard that said 
“Down with fat cats” and left it at the Occupy movement in front of St Paul’s 
Cathedral. I think some people found the Occupy movement too political to join 
in with. But because they thought my mouse was cute they shared pictures of it, 
and it went viral. It took me an hour and a half to make, but made a statement 
for many.

One of my most famous pieces is the knitted phone box in Parliament Square. I 
made it with the group of graffiti knitters I founded called Knit the City. We 
took measurements, knitted at home, then installed it one afternoon. I told the 
police I was doing a craft project. If I’d said street art I’m sure they would 
have stopped me.

The phone box sums up what my art is about. We see adverts all around us, but 
people don’t realise they can make art in the streets too. I want to encourage 
people to express themselves. Your ideas are important and the world is your 
art gallery.

whodunnknit.com <http://www.whodunnknit.com/>

Related: Improve your knitting skills in the Faroes, home of the woollen 
sweater 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/apr/09/knitting-skills-knitwear-faroe-islands-festival-sweaters-knit>
