
Violence at South Africa’s universities has escalated from damage to statues 
and artworks and confrontations with security staff and police, to theburning 
of buildings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/25/south-african-north-west-university-set-ablaze-in-student-protest>
 andbrutal clashes between student factions 
<http://www.okayafrica.com/news/university-of-free-state-south-africa-student-protestors-beaten-by-white-students-during-rugby-match/>
. It’s the second year of conflict over tuition fees, shortages of student 
accommodation, low-paid staff and the language of instruction.

Underlying youth anger are the legacies of racial discrimination and 
colonialism, high levels of unemployment and pronounced and increasing income 
inequality. While the form of campus protests is specific toSouth Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica>, these fault lines have 
parallels in other higher education systems, including those of Britain and the 
US.


We see global concern about the low-paid and immigrant workers who provide 
essential campus services and the effects of inequality on participation in 
higher education. US campuses are riven by racial tensions, while Europe is 
witnessing a surge of xenophobia in the face of the refugee crisis.


Related: University protests around the world: share your photos 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/mar/27/university-protests-around-the-world-share-your-photos>

The spark

The protests in South Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> began 
in the north, at Tshwane University of Technology, early last year, when 
students were prevented from registering because of outstanding fee debts. This 
was exacerbated by the inability of the state loan and bursary agency – the 
National Student Financial Aid Scheme (NSFAS) – to meet its commitments. 
Confrontations spread to other campuses, taking different forms.


Students at three universities in the south were next to act. At the 
University of Cape Town, students took issue with the legacy of colonialism, 
symbolised by thememorial to Cecil John Rhodes 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rhodes_Must_Fall>. Students at Stellenbosch 
distributed a powerfully evocative film –Luister (Listen) 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sF3rTBQTQk4> – that documented black students’ 
daily experiences of racism and discrimination. Students at the University of 
the Western Cape protested against levels of debt that would prevent them from 
graduating.


Dissent crystallised into a national movement in October, when universities 
began to announce fee increases in excess of 10% for the 2016 academic year. 
The government, initially dismissive, wasforced to impose a freeze on fee 
increases <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-34618724>and find emergency 
funding to compensate universities for their loss of revenue.


Following this compromise, the government has appointed a commission of 
inquiry into student funding that will report in October this year. The 2016 
budget, tabled in parliament in late February, underwrote the extension of the 
freeze on fee increases for a further two years and included funding for NSFAS 
to meet its obligation to current students.

But despite these measures, protests have escalated and are likely to 
continue. This is because they are rooted in difficult economic realities that 
cannot be resolved within the current model of student funding.


Related: Casual contracts are ruining universities for staff and students 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/feb/12/casual-contracts-are-ruining-universities-for-staff-and-students>

Even if fees are frozen at 2015 levels for three years, a place at a public 
university is still unattainable for those from average South African families. 
This is because income distribution is heavily skewed in favour of the top 20% 
of households. The average annual household income in South Africa is about 
£3,500; fees and living costs for a single year of university add up to more 
than this. These issues are outside the terms of reference of the commission of 
inquiry, and far more substantial than the short-term fix announced in 
February’s budget.

Rising anger

The university crisis has shown how race and history continue to permeate 
almost every aspect of South Africa’s public life. Intense debates across 
campuses and through the media have opened a window on the disillusionment and 
anger of many black South Africans born after the Mandela-led settlement of the 
early 1990s.


This protesters include both students dependent on financial aid and those 
from the insurgent black middle class. Their intellectual inspiration comes 
from the anti-colonialism of Franz Fanon, the black consciousness of Steve 
Biko. Their focus is on a curriculum that they see as narrow and unreformed and 
on cultures and practices that position them as unwelcome outsiders in public 
universities in their own country.


Across South Africa, unemployment is high and inflation is rising, driven in 
part by drought. Municipal authorities have failed to keep pace with the demand 
for basic services such as water and sanitation.

These broader circumstances have shaped a parallel, worker-driven campaign at 
universities for higher wages and improved benefits. Workers demand that 
universities reverse the trend of outsourcing services such as security, 
catering, cleaning, transport and grounds maintenance to specialist companies 
in a campaign that mirrors the call for universities in Britain to pay the 
living wage rather than the mandatory minimum wage.

Related: Angry young academics: striving for more than consumerism 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2011/jun/15/univeristies-radical-academics-jobs-training>

The bigger picture

South Africa’s universities are a miner’s canary for wider issues in higher 
education. Income inequality and widening participation, while extreme in South 
Africa, are issues for many countries. Unfair acts of discrimination on the 
basis of race, ethnicity and other identifiers are common concerns.

There are significant insights to be gained through comparison with growing 
racial tensions across campuses in the US, and with Britain’s continuing 
difficulties in ensuring that universities are free from discrimination against 
Muslim students. And the rise of xenophobia and unjust discrimination against 
refugees is a problem that South African universities share with every 
university in Europe.


Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
