
A newspaper analyst friend emailed me recently to say he was anticipating a 
circulation “cliff fall” within the coming six months.

I seem to recall that he said much the same three years ago. Predicting the 
collapse of newsprint is a foolhardy game despite the inexorable, onward sweep 
of the digital revolution.

But the latest set of sales statistics for UK national newspaper titles during 
September, as released by the Audit Bureau of Circulations, will surely confirm 
my friend’s belief that it is only a matter of time.


They show that the overall daily market is declining by more than 8% a year 
and the Sunday market by a little over 9%. They also suggest that the red-tops, 
both daily and Sunday, are falling faster than the rest.

But there is no sign yet that the publishers are perched on Beachy Head. They 
are still some way back from the precipice.

In a year, the Sun, Daily Mirror 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/daily-mirror> and Daily Star have shed more 
than 370,000 copies, a fall of 10.9%. Similarly, the four Sunday red-tops - 
Sun, Mirror, Star and People - have collectively lost more than 400,000 sales, 
down 12.3% on the year.

By contrast, the middle market pair are down by 6.2% and the rest are down by 
4.3%, although I must not overlook the fact that the Independent and the 
Guardian show year-on-year declines of 8.1% and 7.6% respectively.

Of course, these losses in print must be set against increasing readership 
online and it would paint a much better picture of the true state of affairs at 
each title if the digital tally was published alongside the print sales.

So there is good news on that front. I understand that it won’t be long before 
ABC is able to produce that kind of comparison on a monthly basis. It could 
even happen from the beginning of next year.

The problem isn’t, incidentally, at the ABC end. Some publishers are taking 
too long to get act together, which is a pity because everyone would benefit 
from the transparency of such a chart.

Going back to the September print figures, there are a couple of points to 
note.The Sun <http://www.theguardian.com/media/sun> reduced its bulk sales 
total, down from 11,000 to 2,000, while the Star, at 403,000, appeared on the 
verge of dipping below 400,000.

That may be the reason for Richard Desmond cutting the cover price to 20p 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/sep/30/richard-desmond-sparks-tabloid-price-war-by-halving-cost-of-star-editions>
. Initial reports suggest his so-called price war has resulted inonly a modest 
sales increase 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/oct/07/richard-desmond-boosts-daily-star-sales-with-price-cut>
 and, anyway, his rivals have not risen to the bait.

It can hardly be said to be a war when no-one retaliates!
