
Summer is here and that means the ice-cream vans are out, the sun is 
(sometimes) out and school will be out in just over a month. It also means the 
country is set for two weeks of tennis fever, asWimbledon 2016 
<http://www.wimbledon.com/index.html> kicks off on Monday 27 June. So how can 
you get your students excited about this great British tradition?


Primary

It’s probably sensible to start at the beginning, which – according to this 
detailed resource 
<http://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/7733/?INTCMP=NECJOBTXT8769I> 
from theTennis Foundation <http://www.tennisfoundation.org.uk/> – was in the 
12th century, when a precursor to modern tennis was played by monks. The 
comprehensive history allows students to explore the game through the ages in a 
timeline task, as well as looking at how and why the equipment used to play it 
has changed.

Related: How to teach … running 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/apr/20/how-to-teach-running> 

You can combine tennis and maths with this lively activity 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/23087/Number-Bonds-Tennis> 
fromTeachit Primary <http://www.teachitprimary.co.uk/>, which challenges pupils 
to play a game of tennis without a ball. Instead of lobbing a fuzzy sphere 
across a net, they have to exchange numbers. The server starts by calling out a 
number between one and 50, and their partner has to return with the number 
required to reach 50 (if the server shouts 19, for example, their opponent 
needs to shout 31 to score the point).


Tennis can also be used to inspire literary creativity in your class, with this
resource 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/23066/Giant-tennis-from-Pobble365>
 fromPobble365 <http://pobble365.com/around-the-world/>. It features a 
thought-provoking image of a giant child playing tennis with the sun – yes, you 
read that right – and asks pupils to create a short story based on the image, 
before following up with exercises on grammar and sentence construction.


Help your pupils to tap into their poetic sides with this shape poetry resource
 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/23088/Wimbledon-Shape-Poetry>
 fromTwinkl <http://www.twinkl.co.uk/>. They can pen their own verses relating 
to Wimbledon and then present them either as a tennis ball or a trophy. For 
younger pupils, there’s thissimple activity based on drawing items related to 
the game, including rackets, nets and trainers 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/23089/Wimbledon-tennis-read-and-draw>
.


The tournament can also be used to spark musical creativity 
<http://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/7748/?INTCMP=NECJOBTXT8769I>
. This interactive activity gets pupils to investigate the various sounds made 
by percussion instruments and use their findings to compose a piece of music 
that represents a tennis match – grunts are optional.


Secondary

How well do your students understand the language of tennis? Can they tell you 
the difference between seeded and unseeded? How about the definitions of love 
and deuce? Get your class up to speed on the lingo with thisresource exploring 
the technical terms used in the game 
<http://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/3334/?INTCMP=NECJOBTXT8769I>
, as well as the popularity of slang and puns used by the media when reporting 
on matches.

And for a more in-depth exploration of the potentially confusing scoring 
system,try this group task 
<http://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/7745/?INTCMP=NECJOBTXT8769I>
. Students are asked to separate into groups and become experts on a particular 
aspect of scoring – which player’s score is announced first, for example, or 
the difference between a game and a set. Once they have mastered their area, 
they have to share the information with other groups in a creative way, such as 
rap, mime, poetry, drama or through images.


You can give your class a taste of life as a young tennis player with this 
comprehension exercise 
<http://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/7737/?INTCMP=NECJOBTXT8769I>
. It uses the diary of a nationally-ranked 17-year-old to explore the demands 
of her daily routine at home and during a tournament in Switzerland. They can 
then demonstrate their understanding of the text by working through a series of 
questions of increasing difficulty.


Related: How to teach ... sports day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jun/08/how-to-teach-sports-day-planning-games-activities>

Your students may not be at professional-athlete level (yet), but you can help 
them understandhow exercise affects their bodies with this simple heart-rate 
investigation 
<http://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/7746/?INTCMP=NECJOBTXT8769I>
. It introduces the concept of resting pulse rate and gets them to predict how 
this would be different immediately after exercise then after five minutes of 
rest. Then, of course, it’s time to get them running, jumping and working in 
pairs to record their results.


And finally, work up some excitement about this year’s tournament by taking a 
look back at the best moments of Wimbledon 2015. Thisgallery contains quotes 
and striking images of the highlights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2015/jul/11/the-best-of-wimbledon-2015-in-pictures-and-quotes>
, including Andy Murray’s gracious response after losing to Roger Federer and 
Serena Williams’ post-victory reflections on what it takes to be a winner. Use 
them to prompt debate and discussion with your students – and get them counting 
down to the first serve later this month.


Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
