
The Hillsborough inquest, coming hard on the heels of the child sexual abuse 
scandal in Rotherham, has asked hard questions of the reforms made in 2011 to 
police accountability. Those reforms made directly elected police and crime 
commissioners (PCCs) responsible for local forces. The PCC elections today 
provide the electorate with itsfirst opportunity to pass judgment 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/apr/08/police-crime-commissioner-pcc-election-may>
.

When the 96 Liverpool fans were killed at Hillsborough football stadium 27 
years ago, responsibility lay with local police authorities. The inquest showed 
that South Yorkshire’s had been little more than a bystander to the 
misdemeanours of the police force. More than 20 years later the same authority 
again made no credible intervention inRotherham 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/rotherham>.

The exponential growth of borderless crimes are stretching a system that 
remains geographically based

The 2011 reforms swept police authorities away. PCCs were sold to us as a more 
visible and energetic democratic control of local policing. But the first South 
Yorkshire PCC, Shaun Wright,fell at his first major hurdle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/sep/16/rotherham-child-sex-abuse-pcc-shaun-wright-resigns>
 – Rotherham – tainted by his past involvement leading children’s services in 
Rotherham between 2005 and 2010. His successor, Alan Billings,  worked hard 
with the police chief, David Crompton, to improve the response to child sexual 
abuse – but feltforced to suspend Crompton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/27/south-yorkshire-police-chief-suspended-over-hillsborough-verdict>
 following the reaction to the inquest. His chosen temporary successor, the 
newly appointed deputy,stepped down almost as soon as she was appointed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/28/new-south-yorkshire-police-chief-hillsborough-dawn-copley-offers-resign-over-conduct>
, leaving an urgent need search for a new chief constable to lead the force out 
of a deepening crisis of confidence.

These events have reinforced the need for central government to play its role 
more effectively. There is no independent body encouraging people to apply for 
senior jobs in the police service, making the task of persuading potential 
chiefs to take on a bed of nails like South Yorkshire so much harder.

The old system that was abandoned in 2011, though far from perfect, provided a 
central career mechanism – and there was never an occasion where top jobs were 
advertised and no other candidate than the sitting deputy applied. The home 
secretary, Theresa May, offered to help in South Yorkshire, but without a 
mechanism to do so it was down to Billings to persuade a neighbouring PCC to
lend its chief constable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/03/south-yorkshire-police-run-north-yorkshire-chief-hillsborough>
, Dave Jones of North Yorkshire.

Related: There's a new police frontline, and it's not on the streets 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2015/jun/19/theres-a-new-police-frontline-and-its-not-on-the-streets>

May has been much less forthcoming on the support or intervention that the 
Home Office might provide to transform South Yorkshire. Even in the US, whence 
the PCC model was derived, the federal courts can impose a “consent decree” on 
a badly failing local force. Forces subject to the decree must adhere to 
certain conditions, such as the use of body cameras by officers conducting stop 
and search. Bill Bratton, the current New York City police commissioner, spent 
his entire tenure in Los Angeles guiding that department out of its consent 
decree.

The lesson of Hillsborough is that the PCC system is not sufficient on its 
own. A PCC’s focus is necessarily local, but parts of local policing have huge 
consequences for the national picture. Local cuts to the numbers of expensive 
firearms officers have had to be reversed by prime ministerial intervention 
after the Paris and Brussels attacks. The exponentialgrowth of borderless crimes
 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2015/jun/19/theres-a-new-police-frontline-and-its-not-on-the-streets>
 – cyber fraud and internet child abuse – are stretching a system that remains 
geographically based.

Meanwhile, local governance continues to evolve – a “metro” model with mayors 
responsible for policing and a wider range of services, leaving a narrower 
“market town” model elsewhere; PCCs are poised to take on a broader 
responsibility for criminal justice.

Allowing all this to take place without a guiding hand is likely to lead to 
further scandals.

Peter Neyroud is a former chief constable who set up the National Policing 
Improvement Agency. He is a lecturer in evidence-based policing at the 
University of Cambridge.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
