 The first rule of television is that commissioning editors should herd 
together. Rather like wildebeest on the veldt, they all rush towards the same 
watering holes for fear of being picked off by predators. Right now, the safest 
watering hole on the plains is the flatmate sitcom.
ITV has just commissioned Lucy Sullivan is Getting Married, described as a 
'humorous take on flat-sharing between three girls in London'. Set to air later 
this year, it joins Kathy Burke's new flatmate sitcom Gimme Gimme Gimme and the 
ongoing Babes in the Wood, and follows successes such as Men Behaving Badly, 
This Life and Friends.

 The flatmate sitcom has been a TV staple since US television created its own 
version of The Odd Couple in the 1970s. It used to be a convenient excuse for 
throwing together people who would never normally mix. The theory was that the 
sparks would fly, leading to all manner of madcap high jinks.

The flatmate sitcom moved on in pretty much the same fashion throughout the 
1970s and 1980s - after all, The Young Ones would never be post-grad chums - 
but then it all changed, in sitcoms and in the real world. In the 1990s, series 
after series of Friends has gone by without any sign of a romance to make 
Chandler leave Joey or Monica move out on Rachel. The Men Behaving Badly have 
managed to extend adolescence almost into old age, and still pull in the 
viewers.

 In the old days, flatmates filled an uncomfortable pause between leaving home 
and settling down to a proper life. It was supposed to be a time of grim 
furniture and bad food, and it was meant to be fraught with unpleasant 
encounters with dodgy tenants who nicked your milk and failed to pay the bills. 
You were supposed to drop your flatmates like a bad rash after you got on to 
life's next stage.

Not any more. Now you stay together as friends and colleagues long after you 
stop sharing door keys. These days, it's the third great relationship after 
your parents and your lovers. These days, flatmates are for life.

 Witness Tony Blair's decision to put his former flatmate Charles Falconer in 
charge of the Millennium Dome. It's the kind of thing we'd all do if we were 
running the country, except we'd do it on day one. 'Charlie,' we'd say, 'here's 
Â£6 billion. Let's party!' Nor is the PM alone in wanting to work with the 
person with whom he once shared a fridge. French and Saunders were teachers 
when they shared a flat, made each other laugh, and decided to give it a go as 
a stand-up double act. Now they hate working without each other.

Jude Law, Ewan McGregor and Jonny Lee Miller all slummed it in a Primrose Hill 
grot-hole in their early twenties, and now share a film production company 
called Natural Nylon. Frank Skinner and David Baddiel shared a flat for seven 
years after Skinner stopped over for a night. This is where they created 
Fantasy Football, and they found living together so important to the show's 
success that they moved into a hotel together during the filming of the World 
Cup series. Even supermodels Erin O'Connor and Karen Elson - who could afford a 
few flats apiece by now - have opted to go on sharing their New York pad.

 The fact is, a flatmate is the first real love you have. In your twenties, 
you stagger into the adult world all lost and confused. You have to deal with a 
real job, real bills and real emotions. Inevitably, you need something to cling 
to. That's why there's something beautiful and unconditional about a flatmate's 
love during this vulnerable time. They see you stoned, pissed, depressed, 
slobbing on the sofa, watching telly with curry dribbling down your shirt, and 
regularly wandering through the kitchen in your underpants - and they still 
stay around. Your parents had a biological responsibility to you. They had to 
love you. Flatmates, however, are only a month's notice from the exit door to 
your life, and yet they stay.

 Eventually, one of you has to move on, usually moving in with a partner. 
These partings are painful. If one of you still wants to be partying, eating 
late-night takeaways, farting and taping the soaps for each other, then moving 
out is a huge rejection of all the laughter and the good times. Those left 
behind may help to fill the cardboard boxes from the corner store, and smile 
and wave as the Transit van chuffs off, but deep inside they're crying. 
Afterwards, they wander around the dusty room, noticing how empty it looks, 
before reaching for the small ads.

 You may stay great friends, but that rejection is always there, and both of 
you know it. Perhaps that's what happened with the Blair-Falconer flatshare. 
The PM's office claims not to know how it ended, but our bet is it was Tony who 
moved in with Cherie and felt bad about leaving poor Charlie to recoup the 
deposit.

As a result, 25 years on, he's still trying to include Charlie in everything 
he's doing, so he can't be accused of blowing out his old mates now he's living 
with his bird. Hence the Dome gig. At least this makes one thing easy for the 
nation. All we have to do is find a few of Charlie's 1970s barrister mates and 
ask them how good his parties were. If they were crap, don't bother turning up 
at the Dome.
