
If you make a winter honeysuckle (Lonicera x purpusii 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/gardening/plants/plant_finder/plant_pages/11215.shtml>) 
happy, it dusts itself in creamy-white, highly fragrant flowers. Like many 
winter-flowering species, its scent is so strong that it carries for some 
distance – I’ve often found myself, nose up in the air, like a cartoon 
character, wandering around streets and into parks trying to pinpoint that 
heady, sweet fragrance. It’s not there to please you, however, but to guide in 
pollinators still on the wing. To win the competition game in winter, flowers 
need to be perfumed with the sort of scent that travels and lingers – which is 
why, once they weigh up the rewards of scent versus showiness, nearly all 
winter-flowering plants choose scent: robust, small flowers can withstand the 
weather better than big, blowsy ones.

Left to its own devices, winter honeysuckle grows into a handsome shrub, 
densely branched and rounded. It can be coaxed to hug a wall or fence, and 
although initially it may need tying in, eventually the stems will twine. The 
best cultivar is ‘Winter Beauty’, which has clusters of cream flowers with 
prominent, yellow anthers. It’s a tough thing, as happy in an exposed site as 
in a sheltered one, and it’s not fussy which way it faces, provided it has some 
sun. It also makes a lovely cut flower, so if the weather outside is too much, 
bring some indoors. Sweetest honeysuckle (L. fragrantissima 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/plants/details?plantid=4560>) is slightly more tidy and 
compact.

The award for the best winter scent, however, has to go to wintersweet (
Chimonanthus praecox 
<http://www.kew.org/science-conservation/plants-fungi/chimonanthus-praecox-wintersweet>
). In fact, this plant is so hell-bent on bringing all the bees to your yard 
that it flowers on bare stems, so there’s no mistaking what to head for. The 
flowers start in December and continue into February. They are small, yellow 
and waxy, tough little things that can take the wet and wind, and have a 
delicious, spicy scent. Wintersweet likes sun and well-drained soil, and will 
do well against a wall. But it is shy to flower, and it can be several years 
before it does its thing. Plant it in a front garden or by the back door, where 
you’ll bother to stop, because however delicious the scent, you’re probably not 
going to trudge to the far end of the garden in the thick of winter just for a 
sniff. There are two commonly sold types:‘Luteus’ 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/plants/details?plantid=419> has sulphur-yellow, 
cup-shaped flowers, and‘Grandiflorus’ 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/plants/details?plantid=2313> has slightly larger ones 
that turn outwards to reveal deep purple centres.

Related: Alys Fowler: ‘Every garden needs a tree or two’ 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/12/garden-trees-alys-fowler-gardening>

Winter-flowering plants have one major drawback: they are exceptionally dull 
in summer – just a mass of green leaves and little else. The best way around 
this is to wrap them in a feather boa. For example, they make an excellent 
frame for summer-flowering clematis: for early summer, downy clematis (C. 
macropetala) needs little pruning, or try a late-flowering herbaceous type that 
can be cut back just before the shrubs come into flower in early winter. Or 
send some wilder-looking sweet peas or nasturtiums to climb across. I’ve wound 
a cultivated blackberry into a fence-trained winter honeysuckle, to give me a 
little more seasonal interest.
