
As someone who eats ice-cream with their Christmas pudding, I’ve never 
understood the peculiar British insistence on saving it for summer 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/aug/18/ice-cream-future-of>. The 
samegoes for sorbet 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2011/jun/28/consider-the-sorbet>
, which, thanks to its water base, is probably the ice that tastes the most 
intensely of its raw ingredients. Without any fat to soften the texture, it 
relies on sugar, which is why sweeter summer berries can be cloying in this 
form. To my mind, high-acid fruits make the best sorbets, and you don’t get 
much tangier than winter citrus.

Although this recipe will work just fine with regular oranges or tangerines, 
blood oranges aren’t just a pretty face 
<http://dianahenry.co.uk/journal-entries/blood-oranges/> – they have a 
distinctive flavour, both sweeter and slightly more bitter than your average 
fruit. They will also, of course, gift your sorbet a gorgeous blushing beauty, 
although, as it’s nigh impossible to predict the degree of pigmentation before 
cutting in, it’s wise not to pin your hopes on a ruby-red result.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hxxe%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hxxe%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1e30b5efb33339edfdbe8e0a37a2229461a81ac%2F0_323_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20blood%20orange%20sorbet&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hxxe%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+blood+orange+sorbet&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hxxe%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1e30b5efb33339edfdbe8e0a37a2229461a81ac%2F0_323_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
 Molly O’Neill’s sorbet, served in orange skins. Photograph: Felicity Cloake 
for the Guardian 
They won’t be around for much longer, so make this sooner rather than later – 
although they tend to be expensive in supermarkets, they’re currently five for 
£1 at my local market, so it’s worth shopping around if you can.

The oranges

Most recipes I try are fruit-juice based, but Molly O’Neill 
<http://cooking.nytimes.com/recipes/5372-orange-campari-sorbet-oranges>, in the 
New York Times, and Bon Appetit 
<http://www.epicurious.com/recipes/food/views/blood-orange-sorbet-109091> 
magazine both blitz the flesh to a puree and use that instead. Admittedly, this 
has me cutting out individual segments in order to minimise the amount of pith 
in the finished dish (annoyingly, it uses the most oranges by some distance, 
which means this takes for ever), but O’Neill scoops it all into the food 
processor, chewy bits and all. Vitally, however, she presses the puree through 
a fine sieve before use. Bon Appetit does not, which gives their finished 
sorbet a vaguely woolly texture. “It’s like eating Baa Baa Black Sheep,” notes 
one tester. Most of us are not particularly keen on this, so if you’re not 
going to use any of the pulp in the dish, I think it’s quicker and easier to 
juice the things instead.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hxxe%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hxxe%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6f95993ec6b075f66caf7ee8158c2767241f166%2F0_252_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20blood%20orange%20sorbet&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hxxe%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+blood+orange+sorbet&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hxxe%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6f95993ec6b075f66caf7ee8158c2767241f166%2F0_252_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
 Zesty ... the Weir’s sorbet. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Caroline and Robin Weir’s Ice Creams, Sorbets & Gelati: The Definitive Guide 
adds some finely chopped zest to the mixture “to heighten the flavour”, while 
Bon Appetit infuses its sugar syrup with grated zest. Diana Henry, 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/foodanddrink/recipes/11333825/Blood-orange-sorbet-recipe.html>
 meanwhile, rubs sugar cubes over the orange skins so they absorb its aromatic 
oils, urging readers not to skip this step because they can’t be bothered (it’s 
as if she read my mind): “It makes all the difference.” It’s a clever trick: 
zest gives the sorbets a pleasing bitter edge that makes the others taste a 
little bit one-dimensional – indeed, the juice-only sorbet 
<http://www.annies-eats.com/2012/03/09/blood-orange-sorbet/> from Annie 
Marshall, the woman behind the Annie Eats blog, is likened to the stuff the 
collects in the bottom of a Calippo tube, but “in a good way”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hxxe%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hxxe%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63fdefa768430e953ac752025c8497d0d4d0e3d5%2F0_283_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20blood%20orange%20sorbet&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hxxe%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+blood+orange+sorbet&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hxxe%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63fdefa768430e953ac752025c8497d0d4d0e3d5%2F0_283_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
 ‘Like eating Baa Baa Black Sheep’ ... Bon Appetit’s sorbet. Photograph: 
Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
If you want a smooth sorbet, then I’d recommend Henry’s method, but I rather 
like the contrast between the sweet-and-sour ice and the bitter, slightly chewy 
flecks of zest, so I’ll be going down the Weir route instead. (Note that zest 
also contains pectin, which helps add body to the ice.)

The liquid

Sorbets, at their simplest, are just water and sugar – sugar lowers the 
freezing point of water, which is why you don’t just end up with a hard block 
of sweetened ice, but a scoopable dessert. Fruit juices, are, of course, 
largely water and sugar themselves, so it seems a shame to dilute the flavour 
further with water in the form of a sugar syrup, as Henry, Bon Appetit and 
O’Neill recommend – instead, I’ll be sticking with juice. Marshall adds a 
little wine to help the texture, but I don’t find it needs it. (Of course, wine 
is always welcome, as is O’Neill’s Campari, although the latter, stirred in 
after churning, sadly doesn’t freeze properly. It is, however, delicious as a 
slushy cocktail.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hxxe%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hxxe%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4af267d3931592df0e975ba8dcf620c583f19369%2F0_411_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20blood%20orange%20sorbet&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hxxe%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+blood+orange+sorbet&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hxxe%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4af267d3931592df0e975ba8dcf620c583f19369%2F0_411_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
 Annie Marshall includes some wine in her sorbet. Photograph: Felicity Cloake 
for the Guardian 
The sweet and the sour

Sugar is the vital ingredient in a sorbet, and I’d advocate strongly for the 
much-maligned cane variety; the honey in O’Neill’s version muddies the clean 
flavour of the citrus. The Weirs use icing sugar, which in theory dissolves 
more easily than the granulated kind, but it seems to give their sorbet a 
slightly powdery texture, perhaps because it’s whisked into cold juice, and I 
didn’t work hard enough. Nevertheless, granulated is cheaper, and works just 
fine (if you’re going for the Henry method, you’ll need sugar lumps; I used the 
brown variety as that’s what I had, but white would work better flavour-wise).

A drop of lemon juice helps to balance that sugar – add it to taste, 
remembering that flavours are muted at low temperatures, so what may seem 
off-puttingly intense at room temperature will probably seem well-balanced once 
frozen.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hxxe%2Fsfb%23img-6&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hxxe%2Fsfb%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc00bd791fdf5488445bbaadb31595639e5cb8da%2F0_413_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20blood%20orange%20sorbet&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hxxe%2Fstw%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+blood+orange+sorbet&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hxxe%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc00bd791fdf5488445bbaadb31595639e5cb8da%2F0_413_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
 Sugar lumps are a feature of Diana Henry’s sorbet. Photograph: Felicity Cloake 
for the Guardian 
The rest

O’Neill whisks a whipped egg white in, intended to add creaminess, but it 
seems to rise to the top of the mixture as it churns, giving a curious two-tone 
effect. She also freezes it in the orange skins, which brings back pleasant 
memories of the Indian restaurants of my youth.

Bon Appetit chills the mixture for at least six hours before freezing, to 
allow the flavours to infuse. It is wise to get it as cold as possible before 
churning, but six hours seems excessive, given that none of the ingredients are 
particularly shy and retiring to start with.

Eat after a rich, wintery stew. Campari optional.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hxxe%2Fsfb%23img-7&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hxxe%2Fsfb%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F448e5c1b4dc89a5f89fbedbf6e7ec0f8c3908d15%2F0_282_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20blood%20orange%20sorbet&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hxxe%2Fstw%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+blood+orange+sorbet&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hxxe%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F448e5c1b4dc89a5f89fbedbf6e7ec0f8c3908d15%2F0_282_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
 The perfect blood orange sorbet. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
The perfect blood orange sorbet

(serves 4)
10 blood oranges
125g white sugar
Juice of 1/2 lemon

Scrub two oranges well, then finely grate the zest.

Roll each orange on the work surface to release the juice, then squeeze until 
you have 350ml juice, fishing out any seeds (I used nine in total, but as they 
vary in size, it’s wise to have some spare).

Heat 100ml of the juice gently in a pan with the sugar, stirring to dissolve. 
Allow to cool slightly, then add the remaining juice and that of the lemon. 
Chill.

Freeze in an ice-cream maker according to instructions, or pour into a strong 
plastic box and put in the coldest part of the freezer. After 90 minutes it 
should have frozen round the edges – take it out and beat vigorously with a 
fork, electric whisk or in a food processor until you have a uniformly textured 
icy slush. Put back in the freezer and repeat at least twice more every 90 
minutes, then freeze for at least another hour.

Eat as soon as possible for the best texture.

Does the thought of sorbet at this time of year make your blood run colder 
than the wind, or are you, like me, an all-seasons fan? And what other blood 
orange recipes would you recommend trying before they disappear for another 
year?
