
In my posting yesterday about the shock departure 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2014/aug/27/irish-independent-ireland>
 of the Irish Independent editor Claire Grady I mentioned the paper's 
lack-lustre circulation performance.

But I need to put that in context, so - in a further interruption to my 
holiday - here are the latest ABC-audited Irish newsprint newspaper sales.

Ireland's national titles have been declining for several years past, so there 
isn't much of surprise in their continuing falls over the first six months of 
this year. The overall year-on-year fall remains worrying: 7.3% for the dailies 
and 6.3% for the Sundays.

And the two leading daily titles, the Irish Independent 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/irish-independent> (the Indo) and the Irish 
Times, remain too reliant on bulk (aka multiple) sales - the copies sold at a 
fraction of their cover price to enable hotels and airports to give them away 
free. It means that only 87% of the Independent's total and 88% of the Times's 
were actively purchased.

In the January-June period this year, sales of the Indo fell 7.2% to 112,383 
(including 14,083 bulks) compared with the same period in 2013 while the 
Times's fell 4.6% to 80,332 (including 9,140 bulks).

The Cork-based Irish Examiner was down by 7.6% to an average sale of 35,026 
copies, including a mere 329 bulks.

There was worse news for the city dailies, the Dublin Herald and Cork Evening 
Echo. The Herald suffered an 11.9% drop to 51,600 (including 2,183 bulks) while 
the Echo's total was down 10.5% to 13,787.

The main Sunday titles fared as badly. The Sunday Independent lost 5.1% of its 
sale to register an average of 220,565 an issue. Its 11,463 bulks accounted for 
more than 5% of its headline sale.

The Sunday Business Post had a dramatic fall, down 11.2% to just 34,012 copies 
(including 994 bulks). The feisty red-topSunday World 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/sunday-world>, which eschews bulk sales, sold 
an average of 198,260, representing a 6.1% year-on-year fall.

North of the border, the Belfast <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/belfast> 
Telegraph continued its long decline, shedding yet more paid-for sales. Only 
77% of its daily "sale" of 48,014 was sold at the full cover price of 70p, 
because 8,510 were free pick-up copies in dump bins while a further 2,499 were 
bulk sales.

In real terms, it therefore sold 37,005 a day, many fewer than its rival, the 
Irish News, which had a headline sale of 39,935, with just 204 bulks.

The Ulster News Letter, at 19,314, fell by a further 6.9%. Its price increase, 
up from 90p to Â£1, will surely have had an effect.

Will a digital-first merger transform INM's titles?

Two weeks ago Independent News & Media (INM) announced that it is to merge the 
editorial operations of the Dublin Herald and the Sunday World 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/business/sectors/media-and-marketing/inm-merges-operations-of-sunday-world-and-herald-1.1895970>
.

The editorial staffs are to be integrated in a "content centre" in order to 
provide a seven-day service to the two papers, which will retain their separate 
titles.

In what INM's editor-in-chief Stephen Rae described it as "a fundamental 
restructuring of the production and reporting process", the new operation will 
become "digital first".

The change will involve the loss of nine jobs at the Herald and four at the 
Sunday World. Volunteers for redundancy will be sought.

According to the Sunday Times's John Burns, 
<http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/news/ireland/article1449151.ece> the 
merger makes sense because there is "a similarity in tone and theme between the 
newspapers", both of which "specialise in coverage of showbiz and crime."

Sources: ABC/Sunday Times 
<http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/news/ireland/article1449151.ece>/Irish 
Times:(1) 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/business/sectors/media-and-marketing/newspaper-sales-continue-to-decline-across-the-board-1.1904236>
 and(2) 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/business/sectors/media-and-marketing/inm-merges-operations-of-sunday-world-and-herald-1.1895970>
