
Hello Michael. What have you been up to? I’ve been hearing about Michael 
Johnson Young Leaders <http://www.michaeljohnsonyoungleaders.org/>. Yes, the 
foundation is a really exciting project for me; I just launched this year. I 
think it’s unique. What we are doing is identifying young people from around 
the world who have really come through some tough, challenging times and 
situations in their communities, and they’ve been able to rise above that 
through their passion for sport. What’s really unique about these young people 
is they have shown real leadership skills in their communities, starting 
projects of their own or using sport to help other young people. So what my 
foundation is doing is giving them the tools to go and be effective and reach 
their full potential as leaders. That’s what I’ve been spending my time on 
these days.

What prompted it? Is it something you’ve been working on for ages? It’s 
something that I’ve been involved in:how sport can change people’s lives 
<http://www.beyondsport.org/>. I’ve been involved in that around the world 
since I retired 16 years ago. I’ve been involved in some great organisations 
that use sport to bring people from the depths, in whatever situations they 
find themselves in, to help them. But this is different; given the right tools 
and opportunities, some of these young people can be leaders because they have 
such potential.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k8xe%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k8xe%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d42659b9f997a7488826f179fd4748985ca4c4b%2F0_450_2048_1228%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michael%20Johnson%3A%20'It's%20all%20about%20the%20execution%20%E2%80%93%20and%20I%20like%20that'&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k8xe%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michael+Johnson%3A+%27It%27s+all+about+the+execution+%E2%80%93+and+I+like+that%27&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k8xe%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d42659b9f997a7488826f179fd4748985ca4c4b%2F0_450_2048_1228%2F2048.jpg>
 Remember those shoes? They were fast. Photograph: Don Emmert/AFP 
How much running do you do these days? I always start that by giving the 
caveat that let’s not even think about what I used to do, in running terms, 
because there’s absolutely no comparison. People ask me if I still run, and 
that answer would be no. Then the next question would be, “So you don’t run at 
all?” and that’s not true – I do, but it’s completely different. As a sprinter, 
you never go out for a three-mile jog, but now I’ll do that once or twice a 
week. And it took me a while, actually, to get used to that. I was like, “Why 
would anyone go out and just run for 20 minutes?”

And so slowly! Yes! And it’s long, and constant, and as a sprinter it’s just 
short intervals: start, stop, start, stop. But I do go out now and enjoy a 20- 
to 30-minute run, or maybe in the gym doing some functional strength and 
resistance training, or the rowing machine, something like that. In my job at
Michael Johnson Performance <http://michaeljohnsonperformance.com/> I’m in a 
high-class training centre with world-class athletes every day, and we’ve got 
all of the equipment there so every now and then I’ll just jump into a training 
session with a bunch of kids, whatever I can do to keep it fresh – a little bit 
of variety.

Have you found some nice routes, a favourite place to run? I spend most of my 
time, when I’m not in Dallas, in San Francisco and there are some nice trails 
there. We have relaxing trails right outside my backyard.

Do you remember your first ever race? Yeah, absolutely. I was 10 years old, my 
first organised race. Where I grew up, I could just walk outside and there 
would be kids, we’d be playing sport and we’d organise our own races up and 
down the street. But my first organised race, I was 10, in Dallas at part of 
the Parks and Recreation summer programme, called the Jesse Owens Games, 
actually. So my first race was, I think, a 100-yard dash; that was back when we 
still called it yards. And I won it, and one of my sisters was also in the 
programme and she won the race before me. So we were pretty happy; there was 
quite the celebration!

You obviously spend a lot of time giving training tips. What’s your top one, 
for runners?One of the things I see most is that many runners don’t run 
symmetrically. A lot of these people have been running for a very long time but 
they still don’t understand that symmetry is extremely important for injury 
prevention but also for performance. People have their thing – rhythm is very 
important when you are running, so people have their quirky little ways to keep 
that. In many cases, that might be the right hand doing something completely 
different to the left, the right arm swinging in a different way, or a 
side-to-side motion or something like that. And that dramatically increases 
your risk of injury.


Do you listen to music when you run? No, I don’t. I know most people do, but I 
tried it a couple of times but I didn’t really like it. Maybe it’s because 
coming from a sprint background and never having done that … But also, I like 
being outside and experiencing all the sounds and everything.

How about gadgets? I do measure how far I’ve gone, and how much time, so I use 
the Nike Plus GPS watch, just for measuring distance and time.

What’s the worst thing about running? As an athlete, when I was competing, I 
had a lot of friends who played American football in the NFL. And if they were 
just a little bit banged up, a little bit injured, they could still play. As a 
sprinter, you are either healthy and can compete, or not, and you can’t. That’s 
always tough and it’s a big part of the sport, injury. You are never going to 
find a sprinter who hasn’t experienced an injury and pretty much every year 
it’s going to be something. If you are on the shelf at that point you can’t 
continue to compete, you have to switch your focus to rehab completely and 
that’s tough.

What about the best thing? I think it’s just very pure. There’s very little 
equipment, it’s not subjective at all. A lot of people might not think that is 
the best thing but it’s one thing that I enjoyed: when the gun goes off you’ve 
got to execute. There’s no half-time, there’s no adjustments to be made and 
come back next time. It’s all right there. It’s all about execution. And I like 
that.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJQ9cBQANjiw&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJQ9cBQANjiw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJQ9cBQANjiw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJQ9cBQANjiw&media=>
 Two Olympic golds, one games. Goosebump-inducing stuff from one of the 
all-time sprinting greats 
What’s your post-race indulgence? When I was competing, it was very, very 
balanced. I didn’t really deprive myself or have this ultra-strict diet or 
lifestyle. I think it’s kind of a relic from old days that people think 
athletes are great athletes because they are willing to make all these 
sacrifices that normal people wouldn’t make. That’s not true; great athletes 
are great because they are blessed with a tremendous amount of talent and work 
very hard to figure out how to smartly and intelligently get the best from 
themselves and their performance. Working now with athletes at the highest 
level, our advice to them is: if you try to get an athlete on a nutrition 
programme that is something they don’t like; they don’t want to do it as it’s 
not balanced, they are not going to do it.

Did you have a set pre-race meal or breakfast? No, I didn’t have a particular 
meal simply because with all the travelling around the world you never know 
what’s going to be available and the last thing you want is to get yourself 
into a ritual, and all of a sudden it’s not available. I tried to avoid that 
and superstition and that sort of thing. You have to learn to be flexible about 
it, not let it affect your performance.


Usain Bolt or Mo Farah? Of course I’d watch Usain Bolt. Just because having 
been a sprinter. I love watching Mo Farah, but any time I watch athletics, the 
favourite thing for me is the sprints over everything else. So that’s an easy 
one for me. I’ll switch to Mo for the last 600 metres!

For you, who is the greatest ever runner? Jesse Owens. Bar none. 
