
The first successful transition of healthcare support workers to students on 
pre-registration nursing degrees has been accomplished at Health Education 
England-Wessex, with almost 70% of trainees gaining places at Bournemouth 
University and the Open University via theSkills for Health Bridging programme 
<http://www.skillsforhealth.org.uk/standards/item/229-skills-for-health-bridging-programme>
.


Bridging the gap between vocation and academy

The Certificate in bridging skills for higher education, is part of the Skills 
for Health Bridging programme, and has been developed as a new qualification 
designed for vocational learners working in healthcare and social care who want 
to progress their careers into all higher education health-related programmes.


Combined with relevant vocational qualifications at level 3, the Bridging 
programme has been designed to offer an alternative route into university for 
motivated and capable healthcare and social care workers.


The course lasts a year, however, there is the option for students to finish 
the course earlier if they find that they are learning at pace. Those who came 
through the course have been recognised by their local NHS trust and Health 
Education England – Wessex.


First wave of success

The first group of students that completed the full course, facilitated 
through Bournemouth and Poole College, have gained the academic skills needed 
to attend university, including report-writing, referencing and interview 
skills.


All those who successfully completed the course are now going on to study 
nursing degrees at Bournemouth University or though the Open University.


Alexandra Gibson from Verwood, Dorset, one of the students on the Bridging 
programme 
<http://www.skillsforhealth.org.uk/news/blog/item/401-successfully-building-bridges-from-level-2-to-university>
, has gone on to study nursing at Bournemouth University: “I started working as 
a healthcare assistant (HCA) at Blandford community hospital and applied to do 
the Bridging certificate. I was so pleased to get a place as the access course 
I was looking at would have taken me two years to get to the same level. The 
Bridging programme enabled me to stay working as a HCA while having one day off 
a week to attend college, which was a huge benefit to me.


“I completed the certificate within 16 weeks, it meant putting in extra hours 
at home to complete the work but I was determined to give it my best shot and 
the tutors were a great support.


“It is really important to be able to show my son, that even though I’m a 
single parent I still have career ambitions. I’m so happy to now be on the 
final stage of becoming a nurse.

“University is full-on, but I’m embracing it and working really hard. The 
tutors are great and I’ve made lots of friends. A number of us from the 
Bridging programme are all on the course together, which is brilliant.”


Angelo Varetto, head of standards, qualifications and apprenticeships at 
Skills for Health says: “At Skills for Health we are always looking for new 
ways to make healthcare learning more accessible. We believe that everyone 
should be given an equal opportunity to progress their career in healthcare and 
the Bridging programme offers an alternative route to those who have not taken 
the more typical route. We are so pleased that through our partnership with 
Bournemouth University, we have been able to make this initiative a success. We 
wish the first wave of graduates all the best in their university degrees.”


Future successes

Bournemouth and Poole College has just recruited another cohort to start for 
September 2016 entrance, with 11 students recommended by their local trusts and 
offered a place on the programme.


Interested in getting involved?


 * What is the Skills for Health Bridging Programme? 
<http://www.skillsforhealth.org.uk/standards/item/228-what-is-the-skills-for-health-bridging-programme>
 * Key features of the Bridging programme 
<http://www.skillsforhealth.org.uk/standards/item/275-key-features-of-the-skills-for-health-bridging-programme>
 * Employers <http://www.skillsforhealth.org.uk/standards/item/225-employers> 
- the starting point for Bridging Programme Partnerships 
 * Employer and further education providers 
<http://www.skillsforhealth.org.uk/standards/item/227-further-education-providers-or-employers-wishing-to-offer-the-bridging-programme>
 – operating the Bridging programme 
 * HE providers 
<http://www.skillsforhealth.org.uk/standards/item/226-higher-education-institutions>
 - creating new routes to health related vocational programmes in higher 
education 
 * HE providers on board 
<http://www.skillsforhealth.org.uk/standards/item/369-universities-on-board> 
 * Crossing the bridge: making the Bridging programme work 
<http://www.skillsforhealth.org.uk/standards/item/370-crossing-the-bridge-making-the-bridging-programme-work;Itemid=261>
 * Bridging programme planner 
<http://www.skillsforhealth.org.uk/standards/item/368-bridging-programme-planner;Itemid=261>
 * Awarding organisations 
<http://www.skillsforhealth.org.uk/standards/item/224-awarding-organisations> - 
offering the Bridging Programme qualification 
 * Health Education England areas 
<http://www.skillsforhealth.org.uk/standards/item/223-health-education-england-support-for-the-bridging-programme>
 - supporting local partnerships 
 * Progression agreement 
<http://www.skillsforhealth.org.uk/standards/item/222-progression-agreement> - 
spelling out the offer to healthcare workers 
 * UCAS tariff points for the Bridging programme qualification 
<http://www.skillsforhealth.org.uk/standards/item/276-ucas-tariff-points-now-available>
 * Reporting on progress and measuring impact 
<http://www.skillsforhealth.org.uk/standards/item/278-reporting-on-progress-and-measuring-impact>
 * Skills for Health 
<http://www.skillsforhealth.org.uk/standards/item/281-skills-for-health-answering-your-questions-and-providing-support>
 – answering your questions and providing support 
Content on this page is produced and paid for by Skills for Health 
<http://www.skillsforhealth.org.uk/>




