 After years of searching, I have found the answer to the timeless question: 
how may I live so as to do no harm? I write in praise of sleep.
Has anyone asleep ever killed anyone? Well, yes. Let's leave out sleeping at 
the wheel, or while flying a plane or doing surgery. Let me revise: I write in 
praise of sleeping in one's bed, at the appropriate time.

Has anyone asleep in a bed at the appropriate time committed genocide? 
Although, true enough: they may have ordered a genocide before retiring for the 
evening. OK: I write in praise of sleeping in a bed at the appropriate time, 
not having given any sinister orders beforehand.

When a human is asleep, ego, ambition, comparison of self with others and 
feelings of inadequacy all recede. We may perform "small harms" - cursing, 
passing wind, rolling over on top of our meaningful other and then, still 
asleep, we have sex and make a baby, who grows up to be an evil dictator...

All right: I write in praise of sleeping in a bed at the appropriate time, not 
having given any sinister orders beforehand, while wearing a condom, or else 
you are sleeping alone, and/or you and your partner have been surgically 
sterilised.

Although there's always sleepwalking to worry about. A friend, sleepdriving 
his car, nearly hit a deer, which bolted through a neighbour's window, 
startling the neighbour (who, turns out, was a deposed dictator) so much that 
he flew home and began a coup d'Ã©tat.

So: I write in praise of sleeping in a bed at the appropriate time, not having 
given any sinister orders beforehand, while wearing a condom, or else you are 
sleeping alone, and/or you and your meaningful other have been surgically 
sterilised, and you are restrained via tight rubber cords to prevent 
sleepwalking.

Try a no-snore strip. A co-worker, annoyed by her husband's snoring, built a 
small nuclear device to destroy him and instead destroyed the world! (This was 
in another galaxy, during a previous incarnation.)

To commemorate this breakthrough in the world peace movement, I've written a 
song, called In The Soft Embrace Of My New Constant Sleep Initiative:

Most of all, my dear, I wish you sleep/A peaceful sleep, so tranquil and 
deep/That during it, you cause no harm/In part because you are wearing a 
no-snore strip and a perma-condom and are sterilised and strapped down via 
rubber cords/That render you immobile while not restricting your circulation 
enough to wake you/Which would defeat the purpose, my dear. (Sung softly, like 
a lullaby.)

Sweet dreams.
