
It’s no surprise Fairfax was keen to replicate the success of the ABC’s Vote 
Compass <https://votecompass.abc.net.au> which has received more than 560,000 
responses this election already and reached 1.4m in the 2013 election. This 
week Fairfax Media launchedYourVote 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/your-vote.html>, “a tool which allows 
Australians to assess their political leanings against the major parties’ 
positions on key themes”.

But if it was going to avoid accusations of cloning the ABC tool it probably 
should have been a little more careful with its language. The press release 
referred to “YourVote election compass”. Then, in the FAQ for YourVote, the 
article referenced “Vote Compass” instead of YourVote, something that didn’t go 
unnoticed by the ABC’s editor of interactive digital storytelling, Matt Liddy.
— Matt Liddy (@mattliddy) June 7, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/mattliddy/status/739987747998334976> 
Hmm. @smh <https://twitter.com/smh> has launched a Vote Compass replica. Their 
own FAQ refers to it as "Vote Compass" — which it's not.
pic.twitter.com/0VCPmALBHn <https://t.co/0VCPmALBHn>
 <https://twitter.com/mattliddy/status/739987747998334976> 
Fairfax’s Canberra bureau chief, Bevan Shields, hit back saying: “Different 
name, different partners, different publications. Think we should be fine. ABC 
doesn’t own all ideas.” Fairfax says YourVote is the Australian version of the 
original global Voting Advice application tool “Kieskompas”, from Amsterdam, 
and is built on “independent scientific methodology which is designed to resist 
political interference”. Fairfax says ABC’s Vote Compass is based on a tool 
designed for the 2011 Canadian election by Kieskompas.

The Weekly Beast took a closer look at the 30 questions YourVote had posed and 
compared them with 30 on the ABC’s Vote Compass. We found a couple were 
identical and 14 had very similar wording. Charitably that reflects the clear 
issues of the election campaign. (And that isvery charitable.) Most of the 
questions were on the same topics, with just slight differences. Only a handful 
were actually different, for example on the Great Barrier Reef health and paid 
parental leave for new mothers. Here are some of the similarities we found:

Related: Still trying to figure out who to vote for? Use Snitty's Vote 
Compass! | First Dog on the Moon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/11/still-trying-to-figure-out-who-to-vote-for-use-snitty-the-psephological-cassowarys-vote-compass>

Vote Compass: Marriage should only be between a man and a woman.
YourVote: Marriage should only be between a man and a woman.

Vote Compass: Terminally ill patients should be legally able to end their own 
lives with medical assistance.
YourVote: Terminally ill people should be able to end their own lives with 
medical assistance.

Vote Compass: Gender quotas should be used to increase the number of women in 
parliament.
YourVote: Political parties should use quotas to achieve gender equality in 
parliament.

Vote Compass: How much should Australia spend on foreign aid? YourVote: 
Australia should decrease foreign aid spending.

Fish tales in troubled waters

Speaking of the reef, this week Guardian Australia published a major report on 
the health of the reef 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/07/the-great-barrier-reef-a-catastrophe-laid-bare>
, written by Michael Slezak. But the state paper in Queensland, Rupert 
Murdoch’s the Courier Mail, has often ignored the environmental disaster on its 
doorstep,much to the despair of scientists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/21/scientists-resort-to-advertising-to-get-great-barrier-reef-crisis-in-queensland-paper>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4knz2%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4knz2%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fadab16f8af561593bdff06b622a4310584c4d9fa%2F0_0_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fairfax's%20YourVote%20same-same%20but%20a%20little%20different%20from%20ABC's%20Vote%20Compass%7C%20Amanda%20Meade&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4knz2%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fairfax%27s+YourVote+same-same+but+a+little+different+from+ABC%27s+Vote+Compass%7C+Amanda+Meade&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4knz2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fadab16f8af561593bdff06b622a4310584c4d9fa%2F0_0_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
 Ellen DeGeneres at the premiere of Finding Dory in Hollywood on Wednesday. 
Photograph: Mario Anzuoni/Reuters 
This week it left the issue alone in print until the US chat show host Ellen 
DeGeneres, the voice of Dory the blue tang fish, released a video message as 
part of a “Remember the Reef” campaign launched to coincide with the release of 
her latest film, Finding Dory.

On Thursday the Courier ran an article about DeGeneres and the reef on page 
three which questioned her motivation for doing the video: “Fishy timing: Ellen 
spruiks movie by questioning health of the reef”. Theonline version 
<http://www.couriermail.com.au/news/queensland/finding-dory-ellen-degeneres-calls-for-donations-for-great-barrier-reef-in-disney-video/news-story/bcd476c237f7fedec0c81c2fbb0986f6>
 says “Disney is calling into question the survival of the Great Barrier Reef 
while unashamedly spruiking its big-budget Finding Nemo sequel”.

Digging deep for Kurt Drysdale

Programs like Nine’s A Current Affair often get a hard time for their tabloid 
TV tactics and sensationalism. But ACA gives back, too. Last weekACA viewers 
raised $700,000 in cash 
<http://aca.ninemsn.com.au/article/9126075/bring-kurt-home-update> and donated 
$100,000 in gifts to the Kurt Drysdale appeal, which was set up for the 
21-year-old who suffered a devastating injury after being tackled in a weekend 
football match playing for Cabramatta. The money will be used to rebuild his 
parents’ house so he can live at home with them.


Mastheads keep shrinking

Fairfax’s regional arm, Australian Community Media, has been getting rid of 
subeditors and photographers on its local papers 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/may/14/fairfax-cuts-another-34-journalism-jobs-in-illawarra-and-south-east-nsw>
 for the past 18 months and downsizing its newsrooms across the country in what 
is the long, slow decline of the community newspaper business. Now News Corp 
has announced plans to close seven of its local Victorian newspapers at the end 
of the month. The staff on the Melbourne Leader, the Berwick Leader, the 
Brimbank Leader, the Free Press Leader, the Hobsons Bay Leader, the Melton 
Leader and the Wyndham Leader were given just three weeks’ notice that their 
papers would close. “News Corp Australia continues to reshape its business to 
meet the needs of its audiences and commercial partners, and is confidently 
investing in areas that will provide returns over the long term,” a spokesman 
said.


Playing monopoly

Over in Western Australia, although newspapers are not being shut down they 
are possibly merging, leading to an unhealthy monopoly by Channel Seven and the 
West Australian’s owner, Kerry Stokes. Stokes’s Seven West Media is negotiating 
to buy Rupert Murdoch’s Perth Now website and the Sunday Times newspaper.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4knz2%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4knz2%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23939d8b36b292989d22a530ec53675980ab80f7%2F909_19_2374_1425%2F2374.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fairfax's%20YourVote%20same-same%20but%20a%20little%20different%20from%20ABC's%20Vote%20Compass%7C%20Amanda%20Meade&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4knz2%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fairfax%27s+YourVote+same-same+but+a+little+different+from+ABC%27s+Vote+Compass%7C+Amanda+Meade&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4knz2%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23939d8b36b292989d22a530ec53675980ab80f7%2F909_19_2374_1425%2F2374.jpg>
 Kerry Stokes, right, with the prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, in Perth in 
April. Photograph: Richard Wainwright/AAP 
At the moment Perth has two newspapers owned by two media moguls. But subject 
to regulatory approval, including from the ACCC, Seven West Media will own 
Seven, as well as the Sunday Times and the West Australian.

Seven West Media and News Corp already own the Community Newspaper Group in 
Western Australia. If the agreement is approved, the West Australian will share 
news content from Murdoch’s newspapers in the other states.

Creatures of habit

Streaming services such as Netflix, Stan and Presto have been very popular in 
Australia, with many of us signing up to the relatively low monthly fees. But 
the latest survey of our screen habits,the Australian Multi-Screen Report 
<http://www.oztam.com.au/documents/Other/Australian%20Multi%20Screen%20Report%20Q1%202016%20FINAL.pdf>
 – from Regional TAM, OzTAM and Nielsen – shows we are still overwhelmingly 
watching broadcast television. Australians watch on average 85 hours and 12 
minutes of broadcast TV on in-home television sets each month. That figure 
includes shows we watched back on our TV sets within seven days of broadcast. 
But compared with last year’s viewing patterns this is a significant drop of 
four hours and 16 minutes a month. We still watch more TV than we spend online: 
on average (31 hours and 12 minutes online).

Talking head-counts

The numbers are in for Wednesday night’s showdown between Bill Shorten on Sky 
News at the Broncos Leagues Club in Brisbane and Malcolm Turnbull on ABC’s 
7.30. The total 7.30 audience across metro and regional on ABC and News 24 was 
800,000. The Sky News People’s Forum across metro and regional was 34,000. In 
the host city Brisbane the official ratings figures showed an audience of zero. 
To be fair there would have been some people who watched, but the number just 
wasn’t statistically relevant to be counted in the sample.

