
I first encountered Robert Boice’s name about three years ago, somewhere 
online; after that, it started poppingup 
<https://gretchenrubin.com/happiness_project/2014/03/want-to-read-about-writing-here-are-my-five-favorite-books-about-writing/>
 every other month. Boice, I learned, was a US psychologist who’d cracked the 
secret of how to write painlessly and productively. Years ago, he’d recorded 
this wisdom in a book, now out of print, which a handful of fans discussed in 
reverent tones, but with a title that seemed like a deliberate bid for 
obscurity:How Writers Journey To Comfort And Fluency 
<http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0275949079/>. Also, it was absurdly 
expensive: used copies sold for £130. Still, I’m a sucker for writing advice, 
especially when so closely guarded. So this month, I succumbed: I found a copy 
at the saner (if still eye-watering) price of £68, and a plain green 
print-on-demand hardback arrived in the post. So if you hunger to write more, 
but instead find yourself procrastinating, or stifled by panic, or writer’s 
block, I can reveal that the solution to your troubles is…

Look, you knew this would be anticlimactic, didn’t you? The kernel of Boice’s 
advice, based on writing workshops conducted with struggling academics, isn’t 
merely old. It’s the oldest in the world: write, every weekday, in brief 
scheduled sessions, as short as 10 minutes at first, then getting longer. 
Reading that, I nearly flung my £68 book across the room in impatience. But 
that wouldn’t surprise Boice. Because impatience, for him, is a huge part of 
why writing causes so much grief.

His students, he explains, tell him they can’t afford to limit their writing 
to short sessions, or try his other exercises: they’ve got deadlines to meet! 
But that proves the point. They want to havealready written – and it’s 
precisely that manic urgency that triggers panic and procrastination. As I kept 
reading, a realisation dawned: the non-excitingness of Boice’s book – from its 
title to his step-by-step advice, which you’re meant to implement gradually, 
over months – is itself an exercise in cultivating patience. It’s slow going 
because slow is the only way forward.

This gets clearer when it comes to one of Boice’s favourite tips: when your 
daily writing time is up,stop dead 
<http://www.openculture.com/2013/02/seven_tips_from_ernest_hemingway_on_how_to_write_fiction.html>
, even if you’ve got momentum and could write more. Maybe you could. But you’d 
be reinforcing the notion of writing as a mysterious force, to be harnessed 
whenever it shows up, rather than a humdrum activity you choose, 
undramatically, to do. “The urge to continue,” Boice writes, “includes a big 
component of impatience about not being finished, about not being productive 
enough, about never again finding such an ideal time for writing.” Stop when 
the timer goes off, and you’ll build self-discipline. Keep going longer, and 
you’re just indulging your insecurity.

Related: Do you overfunction or underfunction in a relationship? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/13/oliver-burkeman-overfunction-underfunction-relationship>

Boice would have helped nobody, then, had he offered a quick fix – because 
wanting a quick fix is the essence of impatience. Instead, decelerate. Make 
writing only a middling priority in your life. Don’t binge-write. Aim for mild 
happiness as you work, not storms of passion. And if all this strikes you as a 
waste of time, ask yourself: could that very reaction be part of the problem? 
Staring paralysed at the screen is an even bigger waste, after all.

• oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com <mailto:oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com>.
