
Apologies for the late debrief this morning, I’m just back at the computer 
after the formerly-known-as-Bupa-10km. Now known asthe Vitality 10km 
<https://www.vitalitylondon10000.co.uk/>, but I can’t quite get my head around 
that. I’d forgotten quite what a massive race it is – a huge field, starting 
more or less exactly where the London Marathon finishes, and looping around 
central London to St Paul’s and back.

Theoretically – and certainly for other people – it’s a fast course, though it 
never seems to work out that way for me. I made the mistake of starting too far 
back and spent the first two miles – a fair proportion of the race – trying to 
get past people. Then again, I’m not sure my heart was really in a proper “go 
for a PB race”, so perhaps I’m just making excuses. I finished in a negative 
split, which has to be a first for a 10km race for me, and a nowhere-near-PB 
time that still, I reckon, just about qualifies as a hard training workout. 
I’ve realised from previous summers of 10km races that I need a good run up at 
these things – starting with a good tempo run, building on that in a series of 
races through the summer. So let’s call this a season opener …

Not so for some of my club-mates, though – my congrats today go to my 
team-mates Nick and Julia, both of whom got PBs. The latter was going for her 
first sub-40 and didn’t so much get it as zoom straight past it, scoffing in 
the general direction of 39 minutes, too, to finish in 38min 36sec. I am in awe.

So, did you race this weekend? Do you, like me, need a few run-ups at a decent 
10km race or are you flying from the word go? (If so, can I borrow your legs?) 
As always, your triumphs, despair, advice and stories below the line. Wouldn’t 
be Monday without them.
