
President Obama’s historic three-day visit to Cuba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/20/barack-obama-cuba-visit-us-politics-shift-public-opinion-diplomacy>
 – the first by a US president since 1928 – has been the high point in a year 
of bold moves to restore diplomatic relations between the two countries.

When Obama touched down in Havana on Sunday, amid the rattling old Chevys and 
crumbling colonial architecture, he landed in a different environment to that 
of three years ago. Havana is now a city in which hundreds of teenagers gather 
each night in Parque Central – one of the new public Wi-Fi hotspots – to Skype 
family abroad or update their Facebook status. It is a capital where 
entrepreneurs are launching dining apps such as AlaMesa (a cross between Yelp 
and Open Table), digital youth culture magazines likeVistar 
<http://vistarmagazine.com/>, and businesses specialising in iPhone repairs. 
The cobbled streets are full of smartly dressed, bar-hopping young Cubans 
alongside the glut of tourists. This is a society brimming with anticipation.

Many of these changes began with Raúl Castro’s 2010 economic reform programme, 
which paved the way for thousands of Cubans to swap state jobs – with salaries 
of around $25 a month – for the fledgling world of private enterprise. Thethaw 
between Cuba and the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/17/us-cuba-diplomatic-relations-obama-raul-castro>
, announced in December 2014, accelerated this and last year the Cuban 
government issued about 496,000 small business licences. It is these
cuentapropistas who are behind the hundreds of new restaurants, bars, and shops 
in the capital.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hn8z%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hn8z%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e3028b4b3e68fa4d97b2c64d61ac5a15326d799%2F0_145_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%E2%80%99s%20Cuba%20visit%20highlights%20pace%20of%20change%20in%20country's%20tourism%20industry&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hn8z%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%E2%80%99s+Cuba+visit+highlights+pace+of+change+in+country%27s+tourism+industry&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hn8z%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e3028b4b3e68fa4d97b2c64d61ac5a15326d799%2F0_145_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
 Cubans gather to use a Wi-Fi hotspot in the Playa district of Havana. 
Photograph: Alamy 
“Many Cubans who work in tourism or have begun private enterprises are now 
experiencing a new prosperity and inspiring other Cubans to become inventive,” 
says Bette Wanderman, director of the documentary A Cuban Legend: the Story of 
Salvador González, who has been visiting the country for the past 19 years. “A 
lot of fun new places are popping up as people start to explore the idea of 
capitalism.”

Many Cubans who work in tourism are now experiencing a new prosperity and 
inspiring other Cubans to become inventive
Bette Wanderman, film-maker 
There is the design studio, shop and gallery Clandestina 
<https://www.facebook.com/ClandestinaDeCuba>, in the heart of the old city, 
which produces T-shirts, handbags and posters offering a distinctive take on 
Cuban life. And also the arts complexFábrica de Arte Cubano <http://www.fac.cu/>
 in the Vedado district that has live performances on its rooftop 
bar-restaurant, El Cocinero.Paladares (privately owned restaurants) such as the 
art-inspired304 O’Reilly 
<http://insightcuba.com/blog/2015/05/15/insight-paladares-304-oreilly> and 
Otranmanera <http://otramaneralahabana.com/en/>, home to El Bulli alumni Alvaro 
Diez, lead the way in the food scene.

More than 3 million people travelled to Cuba last year, boosted by a 40% 
increase in US visitors, and according to the International Monetary Fund as 
many as 10 million American tourists are expected if the 1961 trade embargo is 
lifted. It is a number the 63,000 hotel rooms simply can’t accommodate. One 
government tactic to manage this has been to increase prices by as much as 55%. 
The state-sponsored tourism bodyHabaguanex <http://www.habaguanex.ohc.cu/> 
channels profits from hotels, restaurants and tours into restoring derelict 
buildings and streets, as well as seeding social projects and community 
facilities. Locals however, have complained about the rocketing prices of taxis 
and eating out.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hn8z%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hn8z%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5cf70b0222c9f8dbf01603a6fd17b1e1a14f552%2F0_79_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%E2%80%99s%20Cuba%20visit%20highlights%20pace%20of%20change%20in%20country's%20tourism%20industry&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hn8z%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%E2%80%99s+Cuba+visit+highlights+pace+of+change+in+country%27s+tourism+industry&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hn8z%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5cf70b0222c9f8dbf01603a6fd17b1e1a14f552%2F0_79_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
 Otranmanera restaurant, Havana 
Susana Ortega, a freelance editor and producer in Cuba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cuba>, said: “We’ve been seeing lots of 
changes – more tourism, and everything is more expensive – but the daily lives 
of Cubans stay the same.”

But it’s tourism that could play a vital role in the country’s economic 
revival. Travel and tourism contributed an estimated 14.1% of GDP in 2015, 
which is expected to rise by 4.3% per annum and employ half a million people,
according to the World Travel and Tourism Council 
<https://www.wttc.org/-/media/files/reports/economic%20impact%20research/countries%202015/cuba2015.pdf>
. There are currently more than 50 investment projects in tourism under way 
with more global partnerships announced everyday. And American brands are 
lining up to get involved in the country. After launching last April,Cuba 
became Airbnb’s fastest growing market 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/aug/09/best-bars-restaurants-havana-trinidad-cuba-bed-breakfast-owners>
, now offering 3,700 rooms for an average of $48 a night, compared with $30 for 
the 20,000casas particulares (Cuban homestays) in the country. On the eve of 
Obama’s visit,Starwood Hotels and Resorts signed a deal 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/20/world/americas/american-firm-starwood-signs-deal-to-manage-hotels-in-cuba.html?_r=0>
 to become the first American hospitality chain to run hotels in Cuba; AT&T is 
in talks to expand equipment and infrastructure for cellular roaming services;
JetBlue is ready to launch commercial flights 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/18/travel/cuba-flights-jet-blue.html>; and 
Google is making a deal to improve internet access 
<http://www.theverge.com/2016/3/22/11282698/google-cuba-internet-access-obama>.

The Cuban government has, so far, kept a check on the pace of change. An 
editorial published last month in Granma 
<http://www.granma.cu/relaciones-diplomaticas-cuba-eeuu/2016-03-08/la-visita-a-cuba-del-presidente-barack-obama-08-03-2016-23-03-39>
, the official Communist party publication, said that, for Cuba, “Getting along 
does not mean having to give up our beliefs.” It is the younger generation and 
these new businesses that are putting pressure on the government to allow them 
to operate. “There is the belief among young people that the philosophy of Cuba 
can coexist with private enterprise and they’re not mutually exclusive,” said 
Lucie Greene, worldwide director of The Innovation Group at J Walter Thompson, 
which recently releaseda report entitled The Promise of Cuba 
<https://www.jwtintelligence.com/2016/03/the-innovation-group-launches-the-promise-of-cuba/>
. “The response we’ve had from economists is ‘there’s no going back now’.”
