
On Thursday last week, the UN secretary general listed Saudi Arabia 
responsible for killing children, bombing hospitals and schools 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-rights-un-saudi-yemen-idUSKCN0YO2RK>.


This places Saudi Arabia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia> and 
the coalition it leads in the dubious company of Isis, the Taliban, al-Shabaab 
and the Lord’s Resistance Army in the blacklist of organisations violating 
children’s rights in a conflict area.

By Monday, Saudi Arabia had been removed them from the list 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/07/rights-groups-condemn-removal-of-saudi-arabia-from-un-blacklist>
, erasing much of the UN’s credibility when it comes to defending human rights.

Related: Rights groups condemn removal of Saudi Arabia from UN blacklist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/07/rights-groups-condemn-removal-of-saudi-arabia-from-un-blacklist>

This sudden turnaround is hard to justify. The evidence that the Saudi-led 
coalition is bombing civilian areas in towns and cities in northYemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/yemen> is compelling.

The UN rapporteurs had found that the coalition was directly responsible for 
60% of child casualties from the fighting last year, including the deaths of 
510 children from bombing campaigns. They authenticated 49 bombings of schools 
and hospitals by Saudi Arabia in Yemen in 2015.

However, despite the evidence, the Saudis appear to have been given a free 
pass. Unlike the usual suspects who feature on the secretary general’sannual 
report on children affected by armed conflict 
<http://watchlist.org/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/200416-SG-report-on-CAAC.pdf>
 (pdf), the Saudis have powerful friends including the UK and the US – both 
permanent members of the security council.

They also have other points of influence at the UN based on their funding of 
key UN agencies,including Unicef 
<http://www.unicef.org/publicpartnerships/files/UNICEF_Compendium_of_Resource_Partner_Contributions_2014.pdf>
 (pdf) – the body responsible for promoting the adoption of the UN convention 
of the rights of the child.

The role of the UK in supporting the coalition is particularly troubling. Over 
£7bn of British weapons have been sold to Saudi Arabia since 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/19/uk-issues-28bn-export-licences-arms-saudi-arabia>
. The listing of the Saudi coalition in the UN report would have made it 
extremely difficult for the UK to continue to resist calls for an arms embargo.



Related: UK weapons sales to oppressive regimes top £3bn a year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/28/uk-weapons-sold-countries-poor-human-rights-saudi-arabia>

In the face of all this pressure, the secretary general appears to have 
blinked first, betraying the most vulnerable people on the planet – the 
children whom this process is designed to protect.

The official UN position is that the listing was removed pending an 
investigation. I’m concerned this investigation could become a smokescreen to 
cover a retreating UN office, rather than a genuine attempt to hold Saudi 
Arabia to account.

The UN appears to be acting as a club for the rich and powerful, pointing the 
finger at rebel groups and obscure militia but covering up for the violations 
committed by its member states.

For War Child, which works so hard to keep children safe in the most dangerous 
circumstances, it is further evidence that we cannot rely on the UN to do the 
right thing and stand with those most at risk.

Whether the coalition is blacklisted or not, the facts are plain. Saudi bombing
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/04/saudi-arabia-yemen-bombing-uk-claims-humanitarian-law-committee>
 is killing hundreds of children and destroying the schools and hospitals on 
which children rely. This bombing must stop and other avenues explored to bring 
peace to Yemen.

The role of the UK in supporting this military campaign should also be 
curtailed immediately. The British government claims its advisers are working 
with the Saudi airforce to make sure that civilian casualties are avoided. The 
evidence shows that this strategy is clearly not working.

It is time for the UK to withdraw its support from this coalition, to ban 
sales of arms to Saudi Arabia, and to stand up for the international 
humanitarian laws it has committed itself to.

• Rob Williams is CEO of War Child UK
