
Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> campaigners are warning of 
a growing diabetes epidemic in developing countries, as poor nutrition and 
obesity rates climb.

The World Health Organisation (WHO) has dedicated World Health Day 
<http://www.who.int/campaigns/world-health-day/2016/en/> on 7 April to raising 
awareness of the“staggering burden” 
<http://www.who.int/campaigns/world-health-day/2016/event/en/> in low- and 
middle-income countries of the rise in type 2 diabetes.The disease caused 
approximately 1.5 million deaths in 2012 
<http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs312/en/>, with more than 80% in 
low- and middle-income countries. The WHO projects that diabetes will be the 
seventh leading cause of death by 2030.

But alongside a rise in non-communicable diseases such as cardiovascular 
problems, cancers and chronic respiratory illnesses, poorer countries continue 
to face the devastating impact of infectious diseases: tuberculosis, malaria, 
Aids and diarrhoea.

If you were in charge of global health campaigns, what would you focus on? 
With increasingly diverse health issues in developing countries, what should be 
the priority, and why?

Submit a response of 250 words or fewer, and we’ll publish the best ones 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/series/students-speak> on World 
Health Day. Keep your response clear and concise, avoiding development or 
academic jargon. Email your response todevelopment@theguardian.com 
<mailto:development@theguardian.com> with “Students Speak 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/series/students-speak>” in the 
subject line. Please include your name, the country where you live, and the 
university or college you attend. Submissions close at 6pm BST on 4 April.
