
Wednesday afternoon found Jeremiah Kuol pacing up and down the maternity ward 
of Juba teaching hospital, wondering whether his wife, Hannah Nyabok, would 
live or die.

She had suffered a severe haemorrhage after giving birth the day before but, 
withSouth Sudan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-sudan>’s largest 
public hospital facing a week-long power cut and a shortage of medicine, there 
seemed little hope of saving her life.


“There’s no power, no facilities here, there’s nothing,” Kuol said. “Nothing I 
can do.”

The teaching hospital, a sprawling complex of wards and operating theatres 
built up over the past decade with tens of millions of dollars of international 
donor support, has all but ceased functioning.

Medical staff haven’t been paid for three months and, for more than a week, 
there’s been no fuel for the generators, making surgery impossible.

Outside one ward sat a paralysed man who was waiting for the electricity to be 
restored so that surgeons could try to remove the bullet from his spine. At 
night, only the maternity ward stays open. In it, women give birth by the light 
of the candles that they bring themselves.

Although a new transitional government has been formed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/26/south-sudan-rebel-leader-reik-machar-returns-juba>
 after more thantwo years of bloody civil war 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/11/south-sudans-soldiers-allowed-to-rape-civilians-civil-war-says-un-government-torture>
, South Sudan’s institutions are weak and the state is unable to pay its civil 
servants or provide basic services to its people.

“The whole hospital is just collapsing,” said Dr Fadul Ramadan, a surgeon. “If 
you have no money to go outside [to a private clinic], maybe you will just 
surrender and die.”


Doctors ask families to bring their own fuel to run generators during 
surgeries, or simply turn patients away, as they did to Jackson Jada Patrick, 
who brought his pregnant wife, Lorna Poni, for an emergency C-section after her 
uterus ruptured in their home village, three hours’ drive away.

“What can I say? There’s no help. Why is there no anything?” Patrick said, 
while flagging down a taxi to try their luck at Juba’s military hospital, which 
has fuel.

“It’s like we are in Florence Nightingale 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Florence_Nightingale>’s time,” said one hospital 
employee, who declined to speak on the record for fear of retribution from 
bosses.


Juba’s fuel shortage comes as South Sudan’s import-dependent economy has been 
hammered by massive defence spending – $850m (£581m) on weapons alone out of a 
total government budget of about $4bn, according to the UN – and plummeting oil 
revenues due to a worldwide drop in crude prices.

The hospital’s plight is also the result of competing priorities. Last 
weekend, more than a dozen fuel trucks arrived in Juba, bringing relief to 
motorists, yet none of the fuel made it to the hospital. Military escorts for 
VIP vehicles continue to patrol Juba’s streets as usual.


And, while the hospital received a load of fuel on Thursday night, powering 
the wards for part of Friday, lights were off again by late afternoon.

The hospital’s director general, John Chol, referred the Guardian to an 
undersecretary at the health ministry, who proved unavailable despite numerous 
calls.

Juba teaching hospital is also out of most medicines. South Sudan’s public 
clinics exhausted their drug supplies earlier this year. Although the 
government increased war spending, it did not budget for basic medical supplies.

“The essential drugs that are supposed to be in the hospital and are used for 
emergency cases are not available at all,” said Ramadan. “We don’t have fluids. 
We don’t have oxygen.”


Sixty intern doctors are on strike over no pay and subpar conditions. “There 
was not even water [in the hospital],” said one, who declined to give his name 
for fear of jeopardising his career. “You’re supposed to wash your hands when 
you examine the patient.”

South Sudan’s education sector, which has found itself similarly marginalised 
in the latest government budget, is also under severe strain. Professors at 
five public universities went on strike yesterday after going three months 
without pay. According to the UN children’s agency, Unicef, half the country’s 
children are out of school.

One sector that has stayed afloat, however, is the military. Human Rights 
Watch releaseda damning report this week alleging army abuses in Western Bahr 
el Ghazal state 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2016/05/24/south-sudan-civilians-killed-tortured-western-region>
 in recent months despite a peace deal signed with rebels nine months ago.


The report said government soldiers raped women, killed civilians, and 
tortured men with electric shocks during counterinsurgency operations, 
accusations the army denied.

“With all eyes on the new national unity government in Juba, government 
soldiers have been literally getting away with murder in the country’s western 
regions,” said Human Rights Watch’sAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> director, Daniel Bekele.

Amnesty International has also said that dozens of detainees held in poorly 
ventilated metal shipping containers 20km from Juba are“suffering in appalling 
conditions and their overall treatment is nothing short of torture” 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2016/05/south-sudan-dozens-of-detainees-at-risk-of-death-in-shipping-containers/>
.

Hannah Nyabok turned out to be one of the luckier patients at the hospital. 
After her husband went broke spending $100 on screening donor blood, an appeal 
went round Juba that eventually resulted in her finding an A+ match, which was 
taken after the family of another patient brought fuel to run the blood bank’s 
generators. That donation was then topped up with blood that had been intended 
for an anaemic patient.

Jacob Chol, a political science professor at Juba university, said the 
government ofthe world’s youngest country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jul/10/south-sudan-celebrates-independence>
 needed to rethink its budget to avert further disaster.

“If you can’t provide services, that is a sign of a failing state,” he said. 
“The [government] has to recognise this and pay the salaries so we are at least 
limping.”



