
My friend Ann Prior, who has died aged 66 of cancer, was driven to live a 
simple and impressively resourceful life. She was a cook, author, artist and 
adventurer. She was fiercely independent and cared deeply about the destructive 
impact of humans on the environment, long before it arrived in the national 
consciousness.

Ann shunned any employment that might lead to her feeling trapped, and allowed 
her desire to live near the sea to influence the ways in which she made her 
living. She inherited her love and knowledge of food from her mother, and 
refined her skills to become an excellent cook. She relished making a meal out 
of chance ingredients, her stated favourite being nettles.

With her friend Bo Simmons, Ann bought and ran Burrastow House 
<http://www.burrastowhouse.co.uk/en/> in Shetland, which was almost immediately 
recommended in the Good Food Guide. However, the job of seasonal cook for the 
RSPB Fair Isle bird observatory was to become her chosen employment for much of 
the following 30 years, to the delight of both staff and visitors.

Ann was born in Christchurch, New Zealand, to Mary and Arthur Prior. In 1959 
Arthur got a job as a professor of philosophy at the University of Manchester 
and the family emigrated to the UK. When Ann arrived at Withington school at 
the age of nine, she was already an accomplished writer, a remarkable artist 
and a great reader.

When her father became a don at Balliol College, Oxford, Ann started at Oxford 
high school, which is where I met her. Her arrival in our sixth form was 
heralded by the news that the new girl had a published novel:The Sky Cage 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Sky-Cage-Ann-Prior/dp/B0017HQ1FI> (1967). A sequel 
soon followed:Mirror Image 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Mirror-image-Ann-Prior/dp/0701114053/ref=sr_1_2?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1464795480&sr=1-2>
 (1969). From the proceeds of her books, Ann bought a narrowboat, Medusa, which 
was moored near Oxford and in which she lived while studying English at St 
Hugh’s College.

Ann was drawn to boats – and islands. Her family had sailed to Britain via 
Pitcairn and Curaçao, and years later, during the 1990s, she set foot on 
Ascension and St Helena on the way to the Falkland Islands to cook in hotels 
and on ships. She met Ken Passfield, a marine officer, and together they sailed 
among remote islands. For many years Ann chose to live in perpetual summer, 
alternating her employment between the northern and southern hemispheres – 
between Shetland and the islands of the South Atlantic. During a period as 
postmistress for South Georgia, she assisted with bird-related projects and, 
with Ken, explored deserted whaling stations against a background of battling 
elephant seals and nesting albatross.

As an artist, she painted florid frescoes of voluptuous men and women on 
ceilings in Oxford while a student; most recently she produced watercolour 
landscapes of St Kilda.

Ann is survived by her older brother, Martin.
