
The purpose of any interview is to find the best person for the job. But with 
candidates’ nerves jangling and the recruitment crisis causing increased 
pressure, it can be hard to make sure the right appointment is made.

So we’ve spoken to a range of headteachers and deputies from across the UK to 
find their top tips on how to be a good interviewer. Here are some insider tips:

Set the questions

Selecting the right questions ahead of interviews is key, according to Andy 
Smith, headteacher ofCarluke high school <http://www.carluke-highschool.org.uk/>
 in South Lanarkshire. “You need to develop a clear picture of the behaviours, 
knowledge and skills you would expect the successful candidate to have, and 
tailor the questions to ensure that you draw these out,” he says.

Related: Five ways to nail your final term as a trainee teacher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/may/23/five-ways-nail-final-term-trainee-teacher>

“They should be clear, concise and open.” For example: “Please describe how 
you have improved learning and teaching in your current post and tell us how 
you know you have been successful.”

The headteacher might select the questions alone or in consultation with other 
panel members. For some promoted posts, the questions may be decided upon by a
leeting 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=anecAQAAQBAJ&lpg=PA1007&ots=TZixasmNCN&dq=leet%3B%20plural%20noun%3A%20leets%20a%20list%20of%20candidates%20selected%20for%20a%20post.&pg=PA1007#v=onepage&q=leet;%20plural%20noun:%20leets%20a%20list%20of%20candidates%20selected%20for%20a%20post.&f=false>
 panel, while some local authorities have standard question banks.

Decide which panel member will be asking each question and take time to 
discuss what a model answer might be. You could write down the key points 
you’re looking for, or ask particular panel members to take careful notes 
relating to particular questions (to avoid everyone scribbling furiously at the 
same time). And make sure you talk about what will happen if the panel can’t 
reach agreement.

Peter Kent, headteacher of Lawrence Sheriff school 
<http://www.lawrencesheriffschool.net/> in Rugby, says: “The interview should 
be an extended conversation that helps you get to know the person. Tricky 
questions can often achieve little if they merely put the interviewee on edge.”

Get set up

It’s important to adopt a tone that is both professional and relaxed. Have 
water and tissues to hand, make sure phones are switched off, hang a Do Not 
Disturb sign on the door, and arrange the seating so that is not too close to 
heaters.

“Sit around a table, keep the panel small and avoid a sense of rushing,” says 
Kent.

Carefully consider where you hold the interview too. “I was once interviewed 
in a room with a corrugated roof,” Smith says. “Hail stones started and the 
interview turned into a shouting match.”

The questioning

You might want to consider how the interview questions could be rephrased in 
advance as candidates are allowed to ask for this.

It’s also a good idea to give the candidate an idea of the running order from 
the outset, and that there will be a set bank of questions for each candidate, 
to make them feel comfortable. Lee Card, deputy headteacher atCherry Orchard 
primary school 
<http://www.cherryorchard-pri.worcs.sch.uk/Cherry_Orchard_Primary_School.html> 
in Worcester, adds: “[Make clear] that individual responses may elicit further 
follow-up questions and discussions. This assures candidates that you are not 
drilling away at a response because it wasn’t a good one.”

You can also ease candidates in before getting to more technical questions. 
Sharon McLellan, headteacher ofLaurieknowe primary school 
<http://www.dumgal.gov.uk/index.aspx?articleid=4273> in Dumfries, says it is 
good to start with a settling in style question.

Related: Recruitment lessons: how Japan and Australia attract teachers into 
rural schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/may/22/recruitment-lessons-japan-australia-teachers-rural-schools>

Robin Bevan, headteacher at Southend high school for boys 
<http://www.shsb.org.uk/page/default.asp?title=Home&pid=1> in Essex and the 
Association of Teachers and Lecturers (ATL) <https://www.atl.org.uk/> national 
leadership representative, recommends using questions that don’t have an 
obvious answer. For example: “How would you handle a pupil who is refusing to 
comply with your instructions?” could lend itself to a textbook response. You 
could re-phrase this to: “Can you give me an example of a time when a pupil 
refused to comply with your instructions? What did you do and what effect did 
it have?” As a follow-up: “If you encountered the same situation again, is 
there anything you would do differently?”

Bevan is also a fan of questions that give a flavour of the individual, such 
as: “What do you do to relax?”, and those that require the candidate to talk at 
some length, such as: “Can you tell me about your favourite bit of chemistry?”

“If they come across as unenthused on their favourite topic, then I don’t want 
anything to do with them,” he says.

Keep to time

You might be spending a full day interviewing, with lunch and coffee breaks 
scheduled in, so it’s important that candidates aren’t allowed to go beyond 
their allocated time. “Setting out expectations at the start of the interview 
will help,” says Smith.

Feedback

It’s easy to fall into a trap of positively encouraging candidates. But Smith 
cautions against this: “Don’t give praise after responses. A polite ‘thank you’ 
is sufficient. You don’t want unsuccessful candidates who have been told their 
answers were ‘fantastic’ or ‘brilliant’. This makes feedback very difficult.”

At the end of the interview, Alan Crawford, assistant principal of Shireland 
Collegiate Academy <http://thelearningbank.co.uk/shireland/> in Birmingham, 
says it is important to be clear with candidates about when they will hear the 
panel’s final decision. You should also devote enough time to give feedback to 
unsuccessful candidates.

Involve students

Rather than relying on the interview alone, it’s good to use a number of 
methods to help you identify the best candidate, such as giving the pupil 
council an opportunity to meet the potential new recruits.

And it is highly likely that you will want to see the candidates teach. As 
Ralph Surman, deputy head ofCantrell primary school 
<http://www.cantrell.nottingham.sch.uk/> in Nottingham, says: “They are not 
going to know the children, but that doesn’t matter. I am looking to see if 
they would fit into the context of the school. Would they be the right kind of 
person to teach the kind of pupils that we have?”

You might also want to include a written task for secondary teachers based on 
the academic content of their subject, for example a question from a recent 
A-level paper.

Offer candidates a tour of the school, but be sure to show them round 
individually. “Otherwise,” says Bevan, “you get a fairly horrible piece of 
behaviour emerging – the competitive question asking.”

Trust your instincts

Related: 10 professional development ideas for teachers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/teacher-blog/2013/oct/22/teacher-professional-development-school-advice>

It’s important to remember that interviewing is a dynamic process, and the 
person who looks strongest on paper might not turn out to be the best on the 
day. As Kent says: “We need process and rigour, but my experience is that 
instinct is often a key indicator in finding the right person.”

It also helps to be prepared for the unexpected, according to McLellan. “I 
once interviewed with a colleague and one of the candidates had a complete 
meltdown and was inconsolable,” she says. “Another time, I had to stop an 
interview when it became clear that the candidate hadn’t the first clue what we 
were asking. He had been away from teaching for several years – a fact he 
omitted from his fabulous, well-written application form.

“As for the taciturn candidate who stated, straight-faced, ‘I am very 
enthusiastic’… Let’s just say my colleague and I had to suppress our sudden, 
surprisingly synchronised, coughing fits.”

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.



