
Once you’ve successfully battled the Clearing 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/clearing> phone line scrum to secure a 
place at a university you’re happy with, it will be tempting to go and join 
your mates to celebrate. But there’s still work to be done to set yourself up 
for the year ahead.

Related: Students: read this before moving into a new house 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/sep/29/students-read-this-before-moving-into-new-house>

First of all, accommodation. Unless your uni campus is near to your home, 
you’ll need to sign up for somewhere to live – usually in all-student halls of 
residence, or a private rental. This can be scary for Clearing students – you 
might worry that your relatively late application means that all the best 
options have long-gone. But that’s not usually the case, and your new uni will 
have staff ready to point you in the direction of options that are still 
available.

If you’ve got time, it can be a good idea to visit the campus and look around 
the accommodation options – do you want to pay extra for en suite? Do you want 
the ease of catered halls, or the independence of a private rental? Look on 
student forums online too – some areas and halls of residence are known for 
being party hotspots, while others are quieter, and some have lots of students 
from particular courses.

You’ll also need to sort out your student finances. That means applying for a 
tuition fee loan from the government and looking into non-repayable maintenance 
grants (which are being scrapped from September 2016) and maintenance loans, if 
you’re eligible, as these help to cover uni living costs. Again, don’t worry 
about timing – as long as you apply soon, your student funding will be in place 
by the start of term.

Related: Which universities offer the most financial support? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jun/10/which-universities-offer-the-best-bursaries>

If finances are a struggle, it’s worth investigating whether your university 
offers bursaries – most do, and they can be a great help for your student 
budget. And use the coming weeks before uni starts to open a student bank 
account: the borrowing facilities may prove useful, and by applying now, you’ll 
have more time to consider the options before the packed freshers’ week 
schedule.

Lastly, you’ll probably have some shopping to do too. Your tutors might send 
out an early reading list, and while you will want to get started on some, 
don’t feel you have to buy all of these (usually expensive) tomes. Most of your 
books will be available in faculty libraries – and because most courses don’t 
change radically every year, there’s also likely to be a lot of second-hand 
copies floating around at bargain prices.

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
