
As we’ve established 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/oct/27/dad-dressing-how-your-wardrobe-changes-when-youve-had-a-baby>
, dressing when you’re a dad should all be about mess management. But with 
Father’s Day approaching the question remains: how to do it and not look like 
you’ve dressed yourself under the influence of heavy mood stabilisers?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y397%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y397%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64efe2c5281bb915220fa3ad4c9379530ddad769%2F0_0_1600_1280%2F1600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dressing%20as%20a%20dad%3A%20style%20rules%20to%20live%20by&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y397%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dressing+as+a+dad%3A+style+rules+to+live+by&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y397%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64efe2c5281bb915220fa3ad4c9379530ddad769%2F0_0_1600_1280%2F1600.jpg>
 Adidas Stan Smiths. Photograph: adidas 
The seismic life change that happens post-baby has a ripple effect to your 
wardrobe and buying new clothes falls way down the list of priorities. So you 
end up schlepping around like a schlub in your oldest and most trustworthy 
clothes: for me, this included a black corduroy shirt that was both ripped and 
accidentally bleach dyed but was a I-don’t-need-to-think-about-it piece. Gareth 
Scourfield (stylist for Daniel Craig and Colin Firth, and contributing fashion 
editor to Esquire) stresses the importance of moving away from the wardrobe 
upon which you’ve always relied, to something different when you enter 
fatherhood. “It’s about making an effort and knowing when you have simply grown 
out of and grown apart from clothes you’ve been wearing since the year BC – 
before children,” he says. For this, you need a new agenda for how you dress: 
look at a handful of stylish celebrities – it’s clear that they all follow 
certain dad dressing rules.
 Kanye West dons his best Beckham version 1.0 look with daughter North. 
The daddy of all well-dressed dads is David Beckham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/david-beckham>. Taking a look at late 90s 
throwback photos of the football star with babyBrooklyn 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/brooklyn-beckham>, he kept his look 
clean and straightforward – it was a lesson in basics: white T-shirts, khaki 
cardigans, black shirts and sweatshirts. It’s a simple look he has recently 
re-embraced. Scourfield says that simplicity is key to successful dad dressing. 
“Keep your colour palette to, say, five key colours and work on adding texture, 
such as herringbone and hopsack.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y397%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y397%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3d66db659a3766b17fe7141663a7c6bf476137a%2F453_394_1387_2517%2F1387.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dressing%20as%20a%20dad%3A%20style%20rules%20to%20live%20by&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y397%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dressing+as+a+dad%3A+style+rules+to+live+by&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y397%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3d66db659a3766b17fe7141663a7c6bf476137a%2F453_394_1387_2517%2F1387.jpg>
 John Legend goes for a basic all-black look. Photograph: Marcio Jose Sanchez/AP
John Legend <https://www.theguardian.com/music/johnlegend> and Kanye West 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/kanyewest> are two young fathers who have 
more or less followed this advice. West’s fashion sense during North West’s 
first year was noticeably more conservative than his post-Yeezy looks. Famous 
shots of the father-daughter pair – sleeping side by side and in the recording 
studio – saw Kanye going matchy-matchy with Nori, first in a grey top, then in 
a faded white T-shirt. Very Version 1.0 Beckham.

The role of the modern dad is eclectic and action-filled (by “action” of 
course, I mean “ability to sprint from one Frozen party to the next”), so your 
wardrobe has to reflect that. “Stick to the three Fs: fit, fabric and 
function,” says Scourfield. He suggests investing in slim-cut chinos in olive 
and navy fromUniqlo <http://www.uniqlo.com/uk/> or Massimo Dutti 
<http://www.massimodutti.com/gb/> and upgrading your trainers to a pair of white
Stan Smiths 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/dec/22/2015-stan-smith-went-mass-adidas-sneakers-trainer>
. Another necessity is the dad cap: the sort of cotton textured, subtly 
embroidered snapback headgear that is multipurpose and allweather.

In general, don’t look at your wardrobe as separates – think of them working 
together to created a whole new look. Like your new role, Scourfield says, your 
style should be malleable. “Make it as flexible as possible.”
