
Hundreds of people denied a vote in last month’s elections after a polling 
register blunder at London’s Barnet council, could be entitled to compensation, 
according to the chairman of aLondon <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> 
assembly inquiry into the fiasco.

Up to 600 people attempting to vote in Barnet in the mayoral and London 
assembly elections on 5 May were turned away 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/05/fine-weather-voters-barnet-local-elections-2016-london>
, including the chief rabbi, Ephraim Mirvis.

Barnet council told a London assembly election review hearing that one of the 
presiding officers warned of something being wrong with the election registers 
the day before the election.

Related: Voting shambles in Barnet as Britain goes to the polls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/05/fine-weather-voters-barnet-local-elections-2016-london>

Many of the council’s 155 polling stations were sent incomplete electoral 
registers, but the mistake was not corrected until the polling had begun and 
some voters were being turned away because their names were missing from the 
poll list.

It emerged during the hearing that the mistake could lead to hundreds of 
claims for maladministration to the Electoral Commission.

John Hooton, the council’s interim chief executive and returning officer, 
admitted that the council failed in its duties “to some residents”. Hooton 
apologised for the problems.

Hooton’s predecessor, Andrew Travers, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/09/barnet-council-chief-andrew-travers-steps-down-election-blunder>
 the previous Barnet and Camden constituency returning officer, left the 
council by “mutual agreement” four days after the blunder.

Hooton pointed out that about half of the people turned away at the polling 
stations were able to vote later after the corrected registers were dispatched. 
“We are talking about hundreds rather than thousands of people,” Hooton told 
the panel.

Barnet’s assurance director, Davina Fiore, said: “We will never know an 
absolutely accurate figure ... Of those who said they were impacted, nearly 50% 
were able to return. So if we say between 500 and 600 were impacted then it 
would be between 250 and 300 that were able to return.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ydjn%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ydjn%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4965eeeaea4f1c349252fbaeeb5b731d62681890%2F428_710_3516_2110%2F3516.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barnet%20polling%20blunder%3A%20hundreds%20may%20be%20entitled%20to%20compensation&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ydjn%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Barnet+polling+blunder%3A+hundreds+may+be+entitled+to+compensation&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ydjn%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4965eeeaea4f1c349252fbaeeb5b731d62681890%2F428_710_3516_2110%2F3516.jpg>
 London assembly HQ, London. Photograph: David Levene/Guardian 
Len Duvall, leader of the Labour group on the London assembly, who is chairing 
the review, suggested those people unable to return would be entitled to a 
claim against the council. “If I’m one of those people that gave my name and 
contact details and I was unable to return to vote – have I got a claim against 
you for maladministration? I’m not sure I could put a price on a vote, but I 
think the ombudsman could,” he said.

Fiore replied: “We have kept all the records of the day. I don’t believe 
people would have a claim against us, but that’s a matter for people to decide 
themselves.”

The local government ombudsman said it would be a matter for the Electoral 
Commission.

Fiore gave details of how presiding officers raised the alarm about the 
electoral list the night before the election. She told the panel: “A presiding 
officer rang a member of the team and said ‘I’m not sure my register is right’. 
The member of the team they spoke to thought it was an isolated incident. It 
was only when that member of staff got to that polling station and saw the 
register that it was realised that ‘oh my goodness this is the wrong register 
and this might not be an isolated incident’. The whole system then went into 
recovery mode.”

Opening the hearing, Duvall said: “I do think mistakes happen in terms of 
elections, but usually they are at the minor end. This on the scale of one to 
10 is probably a nine or even a 10. Denying someone the opportunity to vote 
must be quite serious in our democracy. This is a pretty major failure.”


An investigation by Barnet council published this month found that human error 
led to the incorrect electoral registers being printed 
<https://www.barnet.gov.uk/citizen-home/news/Barnet-elections-investigation-published.html>
. The council accepted the recommendations in full and has put in place a 
number of checks in an attempt to avoid similar problems in next week’s EU 
referendum.

Hooton was asked about lessons the council had learned. “The overall rule 
about running elections is check, check and check again,” he said.


Fiore added: “We did not have a check in place for the accuracy of the 
register ... We should have had a check and we should have picked that up.


“All the staff involved in the election were actually quite devastated by what 
happened [and] fully recognise the seriousness of what happened and would agree 
with your assessment of it being a major catastrophe in terms of elections. We 
absolutely recognise that public confidence in the electoral system is 
absolutely paramount and we are going to do what we need to do to get that 
back.”
