
For any small business, satisfying your first overseas order is a significant 
milestone. It is a chance to kickstart growth on a new level, increase 
competitiveness and open up new opportunities for innovation.

But your first venture into exporting requires time, research and some 
internal adjustments. And in many cases the approach from aninternational 
customer may come out of the blue 
<http://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2015/dec/03/the-opportunity-is-there-so-is-your-business-export-ready>
 for online sellers. Jorrit Jorritsma, co-founder of bag maker Millican 
<http://www.homeofmillican.com/>, explained in a recent blog 
<http://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2015/dec/03/the-opportunity-is-there-so-is-your-business-export-ready>
: “From the moment you launch, you’re effectively exporting because if you’re 
on the internet people will find you and place orders.”

However, unanticipated orders may leave busy entrepreneurs with little time to 
prepare. How much will you need to know about your new market? Which trading 
regulations might you need to consider? From intellectual property to 
copyright, what are the legal issues you might need to understand?

For aspiring exporters, e-commerce can seem like the easy option  
<http://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2013/feb/18/online-sales-overseas>
but there are still plenty of considerations to take into account. Should you 
choose one of the many existing online marketplaces or create your own? If you 
do go it alone, how can you make sure your website is appropriate and 
attractive for the markets you want to reach?

In this Q&A, experts will be online between 1pm and 2pm on 23 February to 
guide you through the process of fulfilling your first order. It’s easy to take 
part – justregister to comment 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/register?skipConfirmation=true&INTCMP=HEADER_GU_REG&returnUrl=https%3A%2F%2Fmembership.theguardian.com%2Fjoin%2Ffriend%2Fenter-details>
. Once you’ve signed up, you can post your questions in the comments thread 
below this article.

You can also tweet @GdnSmallBiz <https://twitter.com/GdnSmallBiz> with your 
questions, or email them to smallbusinessnetwork@theguardian.com and we’ll put 
them to the panel for you. Comments are currently open and we welcome questions 
in advance.

Our panel

Mark Lesniak is director of Great British Store 
<https://www.greatbritishstore.com/>, a business-to-business online marketplace 
for British SMEs.

Mike Josypenko is the director of special projects at the Institute of Export 
<http://www.export.org.uk/>, the professional body for international trade. He 
helps businesses to access the opportunities in international trade and has 
four decades of experience in his field.

Hilary Pullen is community manager at online craft marketplace Folksy 
<https://folksy.com/> and author of Online Marketing for your Craft Business  
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Online-Marketing-Your-Craft-Business/dp/1446304892>– 
how to get your handmade products discovered, shared and sold on the internet.

Demelza Wallace is e-commerce manager at Montezuma’s 
<https://www.montezumas.co.uk/>, a family-owned manufacturer and retailer of 
British chocolate. Their online store now serves the UK, European and US 
markets and they export business-to-business as far afield as Australia and 
Kuwait.

Daniel Loughlin is CEO of IRP Commerce <http://www.irpcommerce.com/>, which 
provides an e-commerce platform and advice to help businesses boost their local 
and international sales.

Laurence Gavin is a commercial and corporate partner at Irwin Mitchell  
<http://www.irwinmitchell.com/>in Sheffield, with special expertise in advising 
SMEs.

Ben Silas is the business development director for the south at UPS 
<https://www.ups.com/>, a major logistics company.

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
