
Really? Not even My Brilliant Friend? You’re so lucky you’ve got the whole 
series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/oct/31/elena-ferrante-literary-sensation-nobody-knows>
 ahead of you, and you haven’t even got to wait for her to finish. Look, take 
this one. I always carry a spare copy in case I find someone hasn’t discovered 
her, though you must be the last person in London. Or in case I want to be in 
50s Naples again – you can practically smell the laundry drying in the streets.

Yes, I am an evangelist, but it’s not just me: everyone who reads Ferrante is 
a Ferrante evangelist –Rachel Cusk 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/30/books/review/the-story-of-the-lost-child-by-elena-ferrante.html?_r=0>
,James Wood <http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2013/01/21/women-on-the-verge>, 
you name it. It’s hard to explain – just the accuracy about women’s experience 
and friendships, that searing rivalry that goes along with the love and almost 
physical passion. There’s this incredible scene when Lena bathes Lila before 
her – sorry, spoiler alert – you know that kind of deep, love-hate thing 
between women? Well, even if you don’t, which actually I don’t believe, she’s 
such an incredible storyteller. There’s this huge cast of characters, like the 
terrifying murderer Don Pingu, the handsome gangster Pinocchio, lame Cappuccino 
the shoemaker and mad old Nuttina with her 95 children.

Who said anything about Mean Girls meets One Hundred Years Of Solitude? 
Ferrante’s a total original. That’s why it’s so brilliantshe’s up for the 
International Booker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/10/man-booker-international-longlist-elena-ferrante-orhan-pamuk>
, even if people are saying they’re just trying to flush her out. Nobody knows 
who she is! Course it’s not a stunt – the books speak for themselves. Even if I 
knew who she was, I’d be obsessed with her, but it does make you admire her 
even more, that she won’t play the whole promotional game.

Related: Modern tribes: the wild swimmer 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/23/wild-swimmer-modern-tribes-catherine-bennett>

Course it’s a her, don’t be silly. How would a man understand the truth of 
girls’ friendships, the way they are this cauldron of seething jealousy, along 
with that almost erotic connection as their lithe, young bodies ripen into 
sumptuous matronhood? I haven’t even mentioned the brilliant translation.

You’ll see, in a month, I promise you won’t be able to think or talk about 
anything but Ferrante, unless it’sKarl Ove Knausgaard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/karl-ove-knausgard>. Really? Not even A 
Death In The Family 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/apr/25/death-in-family-karl-ove-knausgaard-review>
? Lucky!
