
On Sunday the White House announced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/01/malia-obama-attend-harvard-university-2017-gap-year>
 that Barack Obama’s daughter, Malia, will take a year off after high school 
before attendingHarvard University 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/harvard-university>.

Moving away from the “Gap Yah <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eKFjWR7X5dU>” 
cliche (epitomised by Jack Whitehall’sFresh Meat character, JP 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8gwKyRzjr6g>) elite universities such as 
Harvard are encouraging students to take gap years so they can build up their 
CV and work experience.

“Taking a year out can set you apart from a crowd of other applicants,” says 
Katie Bateman 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/17/go-and-work-abroad-it-could-have-career-benefits-you-never-imagined>
, a careers adviser at the University of Gloucestershire. “Graduates can learn 
another language and prove just how adaptable they are by embracing change and 
learning to adjust to a different culture.”

Whether you use the time to learn a language, experience a new culture or get 
to grips with a new skill, an Erasmus Impact study showsemployers value 
<http://go.international.ac.uk/erasmus-impact-study-regional-analysis> 
international experience.

So what’s the best way to make the most of your year out? Is it better to 
volunteer abroad, or work closer to home and build experience that reflects 
your career goals? Join us onWednesday 11 May from 1pm to 3pm BST for a live 
chat with the experts. We’ll be discussing:

 * How to make the most of taking a year out. 
 * Tips on finding work experience during a gap year. 
 * Ways to boost your CV with a year abroad. 
The Q&A will take place in the comments section below this article. Taking 
part is easier than ever: to commentcreate a free Guardian account 
<https://id.theguardian.com/register?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>, or log in 
using your Twitter or Facebook profiles. Alternatively, you can tweet us
@GuardianCareers <https://twitter.com/GuardianCareers> or email your questions 
tocharlotte.seager@theguardian.com 
<https://mail.google.com/mail/u/0/?view=cm&fs=1&tf=1&source=mailto&to=charlotte.seager@theguardian.com>
, who can post them for you.

Panel

Richard Nimmo is Chair of the Year Out Group <http://www.yearoutgroup.org/>, a 
trade association that promotes the benefits of well-structured gap year 
programmes. He is also Managing Director ofBlue Ventures Expeditions 
<http://www.blueventures.org/>, an ecotourism organisation that offers marine 
conservation expeditions in Madagascar, Belize and East Timor.

Vicky McNeil-Kornevall is the co-founder of WorkingAbroad.com 
<http://www.workingabroad.com/> – one of the most popular websites on voluntary 
work overseas. She has supported projects across five continents and has 
successfully placed thousands of volunteers in humanitarian and environmental 
positions.

Matt Arnerich works as a content writer for leading graduate recruitment agency
Inspiring Interns <http://www.inspiringinterns.com/>. An avid traveller 
himself, Matt advises graduates on how to stay ahead in the competitive world of
graduate jobs 
<http://www.inspiringinterns.com/candidates/graduate-jobs-internships/london-south-east>
.

Miranda Reid is associate director of Multilingualvacancies.com 
<http://www.multilingualvacancies.com/>, a Europe-wide job board targeting job 
seekers with fluency in English and another language. Before this, Reid began 
her career at an international specialist recruitment agency.

Joe Hallwood is the founder of Tefl Org UK <http://www.tefl.org.uk/>, and has 
worked in TEFL for over 20 years advising graduates on teaching overseas. Prior 
to this, he taught English for eight years in Greece and France, before 
returning to the UK to retrain in marketing.

Lydia Fairman is an HR and resourcing specialist, who owns HR and recruitment 
consultancy,Fairman Consulting <http://www.fairmanconsulting.co.uk/>. Fairman 
also offers free CV advice, interview guidance and careers blogs to help job 
seekers succeed.

Sophie Graham is a careers adviser for the National Careers Service, 
specialising in matching young people and graduates to careers. Graham also 
works for the National Careers Service Helpline and regularly attends careers 
fairs, UCAS events, Skills Shows and Employment Roadshows.

Jon Gregory is a job search, application and interview specialist. He’s the 
author of Winning That Job, a guide for students and graduates, editor of
win-that-job.com <http://www.win-that-job.com/> and is a regional ambassador 
for National Careers Week.

Victoria McLean, CV writer and interview coach, is the founder of CityCV.co.uk 
<http://www.citycv.co.uk/>. She is a former recruitment manager at Goldman 
Sachs and Merrill Lynch, and is a multiple prize winner in the global CV 
writing industry awards.

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
