
Labour’s Rosena Allin-Khan was declared the victor in the Tooting byelection 
in southLondon <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> in a result which was 
overshadowed by the brutal killing hours earlier of Jo Cox.

The mother of two, a junior accident and emergency doctor as well as deputy 
leader of theLabour <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> group on 
Wandsworth council, was elected on a vote of 17,894, finishing 6,357 ahead of 
her Tory rival, Dan Watkins.

Turnout in the constituency, where Labour were defending Sadiq Khan’s general 
election majority of 2,824, was 42.5%.Khan stepped down as an MP following his 
election as mayor of London 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/07/sadiq-khan-pledges-to-put-london-first-as-he-swears-in-as-mayor>
.

At one point the count was halted for a two minute silence for Cox and the 
union flag was lowered to half mast at the town hall. Amid emotional scenes, 
Labour activists embraced with tears in their eyes.

Related: Junior A&E doctor selected as Labour candidate for Tooting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/14/junior-doctor-rosena-allin-khan-selected-labour-candidate-tooting>

Speaking briefly from the stage at the election count in Wandsworth after she 
was declared the winner, Allin-Khan said that Cox’s death was a reminder that 
democracy was precious and had to be cherished. “My thoughts and prayers are 
with Jo’s husband and her children. She was a proud and passionate campaigner 
who will be desperately missed.

“Jo’s death reminds us that our democracy is precious but fragile. We must 
never forget to cherish it. Thousands of people voted today and we are all here 
in recognition of our democratic values.”

Her campaign had made much of her mixed Polish and Pakistani heritage as well 
as her working-class roots. She had been on course to become Labour’s 100th 
female MP until Cox’s death.

During the campaign she had spoken of how she wanted to focus on “uniting 
communities”, adding that her husband had converted to Islam and they are 
raising their two daughters, one and three, to be Muslim.

There was a heavier than normal police presence at the count in Wandsworth 
council’s civil suite. Wandsworth’s mayor, Richard Field, told reporters that 
the council had asked for extra security.

Clive Efford, the Labour MP overseeing the party’s polling day push in Tooting 
, said earlier in the evening that it had been an “extraordinarily difficult” 
day and the party had momentarily halted their campaign after learning of the 
death of Cox.

“When the news came out and the announcement was made around five o’clock 
everyone downed tools in the campaign but we realised that the process has got 
to continue and people gradually gathered themselves and got back out on the 
campaign,” he told the Guardian.
