
Brixton Ice Arena

It's a bit surreal walking along Brixton Station Road with the heady waft of 
jerk chicken and the deep rumble of reggae drifting over from the market, 
knowing you're about to walk into an ice rink. But it's this cultural mismatch 
that makes it such a cracking day out. Brixton Ice Arena is a temporary space 
with all the charm of a portable warehouse, but once inside it covers the 
basics. After you're done practising axel jumps, head to Brixton Village for 
cafes offering everything from Beijing street food to Colombian cantina staples.
• 49 Brixton Station Road, SW9, 020-7737 5034, planet-ice.co.uk/arena/Brixton 
<http://www.planet-ice.co.uk/arena/Brixton>, from £5 including skate hire. See 
website for session times

Putting green, Hyde Park

Dispel any notions of astro turf or windmills on this course. As befitting a 
royal park, we're talking pukka grass, manicured greens with herbaceous borders 
rather than bunkers, and concrete pineapples that wouldn't look out of place in 
a stately home. Bring a blanket and a bottle of bubbly to celebrate your 
birdies.
• Hyde Park Tennis Centre & Cafe, South Carriage Drive, SW1, 020-7262 3474, 
willtowin.co.uk <http://www.willtowin.co.uk/hyde-park/putting-bowls>, adults 
£5, children £3. Open Mon-Sat 7am-9pm, Sun 8am-9pm in summer

Go Ape, Trent Park, Enfield

Trent Park in north London is fast becoming a vast outdoor adventure 
playground. The former hunting grounds of Henry IV already featured an 
equestrian centre, an 18-hole golf course, driving range and hockey club, when 
in March it added the treetop adventure Go Ape to its roster of activities. The 
five-section aerial assault course connects trees in the Church Wood area of 
the park via ladders, bridges and zip wires, and promises to unleash your inner 
Tarzan – or Jane – but with the aid of harnesses and ropes not loincloths and 
vines. It's a five-minute walk from Cockfosters tube station.
• Cockfosters Road, EN4, 0845 643 9215, goape.co.uk/days-out/trent-park 
<http://www.goape.co.uk/days-out/trent-park>, adults £30, children over 10 and 
over 1.4m tall £20. Open daily 23 March-31 October (closed Tuesdays during term 
time)

Hampton Court kayak tour

You can recreate the river scenes from the classic film A Man For All Seasons, 
when Paul Scofield, playing Thomas More, arrives at Hampton Court at the 
summons of Henry VIII. Except Thomas was arriving in a river ferry from his 
home in Chelsea, and you'll be arriving in a kayak after paddling yourself from 
Ye Olde Swan Pub in Thames Ditton. But this is by far the best way to approach 
London's most magnificent palace, gliding close to the famous Golden Gates 
entrance. The tour lasts 90 minutes, including a health and safety briefing, 
but be sure to go back to Hampton Court another time, if only to take in their 
hilarious Horrible Histories-style re-enactments.
• One-hour kayak tour £19.99, londonkayaktours.co.uk 
<http://www.londonkayaktours.co.uk/>; Hampton Court, 
hrp.org.uk/hamptoncourtpalace <http://www.hrp.org.uk/hamptoncourtpalace/>

Table tennis, King's Cross

When London won the Olympics bid in 2008, mayor Boris Johnson announced to the 
world that wiff waff – ping pong – was coming home. Well, it's landed – in the 
form of two tables just over the road from the Javelin train connection that's 
ferrying spectators from St Pancras to the Olympic Stadium over the next three 
weeks. The tables have free bats and balls and are among the 100 or so at 86 
sites in the city delivered by Ping! in association with the English Table 
Tennis Association. The tables have signs encouraging anyone on their own to 
challenge a passer-by to a match. So, come on London, the Games are on!
• To find a ping pong table in London, see pinglondon.co.uk 
<http://pingengland.co.uk/>


