
Last month, the Guardian reported on Seuy San 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/16/enslaved-on-thai-fishing-boat-thought-i-would-die-there>
, a Cambodian construction worker who was kidnapped and forced to work in the 
Thai fishing industry. While harrowing, the details of San’s ordeal have 
becoming increasingly familiar since 2014, when the Guardian first broke the 
story ofslavery in Southeast Asia’s seafood industry 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/jun/10/supermarket-prawns-thailand-produced-slave-labour>
. And, as the breadth offorced labor in the seafood industry 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/series/modern-day-slavery-in-focus+world/thailand>
 has come to light, it has led to calls for shrimp boycotts 
<http://www.usnews.com/news/business/articles/2015-12-14/ap-report-on-slave-peeled-shrimp-spurs-calls-for-boycott>
 in the US.

But the problem of forced labor and human trafficking extends far beyond 
Thailand’s fishing boats. Last year, theUnited Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> International Labor 
Organization estimated that 21 million people are currently living in slavery, 
producing an estimated $150bn in illegal profits each year.

“In all likelihood the majority of the goods and products sold in the US are 
linked to some sort of slavery or trafficking,” said Patricia Jurewicz, founder 
and director of the Responsible Sourcing Network, a human rights advocacy group.

Government efforts to shine light on forced labor have produced mixed results. 
California’sTransparency in Supply Chains Act 
<http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/164934.pdf> of 2010 (TISCA), one 
of the earlier efforts to fight slavery in the supply chain, hasn’t made a big 
impact, according to a recent report 
<http://media.wix.com/ugd/f0f801_0276d7c94ebe453f8648b91dd35898ba.pdf> by 
non-profit group Development International. Less than a fifth of the businesses 
have complied with the law, and enforcement by the state is lacking, critics 
say.

Identifying poor labor practices and stopping them can be a time consuming and 
costly task for companies. Because of the complexity of supply chains, Jurewicz 
said it’s often almost impossible for manufacturers, retailers and consumers to 
uncover the human rights abuses that lie within their products.

“Many affected companies still have a lot of work to do before living up to 
the letter of the law,” the report said.


California’s rules

TISCA requires retail sellers and manufacturers with “annual worldwide gross 
receipts” of more than $100m to disclose their efforts to combat slave labor in 
their supply chain.

Nearly four years after the law took effect, compliance is lagging. According 
to the report, of 2,126 companies it found that were potentially subject to the 
law, 62% had attempted compliance and 14% were fully compliant. The report 
highlighted six companies in particular, including REI, Bath & Body Works 
Direct and Guitar Center, for implementing strong internal policies and 
procedures to stamp out forced labor trafficking and slavery.

While TISCA affects a wide range of companies, those that use more raw 
materials and have longer supply chains are inherently at greater risk of 
supporting slave labor. The more distant a company is from its source 
materials, the less control it has over the labor involved in their extraction, 
whether from fishing, mining, agriculture or another source.

The complexity of reporting is further complicated by privacy laws. 
Development International’s ranking was based on two criteria: whether 
companies offered a disclosure, and whether their disclosure mentioned efforts 
to prevent forced labor in their supply chain. However, state tax privacy laws 
– which explicitly preclude disclosure of any information about “business 
affairs” – prevent the California 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california> attorney general’s office from 
releasing a full list of companies required to comply.

In some cases, Development International had to guess, based on publicly 
available financial information, whether certain companies fell under the law’s 
purview. This, too, highlights the shortcomings of reporting: the attorney 
general’s office said in an email that more than 2,400 companies are subject to 
the law – far more than the 2,126 companies that Development International 
identified.

One company’s efforts

Dried fruit company Sun-Maid, one of the six companies to earn a perfect score 
from Development International, not only posted the required disclosure on its 
website, but indicated the disciplinary steps it takes when it finds forced 
labor in its supply chain.

John Slinkard, the company’s vice president of customer and supply chain 
services, wrote the initial draft of the disclosure for his company, which 
imports apricots from Turkey and mango, papaya and pineapple from South Asia. 
According to Slinkard, Sun-Maid relies on third party auditors to ensure 
compliance. “We just make sure that we’re dealing with companies that not only 
have the reputation but also provide the documentation,” he said. “You don’t 
base it on trust.”

But, even with a policy in place, Sun-Maid regularly needs to revamp its 
anti-slavery policies. “Some of your vendors can become more clever as to how 
they disguise and work around some of these things,” Slinkard said.

While only a handful of companies have made similar commitments like 
Sun-Maid’s to remove slavery from their supply chains, many others 
<http://www.developmentinternational.org/#!ca-company-scores/ygter> have 
provided partial disclosure statements on their websites.

Opening the conversation

While there have been some victories, the Responsible Sourcing Network’s 
Jurewicz questioned TISCA’s effectiveness. It was only last spring, when the 
attorney general’s office sent a letter 
<http://www.qcalliance.org/2015/05/08/california-enforces-its-transparency-in-supply-chains-act/>
 to companies affected by TISCA to encourage compliance with the law. The 
attorney general’s office is actively investigating companies that may be in 
violation. No enforcement actions have been filed to date.

“It has good intentions, but without enforcement, I don’t know how effective 
it actually is,” Jurewicz said. However, she also pointed out that, despite the 
high level of noncompliance, TISCA is a good starting point because it 
encourages discussion about these issues.

Erika Karp, founder and CEO of Cornerstone Capital, a financial service firm, 
said laws like TISCA are important because they address the increasing investor 
demand for transparency. “You want to know a lot. You want to know deeply how 
they operate.” According to Karp, transparency is “essential for a good 
assessment of risk-adjusted returns”.

A growing effort

The US Congress is currently considering two bills – one in the House of 
Representatives 
<https://www.congress.gov/bill/114th-congress/house-bill/3226/text> and one in 
the Senate <https://www.congress.gov/bill/114th-congress/senate-bill/1968/text> 
– that would require publicly traded companies to include disclosures on human 
trafficking in filings to the Securities and Exchange Commission. Unlike the 
Californian law, these laws would make public a list of which companies are 
subject to the law.

The White House is also taking up this issue. US President Barack Obama 
declared January the NationalSlavery <https://www.theguardian.com/world/slavery>
 and Human Trafficking Prevention Month as part of the cabinet-level 
President’s Interagency Task Force to Monitor and Combat Trafficking in 
Persons. The task force was created under the Victims of Trafficking and 
Violence Protection Act of 2000 to address trafficking nationally and abroad.

The effort is extending internationally. In March, the United Kingdom passed 
its Modern Slavery Act 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/modern-slavery-bill>, which requires 
companies with revenues in excess of £36m ($54m) to provide a statement about 
the transparency of their supply chains.

In 2014, the World Federation of Exchanges (WFE), which includes Nasdaq, 
created a sustainability working group to address environmental and social 
issues related to business. Child and forced labor and transparency in the 
supply chain are among the indicators under consideration for inclusion on 
financial reports.

The WFE’s efforts in particular highlight the effect of public relations on 
the fight against forced labor.

“Of course a company wouldn’t want to disclose that they’re doing nothing,” 
said Christopher Miller, policy advisor at Free the Slaves, which works on 
slavery prevention and rescue projects. “That would then incentivize them to do 
something.”
