
Staff at Colchester Academy in Essex received a letter in the post last June. 
Cleaning, catering and building maintenance at the struggling school were to be 
outsourced to a private company.

The academy had been taken over 11 weeks previously by Bright Tribe 
Multi-Academy Trust, a government-favoured academy chain established byventure 
capitalist Mike Dwan 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/oct/20/taxpayer-funds-alternative-provision-free-schools>
, which has ambitions to run more than 200 schools.

Bright Tribe had always intended to review auxiliary services at the school, 
staff were told. Now the takeover of the academy had been completed, a company 
with the right “resources and infrastructure” had been selected. The winner was 
a “national facilities management company” called Blue Support.

It was not necessarily a surprise that a profit-making business was being 
brought in. Outsourcing has become increasingly prevalent in the education 
sector and Bright Tribe had boasted of being a “new breed of academy trust … 
which brings together expertise from the education field and the 
professionalism and influences of commercial partners”.

But in a meeting between union officials and Blue Support executives shortly 
after the letter arrived, a diligent, if overworked, Unison official admitted 
to being puzzled. Sitting with her back to the window in one of the new-build 
school’s soulless rooms, Hazel Corby wondered why the lucky company had the 
same Stockport address as Bright Tribe’s headquarters. She asked how the 
company had been so swiftly selected after Bright Tribe’s takeover? Who else 
had a chance to bid for the contract?

Related: 'Joining a multi-academy trust is like marriage without divorce' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/jun/01/process-becoming-an-academy-experiences>

The school’s principal didn’t know. An answer wasn’t forthcoming from those 
representing the company that afternoon, or in the days to come. Bright Tribe 
later said the question was irrelevant as the contract with Blue Support was 
made on an interim basis.

But an exchange of business cards between Corby and Blue Support’s human 
resources manager, Sally Jarvis, gave rather more away. “Sally’s card said 
Equity Solutions on it,” said Corby.

ES Management Services – where the ES stands for Equity Solutions – is the 
parent company of Blue Support, of which Dwan’s brother, Andrew, is managing 
director. Equity Solutions is also Mike Dwan’s main business interest, among 90 
other companies of which he is, or has been, a director.

Bright Tribe insists that it has always been transparent about its commercial 
partners. But, for Corby, Jarvis’s business card was a loose thread that, once 
pulled, unravelled what she felt was a worrying complex of interconnected 
commercial and charitable interests.

Here was a financier who had quietly moved into sponsoring academies and with 
ostensibly philanthropic ambitions. Dwan’s spokesman said that he had donated 
£3.5m “directly or indirectly” to his academy empire, which included 11 failing 
schools desperately in need of his resources. The spokesman added that, while 
Dwan is aware “some will seek to find some ulterior motive for his actions”, he 
is “involved in the provision of school improvement services for a sole single 
purpose, to promote better outcomes for our children”.

Yet in 2013-14 alone, it was to emerge, there were nearly £1m worth of 
payments not recorded in the publicly available accounts by Dwan’s academies to 
his own private businesses. In 2014-15 another £1.9m in such payments, known as 
“related party transactions”, were made, albeit this time reported in publicly 
available accounts following pressure from government regulators.

The Department for Education said all the payments should have been declared 
in their accounts at the earliest opportunity to avoid a perception of a 
conflict of interest. Dwan continues to insist that, as he is not a trustee of 
the academy trusts, no such requirement exists. The regulator has validated 
claims that all the companies working with the academies charged only the cost 
of their work. And the majority of the costs to academies were incurred when 
staff were transferred over to Dwan companies, at which point the charges to 
the trusts were not discretionary but laid down in law. The services fees paid 
to Dwan companies, as opposed to payments for staff costs, amounted to just 
£192,000, it is said. And the services were moved in-house in January.

However, the Observer has learned that the entrepreneur’s commercial and 
charitable empire has become the focus of a review by the National Audit 
Office, the independent body that scrutinises government accounts for 
parliament, which has forwarded concerns to the government’s regulator.

And the NAO’s findings, so far, have prompted wider questions about the 
government’sacademisation juggernaut 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/06/government-backs-down-over-plan-to-make-all-schools-academies>
, and whether ministers have a tight enough hold on the billions of pounds of 
taxpayers’ money swishing around the new system. Is the corporate world 
supporting the academies through sponsorship, or are we in danger of allowing 
state schools to become subsidiaries in business empires, critics ask. As Corby 
wondered in that meeting room: what on earth is going on?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kqm2%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kqm2%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a480f6d5fbadd347c220b24f31eaae7a99e28c4%2F100_454_3034_1821%2F3034.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Are%20England%E2%80%99s%20academies%20becoming%20a%20cash%20cow%20for%20business%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kqm2%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Are+England%E2%80%99s+academies+becoming+a+cash+cow+for+business%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kqm2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a480f6d5fbadd347c220b24f31eaae7a99e28c4%2F100_454_3034_1821%2F3034.jpg>
 Colchester Academy in Essex, which is now run by Mike Dwan’s Bright Tribe 
trust. Photograph: Eastnews Press Agency 
The story of Mike Dwan is the story of an English state education system that 
has been thrown open to private business interests in unprecedented fashion. In 
his entry in theSunday Times rich list in 2009, Dwan, then said to be worth 
£32m, was described as “a low-key northern property developer based in 
Manchester”. In reality, he is one of Britain’sprivate finance initiative 
multimillionaires 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/jul/05/pfi-cost-300bn>: a businessman 
who reaped the rewards when government departments and councils went into deals 
with private-sector money men to build hospitals and schools, albeit at often 
ruinous long-term costs to the public purse because of high loan rates and huge 
management fees.

Today it is estimated that Dwan, from a Manchester working-class family, is 
worth £75m; he and his wife, Amanda, own Rusland Hall, the stately country 
house in the Lake District that was once home to thesocialist Beatrice Webb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2000/mar/04/history.politics>’s family. 
Three of his five children are said to attend the £16,000-a-year private 
Windermere school where Dwan is chair of governors. In February last year the 
Charity Commission examined payments to Equity Solutions from Windermere 
because of concerns over the “number and value” of the related party 
transactions but, aside from some minor recommendations on disclosure and a 
difference of opinion on whether payments to governors were allowed under the 
school’s articles of association, it gave the governors a clean bill of health 
and took no regulatory action.

One of Dwan’s more lucrative deals has been a 2004 PFI project to deliver a 
new building for Parklands School, in Speke, one of the poorer parts of 
Liverpool. ToLiverpool <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/liverpool> city council’s 
consternation, the deal still continues to replenish the coffers of a company, 
Education Solutions Speke, of which Dwan is a director and has a significant 
shareholding, even though the last pupils left in 2014 when the school closed 
down as a result of desperately poor academic results. In 2015-16 alone the 
taxpayer will pick up a bill for £1.36m in interest payments on Parklands. By 
April 2028, it will have cost taxpayers near to £90m. The complex – Parklands 
includes a public library, leisure centre and other council facilities – cost 
only £22m to build.

Dwan is undoubtedly a canny investor. He is a member of a “tax deferral” 
scheme run 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/oct/20/taxpayer-funds-alternative-provision-free-schools>
 by the Invicta Film Partnership that has until recently been under 
investigation by HM Revenue and Customs over suspicion that it is a vehicle for 
tax avoidance.

It is perhaps not surprising then, given his commercial success with schools, 
that ES Management Services noted in its directors’ report for 2013: “In terms 
of expansion, one area of particular interest is the education sector. There 
appears to be great opportunity in this field which the procurement team are 
currently exploring.”

Bright Tribe Multi-Academy Trust was incorporated in July 2012, with two 
charities named as its founders: the Helping Hands Trust and the My World 
Trust. It has so far added seven schools to what is referred to as its “tribe” 
in Suffolk, Cumbria, Greater Manchester and Essex. The academy trust is also 
deeply entwined with another, the Adventure Learning Academy Trust (ALAT), 
based in Truro, Cornwall, which runs five academies (one secondary and four 
primaries). Both chains share Helping Hands as founding members and trustees. 
The core teams at the academy trusts are almost identical, sharing everything 
from director of schools to marketing manager.

Dwan, a trustee on both the founding charities, represents them on the academy 
chains’ boards. Cutting through all the complexity, Dwan is the person the 
staff at the academy trusts say they work for. Yet what struck Unison officials 
in the days after the Colchester Academy takeover was that Dwan barely existed 
in either of the academy trusts’ accounts in their first two years of 
operation, appearing only in attendance records for trustee meetings.

“It prompted lots of questions – but not many answers,” said Pete Challis, 
Unison’s national officer responsible for local government.

After Blue Support won the contract for Colchester Academy, Bright Tribe 
failed to provide the required details of the procurement process, prompting 
Unison to put in a freedom of information request on 14 August 2015.

The trust responded on 11 September confirming receipt of the request and on 
18 September saying that it would charge a fee of £875 for dealing with the 
request, because the cost of responding would exceed the “appropriate limit’”of 
£450, and the search for information could only continue if a payment was 
received.

Hot on the heels of that move, Bright Tribe revealed that the school’s IT 
management services were also to be transferred to a private company, the 
Knowledge Network. That firm, Challis discovered, is also wholly owned by Dwan.

The websites of both Bright Tribe and ALAT, along with the individual websites 
of all the academies they run, showed that they were designed by Pure Creative, 
an Equity Solutions company that is owned by Dwan. A spokesman did not provide 
a response when asked whether money had passed hands but said that all payments 
would have been reported.

Dwan is also a founding member and chairman of governors at Greater Manchester 
University Technical College, in Oldham. Its 2014-15 accounts showed that, of 
£1.4m in income, a fifth (£277,000) was paid out to organisations in which he 
has an interest.

Meanwhile, concerns were being reported to Unison from staff in the schools. 
Sources close to schools run by ALAT and Bright Tribe said that headteachers 
were given “no choice” but to use support services provided by the trusts, and 
thus the companies that Dwan controls or in which he has an interest.

In one case, a source said, one small primary school had to pay more than 
£10,000 a month to Knowledge Network, and more than £3,000 a month for premises 
support to Blue Support. That “includes a weekly visit from a premises person 
who takes photos of work needing to be done and then says it will be too 
expensive”, the source added.

It is further claimed that a top slice of 8% is being taken by the trusts from 
the money set aside for schools by the Education Funding Agency – twice the 
typical 3-5% seen within other chains. A spokesman declined to comment.

Challis, who has long been concerned about potential profit-making in the 
academy system and the failure to get answers from the academy chains, turned 
to the authorities. “We went to the Education Funding Agency [the DfE’s 
regulator] and then the National Audit Office,” said Challis. “And the letter 
we got back from the NAO was very interesting. I have read a lot of 
correspondence from regulators over the years. And this one screams: we really 
don’t like what we have found.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kqm2%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kqm2%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b0ecd3b862d9ff1f94569c64095006b5dcc5151%2F56_0_1603_962%2F1603.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Are%20England%E2%80%99s%20academies%20becoming%20a%20cash%20cow%20for%20business%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kqm2%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Are+England%E2%80%99s+academies+becoming+a+cash+cow+for+business%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kqm2%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b0ecd3b862d9ff1f94569c64095006b5dcc5151%2F56_0_1603_962%2F1603.jpg>
 Parklands school in Speke, Liverpool, which was burdened by PFI debts. 
Photograph: Google Maps 
The National Audit Office is not an organisation prone to hyperbole. It has, 
however, long voiced concerns about the government’s decision to allow academy 
chains to pay related companies on the basis that they are “at cost”. The NAO 
described such a systemin a 2014 report 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/nov/13/nearly-half-academy-trusts-related-party-transactions>
 as difficult to audit and prone to failure because “at cost” (in other words, 
non-profit) is highly subjective.

Its letter to Challis dated 25 May is accordingly both revelatory and frank. 
Unknown to Challis, the EFA’s risk analysis division had reacted to his 
concerns, the NAO’s education director, Tim Phillips, wrote.

Following the EFA’s review, they had recommended that decisions made by the 
academy chains in the future should be minuted; clear explanations of 
procurement should be offered; that the Charity Commission’s rulings on 
trustees receiving payments should be complied with; and all financial 
transactions between the companies of trustees, directors and sponsors and the 
academy trusts should be declared.

Accordingly, the accounts for Bright Tribe published a few weeks ago – albeit 
very late, and following scrutiny from the EFA – bear little relation to the 
ones filed at Companies House in previous years in terms of the level of detail 
provided. Dwan emerges out of the shadows – as do his companies.

Payments to North Consulting (in which Dwan, his brother and two daughters 
make up four of the five directors), Blue Support Services, the Know ledge 
Network and North and Partners Technical are all disclosed, mostly for the 
first time. A rough and ready analysis (comparing the various companies’ 
turnovers in the latest financial year with the academy chains’ payments to 
them in the school year of August to September) suggest that money from 
academies amounted to as much as 20% of total revenues for North Consulting and 
Blue Support Services.

The academies dismissed the accuracy of the analysis, adding that a “major 
element” of the costs to academies related to the costs that were incurred when 
staff were transferred over to Dwan’s companies, and these costs were not 
discretionary. Yet, the NAO’s letter adds, there are still holes. “We note 
that, based on the information available to us, potentially not all related 
party transactions and conflicts of interest have yet been declared,” Phillips 
wrote.

The auditor added that there may be “good reasons” for the lack of reporting. 
But, Phillips revealed, neither could he find explanations for some of the 
discrepancies between the trusts’ accounts and those of some of the related 
charities and companies they do business with. The EFA and Charity Commission 
have been alerted and appropriate action recommended, he said.

“I will also ask the EFA to consider if the complex arrangements between the 
trusts and other public, private and charitable bodies are sufficiently 
transparent. More widely, I will remind the EFA of the findings of our report – 
on the oversight of related party transactions and conflicts of interest – and 
the need for transparent governance and accountability . . . We will continue 
to monitor progress.”

As will the staff and interested parents at the 12 schools, and counting, 
which form part of Mike Dwan’s education empire.

RISE OF THE ACADEMIES

2002 Tony Blair establishes the first “city academies” to drive up standards 
by replacing failing schools in struggling education authorities. The 
government eventually drops the word “city” to allow for academies in 
struggling rural areas.

2006 Des Smith, an adviser to the academy programme, resigns after it is 
revealed he had promised that wealthy individuals who agreed to make donations 
to the programme might be rewarded with knighthoods and even peerages.

2010 Michael Gove, the new education secretary, says he hopes academies that 
are autonomous from local authorities become “the norm” and urges all schools 
in the country to apply for academy status, including, for the first time, 
primaries.

2012 Jo Shuter, head of Quintin Kynaston Community Academy, and a government 
favourite, is found to have misused public money. Questionable spending 
included £6,957 on Shuter’s 50th birthday party, which was held at the school.

2014 Headteacher salaries soar. Sir Greg Martin, executive head at the Durand 
Academies <http://www.theguardian.com/education/academies> Trust – which runs a 
primary school in Brixton and is planning a boarding secondary school in the 
Sussex countryside – is found to earn £229,000 as a head and a further £160,000 
from a company set up to run the school’s sports and fitness centre.

2015 The chief inspector of schools, Michael Wilshaw, raises concerns about 
the governance practices in some academy chains and seeks powers to inspect 
their administration. His request is rejected.

2015 Ed Miliband criticises the lack of accountability of academies, claiming 
that Whitehall can’t provide the necessary oversight.

2016 The education secretary, Nicky Morgan, announces a U-turn on forcing all 
schools to become academies after a cross-party outcry. However, the government 
still aspires for all schools to convert.

 * The headline on this article was changed on 12 June 2016. It originally 
read: “This man is worth £75m. He makes money from providing services to his 
own state-run academies. Are England’s schools becoming a cash cow for 
businessmen?” Dr Dwan, a benefactor to Bright Tribe Trust and Adventure 
Learning Academy Trust, has asked us to point out that neither he nor any of 
his associated trusts or companies make any profit from their work for the 
academies they support. The trusts’ annual reports and financial statements 
show that he and his companies ensure that the trusts are fully funded and, 
where necessary, are provided with services at cost or less, in compliance with 
the Academies Financial Handbook. 