
Leave the rest of the world queuing to see the Sagrada Família, Casa Batlló or 
one of the other works of the great Catalan architectAntoni Gaudí 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/antoni-gaudi> and take a train 30km 
north to the coastal town of Mataró, to see where it all began.

Related: Catalonia holiday guide: what to see and do, plus the best hotels and 
restaurants 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/sep/26/catalonia-holiday-guide-hotels-restaurants-walking>

The Nau Gaudí, commissioned by the local textile workers’ co-op when he was 
still a student, is Gaudi’s first work. It is also one of the few projects not 
commissioned by the Catholic church or a wealthy patron. Though a simple 
wood-framed warehouse designed for bleaching cotton, it has an elegant 
structure based on a parabolic arch, the hallmark of Gaudí’s later work, 
developed to perfection in the Palau Guëll mansion and La Pedrera apartment 
building.

In the courtyard, the brick arches and tiling of the charming, circular 
service building are a foretaste of the mudejar-style Casa Vicens, the first 
home Gaudí designed. With the decline of the local textile industry, the Nau 
fell into disrepair until work began on refurbishing it in 2002, to mark the 
150th anniversary of the architect’s birth.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4efyk%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4efyk%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F327a7beb7da973f5f1ab2be20822c7122f886722%2F0_38_800_480%2F800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Not%20so%20Familia%3A%20visit%20Antoni%20Gaud%C3%AD%E2%80%99s%20first%20project%20%E2%80%93%20just%20outside%20Barcelona&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4efyk%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Not+so+Familia%3A+visit+Antoni+Gaud%C3%AD%E2%80%99s+first+project+%E2%80%93+just+outside+Barcelona&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4efyk%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F327a7beb7da973f5f1ab2be20822c7122f886722%2F0_38_800_480%2F800.jpg>
 Photograph: Sergio Ruiz 
It is now an art gallery displaying contemporary Catalan art from the 
collection of Llluís Bassat, who made his fortune in advertising. However, 
until January 2016, the Nau Gaudí is presenting an extraordinary exhibition of 
non-conformist Russian art from the1960s and 70s, works that are rarely seen 
because almost all are in the hands of private collectors.

• bassatgaudimataro.ca <http://www.bassatgaudimataro.cat/en/>, free, open 
Tues-Sat 5pm-8pm, Sun 11am-2pm. The Nau is five minutes’ walk from Mataró 
station and a short stroll from the town’s excellent seafood restaurants. 
Trains leave Barcelona’s Plaça de Catalunya station every 10 minutes
