
Every morning, Serah Thomas gets up early and makes her way to Gordon’s market 
in Papua New Guinea’s capital, Port Moresby. Like many of the women who make up 
80% of the city’s vendors, she is entirely reliant on the income she generates 
selling produce at the sprawling and chaotic markets scattered throughout the 
capital.

“Without the markets, I would have no way of feeding my children,” she says. 
“There are many, many women like me in Port Moresby, single mothers who have 
nobody else to rely on. I have no choice but to go.”

It’s not the work that fills Thomas with dread as she ties up her hair and 
makes her way to the bus with a bag of things to sell. It’s the harassment, 
theft and violence that she will have to navigate during the day.

Related: Papua New Guinea risking lives with inaction on sexual violence, says 
MSF 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/29/papua-new-guinea-risking-lives-sexual-violence-medecins-sans-frontieres>

Markets are not safe for female traders. Women 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> are bullied by market security, 
intimidated by police and sexually harassed throughout the day. A toilet trip 
is not to be made on your own. People try to rob them on their way to the bus 
stop. Poor street lighting and unreliable public transport increase their 
vulnerability as they try to get home.


“Over the years, we have all faced many problems at the markets: people 
cutting our bags and stealing our wallets, drunks chasing us. We have all 
experienced a lot of violence,” says Thomas. “Every day we are scared for our 
lives and worry that the next day something will happen to us. It is very 
stressful.”

The violence faced by women in the markets is a reflection of Papua New 
Guinea’s epidemic of gender-based violence. The island is one of themost 
dangerous places in the world to be a woman 
<https://www.hrw.org/world-report/2016>, with an estimated 70% experiencing 
rape or assault.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g2tb%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g2tb%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16046e34814580391e189b5f544058a5f8caf534%2F0_302_4518_2710%2F4518.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Market%20day%20in%20Papua%20New%20Guinea%20brings%20steady%20flow%20of%20harassment%20for%20women%20%7C%20Annie%20Kelly&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g2tb%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Market+day+in+Papua+New+Guinea+brings+steady+flow+of+harassment+for+women+%7C+Annie+Kelly&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g2tb%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16046e34814580391e189b5f544058a5f8caf534%2F0_302_4518_2710%2F4518.jpg>
 Gerehu market on the outskirts of Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea, was 
previously too violent for women and children. It now has a playground and 
safer toilet blocks. 
In 2011, the capital was chosen as a pilot location in the UN Women’s safe 
cities initiative 
<http://www.unwomen.org/en/what-we-do/ending-violence-against-women/creating-safe-public-spaces>
, a global attempt to address rising levels of violence against women in urban 
and public spaces.

“It isn’t enough to say there is a culture of impunity around violence against 
women in all public spaces in Papua New Guinea. It is routine and for many 
people it remains just part of the fabric of everyday life,” says Jurgita 
Sereikaite, from UN Women’sPapua New Guinea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/papua-new-guinea> office.

A study in 2011-12 to assess the scale of the problem found that 55% of women 
had experienced violence in markets 
<http://www2.unwomen.org/~/media/field%20office%20eseasia/docs/publications/2014/8/making%20port%20moresby%20safer%20for%20women%20and%20girls%202014.ashx?v=1&d=20141202T120316>
 in the previous year. The survey also highlighted poor sanitation in markets: 
the dilapidated toilets posed health and safety concerns and in areas around 
bus stations vendors felt particularly vulnerable to assault.

“The women’s responses acted a bit like a map for us,” says Kay Kaugla, the 
gender officer at the National Capital District Commission. “We understood what 
we were facing.”

“When we first went to the markets to tell the women about [the safe cities] 
programme, it was very tough – they were suspicious and scared. When they 
realised that they were going to have a say in what needs to change, they 
became positive,” she says.

After a shaky start, more than 3,000 women formed 12 vendor associations, each 
with an elected spokesperson to represent their concerns to local authorities.

“There was this perception among many in government that these women were just 
voiceless poor women who didn’t need to be listened to,” says Kaugla. “This was 
what we wanted to challenge. We are trying to show that these women are 
entrepreneurs, small business owners and have rights that must be protected.”

Related: Women seek islands of refuge in Papua New Guinea's sea of violence | 
Helen Davidson 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/29/papua-new-guinea-women-violence-at-home-refuge>

For the next two years, the vendor associations took part in consultations to 
overhaul one of the markets, Geheru, and build a space that was safer for 
female vendors. The bathrooms and showers were updated, market stalls and 
shaded areas were renovated, potable running water was provided, and a 
playground was built.

When it reopened in 2014, the market trialled a cashless method to allow 
vendors to pay their market fees through mobile phones. It was introduced to 
stop women being harassed for illegal fees by market officials and men posing 
as tax collectors.

An ambitious rebuild of Papua New Guinea’s largest urban market, Gordon’s, is 
now slowly under way.

Although there has been no official assessment of whether violence has 
decreased since the rebuild at Geheru, female vendors say it has made an 
enormous difference. Whether this can be replicated at Gordon’s is another 
matter. The market has become a focal point for rape, mugging and gang violence 
and the scale of the work needed has already caused significant delays.

Women working at Gordon’s say the wider problem of corruption and 
discrimination must be tackled.

“The police are our biggest problem,” says Mary Boi, a vendor at Gordon’s. 
“Even after the safe city project came to our market and encouraged us to 
report our problems to the police, they didn’t listen and the men who abused us 
would be back in the market and harassing us again. The police also threatened 
and intimidated us.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g2tb%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g2tb%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F987a15f978b290bd39fb9ba430d1afc0041f62d2%2F0_346_5184_3109%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Market%20day%20in%20Papua%20New%20Guinea%20brings%20steady%20flow%20of%20harassment%20for%20women%20%7C%20Annie%20Kelly&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g2tb%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Market+day+in+Papua+New+Guinea+brings+steady+flow+of+harassment+for+women+%7C+Annie+Kelly&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g2tb%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F987a15f978b290bd39fb9ba430d1afc0041f62d2%2F0_346_5184_3109%2F5184.jpg>
 Kay Kaugla, gender officer at Papua New Guinea’s National Capital District 
Commission, says the vendors ‘are entrepreneurs, small business owners and have 
rights that must be protected’. 
In an effort to tackle this, training on women’s rights has begun with local 
police forces based close to the markets. There is now a dedicated member of 
staff working solely on policing issues within the safe cities team.

“All we want is a safe place to work,” says Boi. “These markets are bad places 
for women to be. We just want this to change so we can spend our days in peace, 
not looking over our shoulders fearing what will happen next.”

Thomas, now president of the mini-goods vendors’ association at Gordon’s, is 
upbeat. “A few years ago, nobody cared what we thought; now they are designing 
a market to make things better,” she says. “That is progress.”
