
I’m laden with juicy fat cherries, freshly plucked from the tree. The sun 
shines and we’re picnicking among spangles of wild flowers and long grasses. A 
track steers back to the wood-beamed house where we are staying, past 
mud-and-timber houses tilting back into the earth.

I’m with my husband Mark and two children in a tiny hillside hamlet called 
Baba Stana, close to the village of Oreshak, in the heart of central Bulgaria’s 
Balkan mountains. It’s peaceful and bucolic, and far from the 
cheap-and-cheerful skiing or beach packages Bulgaria is most known for.

Yet people don’t think to come for the mountain scenery with its world-class 
frescoes and monasteries, even though many are Unesco world heritage sites. 
Somehow rural Bulgaria doesn’t sound that appealing.

Having flown into the capital, Sofia <http://www.theguardian.com/travel/sofia>
, with its gold-domed Eastern Orthodox churches, we’d stayed in Casa Ferrari, a 
small friendly guesthouse. The city brims with layers of history all mixing 
together into everyday life – Bulgaria had to grapple its independence from the 
Ottoman Empire after the Turks ruled for half a millennium.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tpf3%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tpf3%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff00f432078b84c68bcf5d6148b1305c89c2c11db%2F0_301_4084_4597%2F4084.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyond%20the%20beach%3A%20Bulgaria%E2%80%99s%20hidden%20treasures&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tpf3%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyond+the+beach%3A+Bulgaria%E2%80%99s+hidden+treasures&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tpf3%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff00f432078b84c68bcf5d6148b1305c89c2c11db%2F0_301_4084_4597%2F4084.jpg>
 The town of Veliko Tarnovo: Bulgaria’s former capital, where artists sit in 
the old town painting gilt icons’: Photograph: Rolf Richrdson/Getty 
Images/Robert Harding World Imagery 
I walked down into the underground metro. It’s easy to use, and sections of 
preserved Roman streets can still be seen as you step off the escalators. Back 
at the top people strode among Roman amphitheatres and grand Stalinist 
architecture. From Sofia we’d corkscrewed up through Bulgaria’s mountainous 
landscape to Baba Stana. Road signs are in the Cyrillic alphabet and few people 
speak English, which makes navigating interesting. But the roads are easy to 
drive, with little traffic, although those you pass drive horrifyingly.

The hamlet is half-empty. Derelict houses stand next to lived-in ones, 
creating a strange sense of abandoned beauty. A local family is having 
breakfast alfresco, their children playing among barns that lean. Few people 
still live here, most having moved to urban areas. Occasionally ancient 
villagers wander past and give a smile in the absence of any shared language. 
The sound of hay being raked falls from terraced fields. Most of those who 
remain here work the land.

The view from our terrace stretches far over the hilltops, and a smattering of 
terracotta pantile roofs peep from the tree canopies. Cowbells and cicadas 
serenade us from flower-filled meadows; birds and butterflies skitter among 
plum trees. Our children are free to explore on their own, with no vehicles for 
me to worry about. The land is still riotously green, wild and untouched.

We buy our provisions from the few tiny shops at Oreshak, which have a cottage 
industry in ceramics. It also has one unexpected visitor attraction: the 
charmingly quirky Cherni Ossum museum, created by a local biology teacher with 
taxidermied animals, many from the region. This delights our boys as they gaze 
up at bears towering over them.

What we didn’t expect to find was a modern hotel like the recently opened Casa 
Art <http://arthotel.bg/en>. Small and stylish, it has a spa, individually 
decorated rooms, and a restaurant with an excellent sommelier. There is also a 
lot of funky colour and lively art.

We eat traditional Bulgarian dishes of dried meats, grilled fish and fresh 
shopska salad (a typical salad here with salted vegetables and cheese). “We are 
very proud of this hotel,” the sommelier tells us. “It’s unique.” The food is 
delicious and costs a fraction of what it would back at home.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tpf3%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tpf3%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20e902de185ec9f0776b242bfd451291b06eb3c8%2F0_720_3910_2346%2F3910.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyond%20the%20beach%3A%20Bulgaria%E2%80%99s%20hidden%20treasures&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tpf3%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyond+the+beach%3A+Bulgaria%E2%80%99s+hidden+treasures&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tpf3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20e902de185ec9f0776b242bfd451291b06eb3c8%2F0_720_3910_2346%2F3910.jpg>
 Pick of the crop: shopska salad, with salted vegetables and cheese. 
Photograph: Zoryana Ivchenko/Getty Images/Moment Open 
But it’s the quiet, pastoral nature of the place that’s the real draw of the 
Bulgarian countryside. We are told that in the Balkan National Park, which 
contains Europe’s largest protected beech forest, wolves and bears (and golden 
eagles) roam among the mountains. We don’t see any of those, but exploring 
these vast wildernesses and swimming in nearby rivers is enough.

Driving through the mountains we pass villages where gardens burst with roses, 
and gypsies ride by on horse-drawn carts, beautiful bright pom-poms tied around 
the horses’ necks flaring out. A little further, at Chiflik, there are natural 
hot mineral springs with open-air pools. There are beautiful towns, too, 
reminders of when the country was part of one of Europe’s biggest and most 
powerful empires. In Lovech, steep cobbled streets lead up to a medieval 
fortress overlooking the River Osam. In Veliko Tarnovo, Bulgaria’s former 
capital, artists sit in the old town painting gilt icons on to slabs of dark 
wood. And Arbanasi’s Nativity Church rivals Romania’s best with its 
floor-to-ceiling frescoes.

Bulgaria has more than 100 monasteries, which hide in remote gorges or perch 
on hills. Outside the Trojan monastery, a 10-minute drive from Oreshak, 
home-produced honey and antique icons are laid out on vintage cars in an 
impromptu market. Monks wander around the wooden balconies under a spectacular 
portico painted with apocalyptic scenes.

Inside the monastery, amid the soft smell of incense, we come across a revered 
three-handed icon of the Virgin Mary. Queues of people move forward to touch 
her and leave banknotes at her feet. This is a land where the mountains are 
still rich with tradition and nature thrives.

Essentials


Rooms at Casa Art <http://arthotel.bg/en> in Oreshak start at £25 per night. 
Rooms atCasa Ferrari <http://casaferrari.com/> in Sofia start at £46. City 
tours can be booked in Sofia withLyuba Tours <http://lyubatours.com/>. Flights 
from Heathrow to Sofia were provided byBritish Airways 
<http://www.britishairways.com/travel/home/public/en_gb>. Bradt’s travel guide 
has useful information
