
The British government has formally asked a United Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> panel to review its finding 
thatJulian Assange <http://www.theguardian.com/media/julian-assange> is 
“arbitrarily detained” in the Ecuadorian embassy in London, calling the opinion 
“deeply flawed”.

In its first formal response to the finding of the UN working group on 
arbitrary detention, whichpublished its opinion in February 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/04/julian-assange-wikileaks-arrest-friday-un-investigation>
, the Foreign Officeconfirmed it would contest the finding 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/uk-submits-response-to-un-working-group-on-assange-case--2>
, saying: “The original conclusions of the UN working group are inaccurate and 
should be reviewed.”

In a statement, the Foreign Office minister Hugo Swire said: “We want to 
ensure the working group is in possession of the full facts. Our request for a 
review of the opinion sets those facts out clearly.

Related: Britain 'sets dangerous precedent' by defying UN report on Assange 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/24/britain-precedent-defy-un-report-julian-assange-politicians>

“Julian Assange has never been arbitrarily detained by the UK, and is in fact 
voluntarily avoiding lawful arrest by choosing to remain in the Ecuadorian 
embassy. The UK continues to have a legal obligation to extradite him to 
Sweden.”

The WikiLeaks <http://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks> founder has been 
confined to the embassy in London since July 2012, when he sought asylum in a 
bid to avoid extradition to Sweden over sexual assault allegations, which he 
denies.

The international panel said on 4 February 
<http://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=17012&LangID=E>
 that it believed Assange’s confinement was arbitrary because of the length of 
time in bringing his case to resolution, citing in particular a “lack of 
diligence by the Swedish prosecutor in its investigations”.

The government argues that the panel is not a judicial body and its findings 
are therefore not binding. “The working group’s opinion is deeply flawed and Mr 
Assange has never been the subject of arbitrary detention,” it said. “His human 
rights have been protected throughout the process and will continue to be 
protected if and when he is extradited to Sweden.”

Speaking shortly after the working group’s findings were published, Philip 
Hammond, the foreign secretary, described them as ridiculous and said Assange 
was hiding from justice.

Assange accused Hammond of insulting the UN 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/05/julian-assange-accuses-philip-hammond-insulting-united-nations>
, saying: “This is the end of the road for the legal arguments that have been 
put forward bySweden <https://www.theguardian.com/world/sweden> and the UK.” 

Responding to the government statement, Melinda Taylor, a legal adviser to 
Assange, told the Guardian: “The fact that they have submitted this request for 
reconsideration undermines their previous assertion that they weren’t in any 
way bound to comply with its opinion.”

She said that all the points made by the Foreign Office had been known to the 
working group before it gave its original opinion, and the UK had every 
opportunity to make its case and correct any factual errors before the opinion 
was published.

“In the absence of any objective basis to seek reconsideration, this rebuttal 
appears to be an attempt to publicly undermine the working group’s opinion,” 
she said.

The panel’s decision on whether or not to review its opinion will be made 
during its next session, beginning 18 April, the Foreign Office said.
