
On 16th April this year, a 7.8 magnitude earthquake struck the coast of 
Ecuador. More than 600 people were killed and 27,000 were injured. Fundacion 
Arca and Socorro AnimalEcuador <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ecuador> were 
among the groups that went in to help injured animals. Here, four people share 
their experiences of helping injured pets.

Valentina León, president, Fundacíon Arca <http://fundacionarca.com/>

We entered Ground Zero breathlessly and with our hearts oppressed. The 
desolation of the place made it look like a ghost town. Manta’s central 
shopping district, Tarqui, was completely destroyed in the earthquake and it 
was impossible to imagine the hustle of commercial activity that would have 
filled the streets just days before. The smell of putrefaction was heavy in the 
air and I felt overwhelmed by the pain, anguish and desperation of human and 
animal victims who had perished there, and of those who are still alive. We 
began to walk down the streets looking for signs of life.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tq8t%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tq8t%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd03e91ead0510794b1d0c136ddc9a4c10b915df5%2F0_30_886_532%2F886.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Diaries%20from%20Ecuador%3A%20helping%20injured%20animals%20after%20the%20earthquake&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tq8t%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Diaries+from+Ecuador%3A+helping+injured+animals+after+the+earthquake&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tq8t%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd03e91ead0510794b1d0c136ddc9a4c10b915df5%2F0_30_886_532%2F886.jpg>
 John Keeble Photo C Going into a wrecked house to entice a cat to safety 
Photograph: John Keeble/Humane Society International 
Suddenly, I heard an intense cat scream – a mixture of loneliness and a call 
for attention. We looked for several minutes, but we could not see the cat. His 
call seemed to come from inside a building at high risk to collapse – we could 
not go inside it.

We were close to despair by the impossibility of entering the building, and 
then I saw the cat on the roof of the neighbouring house. I went into the ruins 
trying to approach him but it was inaccessible and he was very afraid. Finally 
he decided to come down and approached us. So in need of affection, he rubbed 
up against the hands of his rescuers.

The magnitude of the disaster in Ecuador is unimaginable. Many towns along the 
Pacific Coast have been destroyed. Many people lost their loved ones, 
businesses and work. The country’s economy is also seriously injured.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tq8t%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tq8t%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa13435294d8f71bf9782899bfa3a5088cc456fa5%2F0_0_886_591%2F886.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Diaries%20from%20Ecuador%3A%20helping%20injured%20animals%20after%20the%20earthquake&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tq8t%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Diaries+from+Ecuador%3A+helping+injured+animals+after+the+earthquake&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tq8t%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa13435294d8f71bf9782899bfa3a5088cc456fa5%2F0_0_886_591%2F886.jpg>
 Man and dog John Keeble Photos Ecuador 2016 Photograph: John Keeble/Humane 
Society International 
The coast of Manabi province is in ruins, and in this tragedy the animals are 
also victims. Some are wandering the streets disorientated, others remain in 
what was once their home, waiting for something, others still share a makeshift 
tent, roof or shelter with their families. There are thousands of animals in 
need of help.Animals <https://www.theguardian.com/world/animals> are also 
victims of poverty, abuse, and indifference. They lack veterinary care and 
policies to protect them.

The cat we rescued from Ground Zero came home with me. I named him Filipo and 
he is with me now – purring, warm and secure. I share his story while I plan 
how to help other animals. There is an urgent need of medicines, veterinarians, 
homes, food, time, dedication and love based on sustained work to rebuild their 
lives.


John Keeble, photojournalist

I’ve joined one of the animal rescue teams trying to help the thousands of 
animals in need after the earthquake. The team of volunteer vets and support 
staff have been treating and feeding hundreds of dogs and cats found in the 
wrecked buildings or brought to makeshift surgeries by their anxious owners.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tq8t%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tq8t%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F92859127c5a6f698743da4d5c3fd085ef6345747%2F0_0_886_1329%2F886.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Diaries%20from%20Ecuador%3A%20helping%20injured%20animals%20after%20the%20earthquake&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tq8t%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Diaries+from+Ecuador%3A+helping+injured+animals+after+the+earthquake&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tq8t%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F92859127c5a6f698743da4d5c3fd085ef6345747%2F0_0_886_1329%2F886.jpg>
 At a free roadside clinic, the vets work till evening to respond to demand. 
Photograph: John Keeble/Humane Society International 
Streams of owners and their pets have arrived for a free roadside clinic in 
the district of Chone, Manabi province. It is a poor community and the 
earthquake has made it even poorer. The demand for help leaves the vets working 
into the evening.

Soldiers guarding the team and keeping the crowd of pet owners in order are 
looking increasingly tense as the vets work using light from mobile phones. 
Other volunteers edge to the front of the crowd to squirt worming medicine into 
reluctant canine mouths, and to assess each animal’s condition before directing 
people to the right line for care or for animal food.

This is an area, even without before the earthquake, that is best avoided 
after dark. It is known as being lethally dangerousbut no one is leaving until 
the last animal has been seen and the the last owner given bags of food.

Dani Moncayo, Socorro Animal Ecuador


My sister Valeria and I watched news of the earthquake as it emerged on our 
TVs. We were shocked, like everyone else. People were being rescued but we 
could see how the animals were suffering too. It was heartbreaking and we knew 
we had to do something for the animals.
We got donations of food at first but as we saw how some foundations were 
helping animals we decided to raise money to support their efforts. We knew we 
had to appeal to the wider world because most people here were focused on the 
needs of people.

We are still in the emergency phase of trying to help the thousands of animals 
that need food, shelter and attention from veterinarians – so many were hurt, 
others were left alone when their owners were killed or were force to abandon 
them when they had to leave the damaged areas.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tq8t%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tq8t%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa51fbcd292a9c3b714cd6aad4060cf2f2c034a52%2F0_0_886_591%2F886.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Diaries%20from%20Ecuador%3A%20helping%20injured%20animals%20after%20the%20earthquake&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tq8t%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Diaries+from+Ecuador%3A+helping+injured+animals+after+the+earthquake&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tq8t%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa51fbcd292a9c3b714cd6aad4060cf2f2c034a52%2F0_0_886_591%2F886.jpg>
 A dog receiving treatment by the road. Photograph: John Keeble/Humane Society 
International 
Animals suffer like people. They feel the fear of the earthquake and the fear 
of being abandoned without food, shelter and people. Animals are as scared as 
people when the aftershocks strike. People can get psychological help but 
animals cannot. That is why we need to search for them.

Many animals still have their owners but they cannot afford medical help or 
food for them. It is a terrible situation. Damaged homes and businesses are 
being cleared and there is a real risk that animals living in the buildings 
will be killed or badly injured and left to die slowly.


Cristina Bernardi, lead veterinarian, Fundacíon Arca

We were walking past a soldier guarding an area of Tarqui and he told us about 
three cats in a house. We found the house but couldn’t open the door I called 
through a tiny hole in the door and two kittens came through. They were 
starving. I spent 10 minutes feeding them before they would let me pick them 
up. I looked into the room for the third kitten but it wasn’t there. I don’t 
know what happened to it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tq8t%2Fsfb%23img-6&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tq8t%2Fsfb%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd78750482f961800a0bc0f2c714f16a20955e02%2F0_0_886_1329%2F886.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Diaries%20from%20Ecuador%3A%20helping%20injured%20animals%20after%20the%20earthquake&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tq8t%2Fstw%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Diaries+from+Ecuador%3A+helping+injured+animals+after+the+earthquake&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tq8t%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd78750482f961800a0bc0f2c714f16a20955e02%2F0_0_886_1329%2F886.jpg>
 Young student vets have volunteered to help. Photograph: John Keeble/Humane 
Society International 
A couple of hours earlier, our team was treating animals in an open and 
populated part of Tarqui - vaccinating, worming and giving out food. We were 
shocked to find so many dogs with advanced distemper and we had to put seven of 
them to sleep. Later in the day we reached Chone, another town hit by the 
earthquake, and picked up three soldiers to guard us and our supplies.

Our team, which includes four young students who have taken on work normally 
done by fully-trained veterinarians, are finding extra health complications in 
the animals , such as parasites. During our days here, we have helped hundreds 
of animals and their owners but we know that it is almost nothing compared to 
the needs of animals throughout the earthquake area.

Donations made to Humane Society International’s emergency Ecuador earthquake 
animal fund will be used to buy veterinary medical supplies and support the 
team of trained veterinarians who treat animals in more remote areas. Donatehere
 <http://www.hsi.org/ecuador>.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.



