
We’re a nation glued to our smartphones, according to a 2015 Ofcom report 
<http://media.ofcom.org.uk/news/2015/cmr-uk-2015/>. Sixteen- to 24-year-olds 
are the biggest user group – 90% of them own one and look at it387 times each 
day 
<https://www.research-live.com/article/news/young-people-use-smartphones-every-other-minute/id/4013728>
 on average. It’s clear that if recruiters are searching for a young, captive 
audience from which to source talent, they should be thinking mobile.

And they are. Software companies are seeing growing demand from employers 
looking for gamified recruitment apps. Whether companies are seeking greater 
diversity or bubbly shop assistants, there’s much in this new breed of digital 
tools to attract businesses. But what are the benefits for job hunters?

A new kind of job hunting

Speed and convenience top the list for university students. Umar Hameed, a 
21-year-old Manchester Metropolitan student studying computer and network 
technology, recently downloaded careers appDebut <http://debut.careers/>. The 
app offers both a talent spotting tool (where jobseekers fill out profiles for 
employers to browse through) and a number of company specific games, which help 
employers whittle down potential hires according to their scores. Its clients 
include Vodafone and L’Oreal.

Hameed downloaded Debut in preparation for graduating next year. He says: “It 
saves a lot of time. This time last year, I was just blanket applying [for 
sandwich year placements] and I wasn’t getting anything back. I had to keep 
doing separate, tailored CVs and cover letters.”

Related: Why you don't need a CV to get your next job 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2015/nov/11/why-you-dont-need-a-cv-to-get-your-next-job>

Job seekers spend around five minutes filling out Debut’s talent spot profile, 
including their university and course, skills (such as a second language) and 
ethnicity. It even drills down to details such as whether they went to a state 
school and if their parents went to university. This might not sit right with 
all applicants (after all, most would rather be picked for their achievements 
rather than for a background that fulfils diversity requirements) but it could 
give less privileged job hunters some advantage. Recruiters are also 
increasingly looking for an efficient way to reach students at lesser known 
universities.

Debut’s founder, Charlie Taylor, 26, worked as a consultant at Ernst & Young 
after university. He says his own experience of job hunting showed him the 
inefficiency of graduate recruitment methods. “I could see how alien the 
experience was compared to what students were doing in [the rest of] our lives. 
We had all these fantastic concepts that were available at the tap of a finger 
– dating, ordering food, ordering taxis.” Yet there was nothing similar 
available for recruitment.

The rigmarole of assessment centres, in particular, irked him. “They were 
asking qualitative interview questions and [assessing the answers] on a 
quantitative scale.” Debut can help job hunters skip this long-winded process. 
Some of its games offer internships as a prize, with the top scorers 
fast-tracked through the application process.

Desperately seeking gamers 

Established gaming companies have also been approached by employers to develop 
recruitment games. Phil Stuart founded his company,Preloaded 
<http://preloaded.com/>, 16 years ago. Its focus is the use of gaming in 
education, but in the last 18 months or so it has been developing a recruitment 
app for a big fashion retailer. The app allows players to take on the virtual 
duties of a shop assistant. Adept players will then be encouraged to apply for 
a job at the company.

Mario Herger is CEO of the Enterprise Gamification Consultancy 
<http://www.enterprise-gamification.com/> in California, where he advises 
businesses how they can use gaming for training, recruitment and to engage 
customers. He’s seen many different approaches to recruitment games, but the 
day-in-the-life format is a common one. French bank BNP Paribas invited 
jobseekers to play a day as a banker, while the French postal service asked 
potential recruits to test out their suitability as a virtual postman, 
including adapting to the job’s early mornings.

As well as helping candidates decide whether they are suited to a vocation, 
recruitment games could help redress an employee gender imbalance in some 
industries. Herger points out that it’s no longer truethat most gamers are men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/sep/17/women-video-games-iab>. And 
the male gamers stereotype is particularly outdated in the realm of mobile 
gaming.

Related: Technology has transformed the career prospects of young entrepreneurs
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/technology-transformed-career-young-entrepreneurs>

Herger adds that simple games can also be effective for helping young people 
find a job that matches their talents – the UK’s intelligence organisation 
GCHQ, for example,challenged aspiring spies to crack a code 
<http://www.campaignlive.co.uk/article/1107183/spies-launch-code-breaking-recruitment-challenge#>
.

A new spin on traditional methods

Other successful formats have adapted more traditional hiring practices. 
Arctic Shores <https://www.arcticshores.com/> created three gaming apps that 
incorporate psychometric testing. As the player navigates a spaceship through 
space, the game collects data on how they respond to different problems. This 
aims to gauge a candidate’s character and test how well they would fit into an 
existing team.

UK academics are starting to research this new approach to recruitment. A 
research project on gamification in human resources 
<https://www.brighton.ac.uk/crome/research-projects/gamification-in-human-resources.aspx>
, run by Brighton University business school, found that “gamification of 
recruitment and selection with ‘quests’ and challenges may be an ideal way in 
which you [recruiters] can identify, appeal to and acquire the talent you are 
seeking”.

There are also a few companies helping jobseekers to speed up the application 
process simply by filling in a profile, rather than sending out CVs.Job Today 
<http://jobtoday.com/en/>, for example, asks candidates to spend five minutes 
completing a profile that they can then use to apply for jobs listed on the 
app. Recruiters are encouraged to respond within 24 hours.

Dein Moore, 25, found work as an event coordinator using Job Today, and later 
joined the company’s social media and sales team. He discovered the app through 
an advert on Instagram and says he was happy to share his data and photo on the 
app as he’s so used to that on social media. “It is a bit like Tinder – you 
swipe right and instead of getting a date, you get a job.”

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
