
I’m a 46-year-old woman who hasn’t had sex for over 10 years. This was never 
the plan, but I’m stuck in a perpetual circle: I worry so much about how I 
could explain this to a potential partner and the longer it goes on, the worse 
it gets. I don’t want to live the rest of my life without sex and affection.

Being theoretically ready to connect sexually with another person is a good 
first step. You will have to take some risks, though, and there is little 
defence for anyone against insecurities and embarrassments, no matter how 
sexually experienced they may be. In fact, being open to rejection – even 
ridicule – is an important part of your work ahead. When discomfort occurs, 
just tell yourself to breathe and tolerate it.

For now, try to focus on making connections with others simply for fun and 
friendship. If you allow yourself to become more gregarious, sooner or later 
you will naturally meet someone to whom you will be attracted. At that point, 
you will really have to leave your comfort zone and let your desire lead the 
way.

Pledge to be kinder to your body from now on, and embrace the notion that you 
deserve to have pleasure. Every single human being can be attractive to 
another. And don’t worry about potential partners’ negative views about your 
long-term celibacy: you don’t have to tell them, but even if you do, many men 
will simply assume you have high standards.

• Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a US-based psychotherapist specialising in 
sexual disorders.

• If you would like advice from Pamela Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, 
send us a brief description of your concerns toprivate.lives@theguardian.com 
<mailto:private.lives@theguardian.com> (please don’t send attachments). Each 
week, Pamela chooses one problem to answer, which will be published online and 
in print. She regrets that she cannot enter into personal correspondence.
