
Anti-slavery campaigners in Mauritania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mauritania> say two court victories last 
week could be significant in the fight against the practice.

In only the country’s second prosecution for slavery – and the first by a new 
court established alongside an anti-slavery law passed last year – two 
slave-owners were sentenced to five years in prison, with one year to be served 
and four years suspended.

In another boost for campaigners, two prominent anti-slavery activists, Biram 
Ould Abeid 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/17/mauritania-anti-slavery-activists-jailed-biram-ould-abeid>
 and Brahim Bilal – who had beenin jail for 20 months after taking part in a 
demonstration 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/21/mauritania-anti-slavery-activists-sentence-upheld-accused-parody-justice>
 against slavery – have been freed.

Related: Anti-slavery activists in Mauritania face violent clampdown, rights 
groups warn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/20/anti-slavery-activists-in-mauritania-face-violent-clampdown-rights-groups-warn>

“The problem for us in the past has not been bringing the complaint to court, 
it has been that our previous attempts have never resulted in a conviction. 
This is the first time that a trial has gone from start to finish and it really 
gives us hope in the months to come that we can make progress on other cases,” 
said Salimata Lam, national coordinator for local NGOSOS Esclaves 
<https://fr-fr.facebook.com/Sos-Esclaves-Mauritanie-136790999749061/>. 

The two slave-owners – Sidi Mohamed Ould Hanana and Khalihina Ould Heymad – 
were also ordered to pay compensation to the two female slaves who had brought 
the case with the support of SOS Esclaves and Anti-Slavery International (ASI). 
The presiding judge of the Nema special court, which was set up in December, 
also imposed a fine of 100,000 ouguiya (about $285) and ordered 1m ouguiya in 
restitution to each of the women.

The women – Fatimetou Mint Hamdi and Fatimata Mint Zaydih, aged between 35 and 
40 – had lived with the Ould Daoud family since birth. They escaped with their 
children with the help of SOS Esclaves last year. The NGO has been looking 
after them since.

Speaking after the trial, Zaydih said: “I never received any money or anything 
for the work I did. I was only ever allowed to eat the leftovers from the 
masters’ meals. My 10-year-old son became the slave of one of the masters, and 
was under his control all the time. I never knew what my boy was eating or if 
he was eating at all.”

Related: Slavery still shackles Mauritania, 31 years after its abolition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/aug/14/slavery-still-shackles-mauritania>

Mauritania is one of three countries – along with Niger and Mali – where 
slavery by inheritance is proving hard to eradicate. Some people from the 
Haratin group are born into slavery; their masters own them from birth and buy 
and sell them. Haratins work for no pay and receive little education. The women 
face rape, with any children also becoming the property of the slave owner.

The presiding judge, Aliou Ba, said the sentences were intended to send a 
message to Mauritanians that slavery will be taken seriously, and added that he 
has eight other slavery cases on his books.

“This judgment will likely have an enormously empowering effect on people in 
slavery and will act as a strong deterrent on other slave-owners,” said Sarah 
Mathewson,Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> programme director 
at ASI.

Abeid <http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2014/09/08/freedom-fighter> and Bilal 
are president and vice-president of theInitiative for the Resurgence of the 
Abolitionist Movement <http://www.iramauritanie.org/> respectively. Abeid, a 
winner of the 2013 UN human rights prize, stood as a candidate in Mauritania’s 
2014 presidential election and came second behind Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz.

The campaigners were sentenced to two years in jail in January 2015 for 
“inciting trouble” and belonging to an unrecognised organisation but the 
supreme courtmodified their convictions <http://unpo.org/article/19188>. 
Speaking after his release, Abeid said: “The injustice and persecution we have 
been through have only strengthened our convictions.”

International rights groups and the UN have long been pressuring the 
government to outlaw slavery. Thelaw passed in August 
<http://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-33936243> made slavery a crime against 
humanity, increased the penalty to 20 years’ imprisonment and included 
provisions to make it possible for civil society organisations to bring cases 
on behalf of slaves.

Nevertheless, there remains a long way to go to improve human rights in 
Mauritania. The country has been criticised for cracking down on civil society 
and journalists. Adeath sentence was upheld 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-36111386> last month for a blogger 
convicted of apostasy.

Although slavery was officially abolished in 1981, it is deeply ingrained in 
Mauritania’s history and pressure groups have struggled to get the authorities 
to acknowledge that it exists. Although the prosecutions are ground-breaking, 
the claimants’ lawyer, Maitre Mohameden Elid, said the sentence was too lenient.

“This is just the start. We’ll do everything we can to get the next cases out 
of the drawers in the justice department,” saidSOS Esclaves 
<https://fr-fr.facebook.com/Sos-Esclaves-Mauritanie-136790999749061/>’s Lam. 
“We want to see fixed dates for the next cases.”
