
Pseudoscience is everywhere – on the back of your shampoo bottle, on the ads 
that pop up in your Facebook feed, and most of all in the Daily Mail. Bold 
statements in multi-syllabic scientific jargon give the false impression that 
they’re supported by laboratory research and hard facts.

Magnetic wristbands <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-12135402> improve your 
sporting performance,carbs make you fat 
<http://www.womenshealthmag.com/weight-loss/bad-carbs>, and just about 
everything gives youcancer 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3381086/Sugar-fizzy-drinks-junk-food-increases-chances-breast-cancer-spread-organs-scientists-claim.html>
.

Of course, we scientists accept that sometimes people believe things we don’t 
agree with. That’s fine. Science is full of people who disagree with one 
another . If we all thought exactly the same way, we could retire and call the 
status quo truth.

But when people think snake oil is backed up by science, we have to challenge 
that. Sowhy is it so hard <http://journal.sjdm.org/15/15923a/jdm15923a.pdf>?


Related: Eight things you think are true – but science scoffs at 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/jun/25/irrational-beliefs-eight-myths-that-are-disproved-by-science>

As a nation, the British have always been wary of the “social elite” 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2235719/Britain-run-private-school-elite-study-shows.html>
 and academics are included under that label of privilege. Many people bristle 
at the idea of listening to those with multiple degrees talking down from on 
high to “correct” the less educated.

Academics <http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/academics> have 
a reputation for being blinkered, arrogant, patronising and intolerant of those 
whose specialities differ from their own. But for every toffee-nosed academic 
I’ve met, there have been plenty of humble, engaging, enthusiastic ones who 
love their subjects and just want to get the word out there.

However, when you set out to counter an existing belief, you’re up against a 
whole load of cognitive biases – let’s take a look at what’s going on in the 
mind of your readers.

• Sunk cost fallacy 
<http://www.logicallyfallacious.com/index.php/logical-fallacies/174-sunk-cost-fallacy>
 is the reason that people who have already wasted money on tickets to a 
terrible film also waste their evening watching it. It can be the reason that 
people chomp their way through terrible food or get married when the 
relationship has already soured – it’s the urge to justify previous decisions 
using the next one. And it means that if people have put their weight behind a 
belief, they are invested in it, and are likely to fight its corner.

• Along with our love of being right, we are hooked on patterns, and make 
sense of the world by seeking them out. This leads us toconfirmation and 
selection bias <http://www.sciencedaily.com/terms/confirmation_bias.htm>: we 
look for evidence to support a theory, and ignore evidence to the contrary. 
Given the several million individually observable things that happen to you 
every day, it’s easy to pick one to prove an idea you’ve already become 
attached to, whether superstition or stereotype.

Related: How can academics help science reporters get their facts straight? – 
live chat 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/apr/16/live-qa-how-can-academics-help-science-reporters-get-their-facts-straight>

• Everyday life brings a lot of data and sometimes your subconscious 
summarises it badly, falling victim to theclustering illusion 
<http://bias123.com/clustering_illusion>. Any random set of data looks like it 
has clusters of points in it. If it didn’t have clusters, it wouldn’t be random 
scatter, it’d be an evenly spaced pattern. But our addiction to order makes 
those clusters very seductive, and it’s easy to forget that two things that 
happened at the same time don’t have to be related.


• The Dunning–Kruger Effect 
<http://theness.com/neurologicablog/index.php/lessons-from-dunning-kruger/> was 
brutally summarised by Darwin as “ignorance begets confidence”. The less you 
know, the more likely you are to perceive yourself as an expert. Conversely, 
the more you know, the more likely you are to doubt your own competence. This 
means that some people have illusory superiority, and some experts can’t 
explain how they do things because they assume what they do is easy or obvious 
to all.

One expert who can explain things is Christian Behrenbruch, Advance global 
Australian of the year 
<http://advance.org/videos/christian-behrenbruch-2012-advance-global-australi/>
in biotechnology, adjunct professor atRMIT University <http://www.rmit.edu.au/> 
and a professorial fellow at Monash University.

Behrenbruch dedicates at least three hours a day to dispelling pseudoscience. 
He says: “Whenever there is money involved, science gets thrown out the window.

“For example, when the average punter decides to invest in a technology 
company, it takes an awful lot to dislodge the belief that the science may be 
quackery. All over the planet, there are rafts of small public companies that 
take money from gullible investors with poor science – but once they are 
hooked, they are hooked.


“The other area is health. As a health condition degrades and there become 
fewer and fewer treatment options, the tendency to try anything rises. The 
confounding part of this equation is the concept of human hope – and that, 
unfortunately, is what undermines science every time. We hope that something 
will work, we believe that something will work.”


Margaret Defeyter is director of business and employer engagement at 
Northumbria University, a role which has given her a lot of hands-on experience 
with public communication.

Related: Is slack science reporting letting down the public? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/mar/24/is-slack-science-reporting-letting-down-the-public>

She has some practical advice for getting a message across: “I think many 
academics find it hard to explain research in everyday language. The best way I 
have found is through events such as the British Science Festival. The Healthy 
Living team ran a pop-up stand displaying hands-on models and activities based 
on research findings. This worked extremely well, as it took something quite 
abstract and made it concrete.”

If we’re going to dispel myths, we need to improve our ability to communicate, 
with creative approaches such as hands-on activities that encourage 
self-directed learning. Rather than just trying to stamp out misunderstandings, 
we need to offer people something else to believe in.


Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
