
Of all the world’s great cuisines served in the UK, Thai food has taken a 
surprisingly long time to get a 21st-century makeover. There are kimchi 
burritos, sourdough pizzas and North Carolina barbecues on many street corners 
– at least in major cities. But until recently Thai restaurants – even in 
hippest Hackney – have been conservative in their outlook: green and red 
curries, papaya salads, hot and sour soup. Not forgetting the ubiquitous pad 
Thai, that MSG-laden heap of peanut dust, noodles and slivers of flavourless 
meat that is guaranteed to cause you to slump, exhausted, into your bowl. The 
more interesting regional dishes have remained known mainly to Thais.

“Pad Thai is not even a very traditional Thai dish,” laughs Ben Chapman, 
co-founder ofSmoking Goat <http://smokinggoatsoho.com/>. “It was basically 
introduced by the Thai government [in the 40s] to get people to eat more rice 
noodles.”

For the past 18 months, in his tiny bar-restaurant on Denmark Street in Soho, 
London, Chapman has been doling out a different kind of Thai food. It comes 
cooked over hot coals and bristling with flavours: nahm yum scallops served on 
the half-shell; aged beef short rib with massaman and pickles; five spice pork 
belly. Later this year they will open another, bigger site on the other side of 
Soho.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jb9q%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jb9q%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8623dfcd75d7c8c9514310096fd6a030d848aa29%2F0_4300_6200_3719%2F6200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chefs%20who%20are%20loosening%20the%20old%20school%20Thai&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jb9q%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chefs+who+are+loosening+the+old+school+Thai&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jb9q%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8623dfcd75d7c8c9514310096fd6a030d848aa29%2F0_4300_6200_3719%2F6200.jpg>
 Signature dish: smoked goat shoulder with Thai herbs. Photograph: Pal Hansen 
for the Observer 
They’re perhaps the most prominent exponents of a new kind of Thai cooking, 
much closer to the food that many British tourists will have tasted in the 
north and northeast of Thailand.

“The first time I ate good Thai food I fell in love,” Chapman says. “It was 
food in glorious technicolour – spicy, umami, sour, sugar – all at the same 
time. To me that was astonishing. I wanted to eat it again, but there was 
nowhere in Britain I could, so I had to learn how to cook it.”

While the flavours are heavily influenced by northern Thai cuisine, many of 
the ingredients are adjusted for the UK. You’ll be hard pressed to find a short 
rib in Chiang Mai, for instance. “None of it is verbatim Thai food,” he says. 
“For example, our aromatics are very different. Their mint is much smaller and 
sweeter; here it’s garden mint, which is slightly bitter. Coriander here is 
slightly soapy, whereas there it’s brighter. In some cases you can work around 
it. If you are making a nam tok, for instance, a classic northern Thai dish, 
but you know your mint is weaker, you can use less of it and add sweetness to 
the stock instead.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jb9q%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jb9q%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3fd87aa087625be6a15d87d001e50cc3f4604b31%2F1744_2000_6009_3607%2F6009.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chefs%20who%20are%20loosening%20the%20old%20school%20Thai&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jb9q%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chefs+who+are+loosening+the+old+school+Thai&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jb9q%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3fd87aa087625be6a15d87d001e50cc3f4604b31%2F1744_2000_6009_3607%2F6009.jpg>
 Life after pad Thai: (from left) Mark Dobbie, Tom George and Andy Oliver of 
Som Saa. Photograph: Pal Hansen for the Observer 
In Commercial Street in east London, people are queuing for more than two 
hours for a table atSom Saa <http://www.somsaa.com/>, another restaurant 
specialising in regional Thai dishes. Among the dishes the diners are waiting 
to sample are silky panang curries of braised beef cheeks and isaan hot soup 
that stops just short of blowing your head off. It’s a wider menu than the one 
at Smoking Goat, taking in southern as well as northern regional Thai cuisine.

You put balls of meat on top of fruit with coriander and chilli. It’s an 
amazing explosion of flavour and freshness

The permanent site has just opened off the back of a successful stay at 
Climpson’s Arch in Hackney. Founders Andy Oliver and Tom George funded the site 
through Crowdcube, which offered hungry diners the chance to get involved.

“If you’re writing a hypothetical business plan for a restaurant, it’s much 
easier if you have a version of the restaurant that people can see,” says 
Oliver. “Then if they like it they can invest. It means we don’t just have one 
big investor who comes down and says he doesn’t like the tables or tells us to 
use cheaper prawns.”

Although they are ostensibly Smoking Goat’s rivals, there is also a sense of 
esprit de corps. They have all known each other for years. Along with Peckham’s
Begging Bowl <http://www.thebeggingbowl.co.uk/>, run by New Zealander Jane 
Alty, they are the leading lights of the new wave of regional Thai cooking. It 
might be an obvious thing to point out, but none of the people involved in this 
new wave seem to be Thai, though Chapman says he has plenty of Thai customers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jb9q%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jb9q%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F280641b618e5c86151df6009a4bdb1e7936e90f1%2F0_180_5400_3240%2F5400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chefs%20who%20are%20loosening%20the%20old%20school%20Thai&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jb9q%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chefs+who+are+loosening+the+old+school+Thai&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jb9q%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F280641b618e5c86151df6009a4bdb1e7936e90f1%2F0_180_5400_3240%2F5400.jpg>
 ‘Food comes cooked over hot coals and bristling with flavours’: (from left) 
gaeng gari jay, gaeng juet het, sticky rice, pad pak, and nahm dtok pla thort. 
Photograph: Steve Joyce 
All three restaurants are indebted to Pok Pok <http://pokpokny.com/> in New 
York and the Australian chef David Thompson’sNahm 
<http://www.comohotels.com/travel-and-media/press-release/david-thompson-feels-masterchef-effect-nahm>
, which introduced regional Thai food at the higher end of the market in 2001 
and is still going strong. Oliver and Alty worked there themselves.

“I always liked Asian recipes more than western ones,” Oliver says. “From a 
young age I was cooking Madhur Jaffrey’s recipes, then I travelled round Asia 
at 19, trying everything. I took a graduate job after uni but packed it in to 
go to various kitchens – Moro, Maze, Bocca di Lupo – before David offered me a 
job at Nahm. I had no knowledge but a lot of enthusiasm. I never looked back.

“The techniques are totally different. One of the first things you make is ma 
haw, which is minced pork and minced chicken that has been cooked with 
coriander, garlic, pepper, fish sauce, palm sugar and all sorts of other 
seasonings until it’s almost like a caramel. You put balls of this on top of 
fruit with coriander and chilli. You could spend 1,000 years in a western 
kitchen and never even consider doing that. Three proteins mixed together is 
bizarre to a westerner, and the meat is overcooked by about 45 minutes by our 
standards. But the result is delicious. I like breaking the rules.”

• This article was amended on 23 May 2016 to remove a reference to chef Seb 
Holmes, who no longer works with Ben Chapman.

