
Q Can you help me decide what type of flooring to have in my pub kitchen? I 
need something that can cope with beer barrels being dropped on it. Also, there 
is a coal-fired Rayburn in the room so the flooring needs to withstand hot ash 
and ember accidents. I don't want two materials (eg tiles by the Rayburn and 
vinyl by the door) as it looks like you can't afford to do a whole room in one 
material.
Thanks,
 Isobel 

A I don't think you should worry about what others think - you have very 
specific practical needs to fulfill with this floor and if handled with intent 
the functional and aesthetic styles will work together. Being relatively thin 
your vinyl floor will conduct heat from the solid ground, making the room feel 
cool. For the area surrounding the Rayburn, try a light-coloured natural stone 
tile such as limestone (www.stonehousetiles.co.uk 
<http://www.stonehousetiles.co.uk>), which can withstand extremes of heat, and 
colour-match it with a light cork (a natural and sustainable material) which 
has high-impact resistance. Wicanders Moonlight Identity collection (
www.wicanders.com <http://www.wicanders.com>) is a white-coloured cork floor 
that will help brighten the room by reflecting light from the window, as well 
as being warm underfoot.

Q Years back I bought a two-piece bath and pedestal mat from Kays Catalogue in 
tumble-twist yarn with an anti-slip latex backing. It's about 30in by 20in. 
They are available from Littlewoods but do not have latex on the back. The 
Littlewoods ones are nice but not so weighty, and the Kays one has lasted for 
years. The only manufacturer online is TD Textiles in the north, who say their 
mats are anti-slip but on the phone today they tell me this is a mistake. I 
dislike chenille mats - a kind of poor man's tumble-twist, with a nasty plush 
nap which leaks. Can you help?
Judy

A Your question is the sort I can really get my teeth into - clean, to the 
point, focused, yet hungry. You're clearly a woman who knows what she wants, 
and that's bath mats: nice, fluffy, rubbery-backed ones. My design police 
inform me that toilet mats have gone out of fashion, butwww.johnlewis.com 
<http://www.johnlewis.com> has 64 bath mats, and I'm sure at least one will fit 
your discerning tastes.

Â·  If you have an interior design question for Oliver Heath, email him at 
ask.oliver@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.oliver@observer.co.uk>
