
“I want my daughter to be internationally successful. I want her to be 
whatever she wants. And I want people to respect her.” These words were spoken 
by Mohammad, a middle-aged Saudi-Arabian partner of a major global management 
consultancy, during a panel debate I recently attended in Riyadh.


I found his ambitions for his daughter easy to identify with. They parallel 
with my feelings about the freedoms and rights I expect for my own 
eight-year-old daughter.


Sadly, it would seem not everyone shares Mohammad’s sentiments. Saudi Arabia 
ranks 20th out of 22 
<http://news.trust.org/spotlight/poll-womens-rights-in-the-arab-world/> for 
women’s rights in the Arab states, and 130th out of 142 countries measured in 
theWorld Economic Forum’s Global Gender Gap 
<http://reports.weforum.org/global-gender-gap-report-2014/rankings/> report.

If Saudi Arabia is to pool its resources of female talent it needs women to be 
represented in the boardroom.

 The western media has extensively covered women’s disenfranchisement in the 
country, and I don’t just mean the ban on driving; women cannot travel freely 
and are mostly excluded from the world outside the home. The biggest issue here 
is the male guardianship of women, meaning that they need their male guardians’ 
permission to marry, travel, leave the country and enrol in education.

Many have argued for women’s equality on purely moral terms, and those are 
valid arguments. But they aren’t the only ones. There is also corporate and 
national profitability to be considered and for many who reject western 
morality, a purely financial argument might prove more compelling.


The volatility of the oil markets means that the country can no longer rely on 
its primary industry as a reliable source of wealth. Soon, Saudi Arabia will 
have to play by the same rules as other industrialised countries: it will need 
to diversify and take its place in the economy of human capital. But women make 
up only16% of the Saudi workforce 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-08-10/saudi-women-are-joining-the-workforce-in-record-numbers>
, standing much in line with the14% of the UAE 
<http://d2sh4fq2xsdeg9.cloudfront.net/application/velocity/spotlight-extensions/womens-rights-in-the-arab-world/english/popups/10.png?v=72.73>
 and19% in Bahrain 
<http://d2sh4fq2xsdeg9.cloudfront.net/application/velocity/spotlight-extensions/womens-rights-in-the-arab-world/english/popups/12.png?v=72.73>
. How can a country deprived of 55% of its workforce compete with nations that 
are more than happy to pool all of their human resources?

The lowering of oil prices should serve as a resounding clarion call for a 
nation that needs to plan for a near-future in which oil wells are drying up. 
It is time to drill into a far richer well, that of talented, modern women.Women
 <http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> like Mohammad’s daughter. A 
well that need never run dry.

Change is inevitable, and it has already begun. During my time in Saudi, I 
witnessed the early blossoming of a female subculture. Women who might still be 
subject to harsh rules of “guardianship” are finding ways to communicate with 
each other via social networks. And, whether they are inspired by fine-art, 
sculpture orvideo game vlogging 
<http://techcrunch.com/2016/02/18/the-fierce-female-mobile-gamers-of-saudi-arabia/?ncid=rss>
, things are changing faster than one might expect.


In just one generation the country has moved from 5% to almost 100% literacy. 
A staggering 70% of the population is under 30 years old, meaning a more 
youthful and less traditional perspective is possible. Women may still be 
barred from participation in most mainstream cultural establishments but they 
are no longer silent.


Related: Saudi Arabia labour market reforms bring change at the checkouts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/17/saudi-supermarket-saudisation-women-workers>

In 2015 women voted for the first time in the municipal councils. More than 
half (55%) of the graduates from Saudi universities are now women. And women 
employment is one of the top priorities of the governmental agenda.

Speaking at this year’s Munich Security Conference, the Saudi Arabian foreign 
minister assured delegates that women would soon be allowed to drive 
<http://www.arabnews.com/featured/news/879866> and that the prohibition was a 
societal rather than religious issue. While this proposal came with no specific 
schedule, one cannot help feeling that the kingdom’s government is increasingly 
aware of just how untenable women’s current situation of rights deprivation has 
become.

While Saudi women might largely be excluded from the workforce, I also 
witnessed a corporateSaudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia> which is very much a world 
apart. Here I encountered business “compounds” – privately owned towns built to 
house the employees of multinational companies.


The largest of these compounds are as big as small cities. Within the walls of 
the compound of Saudi Aramco, the oil giant that is estimated to be the world’s 
most valuable company, I saw women and men behaving freely, much as they do in 
other more liberal Arab nations. Women do not have to wear the abaya (black 
robe), which is obligatory on the streets of most major Saudi cities. There’s 
also an (unwritten) understanding that the muttawa (the religious police) do 
not attempt to enforce gender segregation or dress codes on private property.

But as I look over Mohammad’s shoulder and scan the room, there are no women. 
The panel of corporate pundits consists exclusively of men. Whilst I did see 
women on other panels, if Saudi Arabia is to pool its resources of female 
talent it needs women to be represented in the boardroom to get their voices 
heard. And, more than ever, it needs the private sector to lead this shift.


Saudi Arabia’s future is poised on a fine balance. There may have been no 
female pundits on Mohammad’s panel but the men I spoke to did at least admit 
their openness to address the issue of women’s rights and their importance to 
the future economy of the country – one that needs to compete with other Arab 
countries such as Bahrain and Dubai.

It is a pressing need and the value of women must be recognised. 

You can find out more about Belinda’s experiences in Saudi Arabia via the 
hashtag #feministinsaudi and follow her on Twitter@belindaparmar 
<https://twitter.com/belindaparmar> 
