
The tumultuous and often bitter EU referendum 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> campaign has left the two 
rival camps – Remain and Leave – locked in a dramatic dead heat with just four 
days to go before the British people decide their European future.
Brexit explained: Guardian view 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/05/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=guardian_view#>
The final Opinium/Observer poll  <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/polls>
before referendum day on Thursday puts both sides on 44%, with 10% saying they 
are undecided.

The online survey of more than 2,000 people was taken between last Tuesday and 
Friday, with 80% of the polling conducted before themurder of the Labour MP Jo 
Cox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/live/2016/jun/17/jo-cox-death-police-labour-mp-latest-updates>
, which led to the suspension of all campaigning.

A YouGov poll for the Sunday Times today gives the Remain camp 44%, a one 
point lead over Leave. A third of the responses were taken before news of her 
death was made public.

Anthony Wells, director of YouGov’s political and social research team, said: 
“While there will be speculation about whether this movement is connected to 
the tragic death of Jo Cox, we do not think that it is... We are now in the 
final week of the referendum campaign and the swing back towards the status quo 
appears to be in full force.”

Related: EU referendum voters unconvinced by scare tactics: ‘I just want to do 
what’s right’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/18/eu-referendum-voters-scare-leave-remain>

Today, both sides will resume their battle to capture the votes of the 
undecided and to persuade people to switch sides, though both the Leave and 
Remain camps say that the manner of their campaigning will be more sober and 
less combative.

Some 79% of those who stated a clear preference said they were certain not to 
change their minds. Among Remain supporters, 77% said they would definitely not 
switch sides, while among Leave voters 81% said they would not waver.

The poll – which sets the stage for a tense and dramatic run to referendum day 
– suggests that, among the undecideds, more are inclined to vote Remain than 
Leave. When the 10% who have not made up their minds were asked which way they 
were leaning, 36% said they were inclining towards Remain and 28% towards Leave.

In an interview with the Observer, Kenneth Clarke, a former Tory chancellor 
and a strong supporter of remaining inside the EU, criticised both campaigns 
for making overblown claims, which he said had left much of the electorate 
“angry and confused”. Clarke said a referendum on such a complex and important 
matter should never have been called and that the result was more uncertain 
than the Scottish referendum in 2014 had ever been. The outcome was now “in the 
lap of the gods”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yzfc%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yzfc%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56c03d492ab596f9195ea78552b1cf44bf9f4fcc%2F0_192_3680_2208%2F3680.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%20splits%20Britain%20down%20the%20middle%20as%20contest%20resumes&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yzfc%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EU+referendum+splits+Britain+down+the+middle+as+contest+resumes&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yzfc%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56c03d492ab596f9195ea78552b1cf44bf9f4fcc%2F0_192_3680_2208%2F3680.jpg>
 Nigel Farage launches Ukip’s new EU referendum poster campaign. Photograph: 
James Shaw/REX/Shutterstock/James Shaw/Rex/Shutterstock 
Taking aim at the Remain camp, led by David Cameron, Clarke said it had 
“dramatised” Treasury reports which suggested Brexit would have serious 
negative effects on the economy.

But he was far more damning of the Leave camp, headed by his Tory colleagues 
Boris Johnson and Michael Gove, which he said had echoed the “bigotry and 
prejudice” of Nigel Farage. Its leaders, he suggested, had voiced opinions that 
he felt they did not truly hold, particularly on immigration.

Clarke added: “People have not been impressed by the campaigning. They do feel 
they don’t know enough about it. And they are slightly uncertain as to which 
way to vote.”

In a letter to this newspaper on Sunday, former Labour 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> prime minister Tony Blair, and 
former deputy prime ministers Michael Heseltine, Conservative, and Nick Clegg, 
Liberal Democrat, head a list of prominent figures in public life who call on 
the British public to reject “division, isolationism and blame” by voting to 
stay in the EU. They say that Nigel Farage and other Leave campaigners have 
tried to divide the country and foster anti-immigrant feeling by promoting a 
sense of “us and them”.

Related: Rupert Murdoch’s newspapers in two minds over EU referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/18/rupert-murdoch-newspapers-eu-referendum-sun-times>

Privately, the Remain campaign believes that the death of Cox, a strong 
supporter of the EU who had praised the way in which immigration had enriched 
British society, will make it harder for their opponents to campaign as 
stridently as before on immigration issues.

Labour politicians will postpone the resumption of full campaigning until 
after MPs have returned to parliament tomorrow to pay tributes to Cox.

Scotland Yard will offer every MP a briefing this week on how to keep 
themselves and their staff safe in their constituencies 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/16/jo-cox-fatal-shooting-enhanced-security-for-mps-had-started>
.

It is understood that plans are being laid to establish a central body that 
can ensure that all local forces respond swiftly and appropriately to threats 
against MPs, following concerns that local forces have not always taken the 
dangers sufficiently seriously.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yzfc%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yzfc%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28409560b2bfe746923d5e83bbc5f2c861425111%2F362_579_8673_5205%2F8673.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%20splits%20Britain%20down%20the%20middle%20as%20contest%20resumes&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yzfc%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EU+referendum+splits+Britain+down+the+middle+as+contest+resumes&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yzfc%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28409560b2bfe746923d5e83bbc5f2c861425111%2F362_579_8673_5205%2F8673.jpg>
 Floral tributes to Jo Cox in Birstall. Photograph: Christopher Furlong/Getty 
Images 
Writing in the Comment pages of today’s Observer, the shadow education 
secretary, Lucy Powell, pays tribute to her friend and colleague: “We must make 
sure that her memory is served not by more women now being put off by abuse and 
security concerns, but inspired by her life, her approach and her achievements. 
Losing Jo is such a deep loss to those who knew her and the causes she stood 
for. But in each and every one of us, in our every day lives, we must make sure 
that a little bit of Jo lives on.”
