
One out of every 122 people is internally displaced, seeking asylum or a 
refugee, according tonew figures 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/18/59m-people-displaced-war-violence-persecution-says-un>
. The annualglobal trends study <http://unhcr.org/556725e69.html> by the UN 
refugee agency, UNHCR, warns that the world is failing people in an “age of 
unprecedented mass displacement”.

The Syrian conflict has led to a significant increase in refugees globally, 
with nearly four million Syrians living in Lebanon, Turkey, Jordan and Iraq. A 
new campaign calledEveryday Heroes of Syria 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/20/world-refugee-day-everyday-heroes-helping-syrian-refugees>
 is paying tribute to Syrian refugees and members of host communities who are 
banding together to support one another.

In the latest instalment in our series reviewing the millennium development 
goals 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/series/millennium-development-goals-the-final-countdown>
 (MDGs), the focus turned to goal six, which aims to combat HIV and Aids, 
malaria and other diseases. You can learn more about how far the world has come 
in reducing the spread of disease inthis explainer 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/18/millennium-development-goal-six-hiv-and-malaria-explainer>
 and a list of15 achievements 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/18/millennium-development-goal-6-15-achievements-on-hiv-and-malaria>
. There are also stories of hope from Ethiopia, where more children of HIV 
mothers are being bornfree of the virus 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/18/ethiopia-hiv-mother-child-transmission-antiretroviral-treatment>
, as well as in Kenya where progress ontackling malaria 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/18/kenya-bednets-malaria-prevention-climate-change>
 has been made but threats from climate change persist.

Elsewhere on the site

 * Colombia’s pipes to nowhere: villagers die of thirst as corruption stalls 
dam project 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/18/colombia-water-drought-rancheria-corruption>
 * Congolese troops must be disarmed if rapes are to stop 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/17/drc-troops-disarmed-rape-dr-denis-mukwege>
 * Médecins Sans Frontières head criticises G7 for lack of urgency over Ebola 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/16/medecins-sans-frontieres-head-criticises-g7-over-ebola-joanne-liu>
 * Ebola in Sierra Leone: ‘Remind people not to forget about us, the survivors’
 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/15/ebola-sierra-leone-remind-people-not-to-forget-survivors>
 * Five myths about child labour 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/datablog/2015/jun/12/five-myths-about-child-labour-world-day-against>
Opinion

While many environmental campaigners welcomed Pope Francis’s encyclical 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/18/eight-things-we-learned-from-the-popes-climate-change-encyclical>
 calling for action on climate change, others thought it did not go far enough.
John Vidal <http://www.theguardian.com/profile/johnvidal> argues the encyclical 
glosses over 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/19/pope-francis-climate-change-encyclical-population-growth-development-role-women>
 the role of population growth and family planning in developing countries. In 
Turkey, women’s rights campaigner Semanur Karaman writes that following the 
election which resulted in more female MPs being elected than ever before, the 
country is on thethreshold of a gender revolution 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/19/turkey-elections-revolution-hdp-women-female-mps>
.

Multimedia

Pictures: ‘I know I’m too young to be a mother’: child marriage in Ethiopia 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2015/jun/19/ethiopia-early-marriage-girls-empowerment-unicef-in-pictures>

Pictures: Farmers in Burma swap opium poppies for coffee crops 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2015/jun/16/farmers-burma-shan-swap-opium-poppies-coffee-crops-in-pictures>

Pictures: Taluorumana, the Colombian village dying of thirst 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2015/jun/18/talorumana-colombia-dying-thirst-in-pictures>


Podcast: Financing the sustainable development goals 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/audio/2015/jun/23/sustainable-development-goals-financing-development-addis-ethiopia>

What you said: top reader comment

On the piece William Hague’s summit against warzone rape seen as ‘costly 
failure’ 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/13/warzone-rape-congo-questions-uk-campaign#comment-53833018>
,TSJones wrote:

I think the issue revolves around “what the UN can and can’t do”. The UN is, 
after all, simply a collective of nation states. Thus it is only as powerful as 
the states that comprise it allow it to be. The goals it had when it was set up 
were not to solve all the world’s problems – that had been tried by the old 
League of Nations and was a dismal failure. As someone once said, law without 
force is no law at all – and as the UN cannot enforce any of its principles or 
initiatives then it is and will always be a paper tiger.

Highlight from the blogosphere

Overseas Development Institute: Politics and megacities: what does political 
transition in Nigeria mean for Lagos? 
<http://www.developmentprogress.org/blog/2015/06/10/politics-and-megacities-what-does-political-transition-nigeria-mean-lagos>

And finally …

Poverty matters will return in two weeks with another roundup of the latest 
news and comment. In the meantime, keep up to date on theGlobal Development 
website <http://www.theguardian.com/global-development>. Follow @gdndevelopment 
<https://twitter.com/gdndevelopment> and the team – @swajones 
<https://twitter.com/swajones>, @LizFordGuardian 
<https://twitter.com/lizfordguardian>, @MarkC_Anderson 
<https://twitter.com/MarkC_Anderson> and @CarlaOkai 
<https://twitter.com/CarlaOkai> – on Twitter, and join Guardian Global 
Development on Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardianglobaldevelopment>.
