
Q I love hats, but I find that cheap ones lose their shape and good-quality 
ones are enormously expensive. Are there any hat companies you can recommend 
that have well-priced, well-made hats?
Ben

A Pete Doherty has a lot to answer for. Hats have crept back on to the 
menswear catwalks over the past few seasons, and the straw trilby has become a 
favourite style for designers such as Rai Kawakubo of Comme des Garcons. I can 
highly recommend the New York Hat Company, which is sold in Liberty: it has a 
great range of straw trilbies and, following the bright colour trend for 
spring/summer 2008 menswear, the brand has come up with great coloured hat 
bands in an array of different hues for £50 to £60. If you'd rather emulate 
Justin Timberlake, Selfridges also stocks a make called Bailey of Hollywood, 
which has a variety of styles from fedoras to porkpie hats - again, these come 
in great colours to brighten your summer wardrobe. The prices range from £35 to 
£75. If you want something a little rare, look online atbaileyhats.com. 
<http://www.baileyhats.com.> Bailey also has a range called Bailey 1/10, which 
is designed by none other than the actor John Malkovich.

Q Help! Where can I buy a cool illustrated T-shirt to wear with a pencil skirt 
and blazer?
Kim

A Jonathan Saunders for Topshop has a great geometric-print T-shirt for £65, 
and one of Luella Bartley's bat-print tees (pictured) would also look cool and 
fun with a pencil skirt. You can find them in Luella's London shop for £85 (020 
7518 1830). For something cheaper, try Urban Outfitters (urbanoutfitters.co.uk 
<http://www.urbanoutfitters.co.uk>). The store always has big selection of 
varied and fabulous T-shirts, some of which cost as little as £15.

·  If you have a wardrobe question for Jo Jones, email her at 
ask.jo@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.jo@observer.co.uk>
