
According to the skills minister, Nick Boles 
<http://www.theguardian.com/profile/nick-boles>, “most” of the recent strikes 
would have gone ahead under a new government crackdown on trade unions that 
will see a new participation threshold in votes on industrial action. Is he 
right?

What is the context? 

Boles is the minister of state for skills in the Department for Business, 
Innovation & Skills, whichoutlined the new rules to makes strikes unlawful 
unless 50% of those being asked to strike vote in a ballot 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/new-legislation-to-make-strike-laws-fair-for-working-people>
 on Wednesday.

What did Boles say?

Speaking to BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, he argued that most of the biggest 
strikes in recent years had achieved the necessary support from union members 
to have gone ahead under the proposed new rules, including last week’s24-hour 
strike by tube workers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jul/08/tube-strike-london-travel-mayhem-24-hours>
.

He said: “The right to strike is absolutely something we must maintain. And 
indeed, most recent strikes, if you look at the figures, would have passed 
these thresholds.”

He later repeated the point. “On the voting rules, as I say, if you go through 
strikes over the last couple of years, most of them pass the thresholds that 
would apply. So it can’t be that hard to arrange.”

On last week’s tube strike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jul/09/tube-strike-london-communters-chaos-rail-bus-trains>
 by four rail unions – Aslef, RMT, Unite and TSSA – Boles was asked to say 
whether the proposed thresholds would have prevented the strike. “It was a 
mixed picture, actually,” he said. “There were a number of different unions and 
a number of different workers involved. But, for instance, the strike by Aslef 
involving tube drivers was absolutely a strike that was supported more than 
adequately, according to the thresholds we are introducing.”

Is Boles right? 

Technically speaking, Boles probably is right, but he’s being deliberately 
misleading, according toRoger Seifert, professor of industrial relations at 
Wolverhampton University business school <http://www.rogerseifert.com/>. He 
points out that the figures on strikes that meet the new threshold have been 
skewed by the high number of recent strikes by firefighters and London 
Underground workers, whose ballots would have met the 50% threshold on turnout.

The Fire Brigades Union (FBU) pointed out that there have been 34 separate 
periods of strike action during a pension dispute between September 2013 and 
February 2015. Some of these only lasted a few hours. It is understood that all 
would have met the new turnout threshold. The RMT said that it has had more 
strikes than it can count in the last two years.

Asked about Boles’s claim that “most strikes” would have taken place, Seifert 
said: “That’s being a little disingenuous. If you count each one of those 
strikes by firefighters as a separate strike, then it distorts the reality.”

He also pointed out that the current rules have allowed the RMT union to 
conduct several strikes on theLondon <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> 
Underground on one ballot that would have met the 50% threshold standard. Under 
the new rules, they would need to ballot each strike. What the minister’s 
claims obscure is how extensively the new thresholds would curb strikes in 
other sectors.

“The legislation is clearly designed to make it harder and more costly to 
strike. But [Boles] is right to suggest that it wouldn’t affect the 
firefighters or the underground workers. In the last couple of years, there 
have been strikes by teachers and civil servants and local government workers 
that would not have got through,” Seifert said.

“I haven’t seen the basis for his argument, but if you wanted to make the 
point [Boles] is making, you could only do it by counting every strike by the 
firefighters and the underground workers as a separate strike,” he added.

Matt Wrack, the FBU general secretary, attacked the proposals. He said: “This 
has nothing to do with the voting threshold, as the Tories claim. It is all 
about weakening all trade unions’ and workers’ rights so that bosses can attack 
wages, pensions and conditions at work. And this coming from a government who 
have been voted into office on the support of just 24% of the public.”

What kinds of strikes would continue to take place under the rules? 

Much of the political pressure to curb strikes has come from angry London 
commuters, including the London mayor, Boris Johnson, over frequent tube 
strikes in the capital. But the new rules won’t stop these happening, according 
to Seifert. “Where you have small, coherent, highly unionised groups like the 
firefighters or the underground workers, it won’t stop strikes,” he said. The 
legislation would also have failed to stop a wave of strikes by British Airways 
cabin crew, which led to 22 days of walkouts in 2010.

What kind of strikes will the legislation prevent? 

In sectors with workforces that are less unionised and more dispersed, such as 
the media, local government and education, strike action would be difficult 
under the new rules. Siefert said: “What it will stop is national strikes by 
teachers, local government workers, civil servants, the BBC, Guardian 
journalists and academics. I can’t see how one-day national strikes by teachers 
or civil servants would meet these criteria.”

An investigation by the Local Government Chronicle last month 
<http://www.lgcplus.com/news/politics/exclusive-national-strikes-under-threat-from-proposed-turnout-rules/5086707.article#.VXlhaRY7TCg.twitter 
http://www.lgcplus.com/news/politics/exclusive-national-strikes-under-threat-from-proposed-turnout-rules/5086707.article#.VXlhaRY7TCg.twitter 
http://www.lgcplus.com/news/politics/exclusive-national-strikes-under-threat-from-proposed-turnout-rules/5086707.article#.VXlhaRY7TCg.twitter>
 found that none of the five national strikes by workers in local government 
this century could have gone ahead under the 50% threshold rule. In fact, it 
reported that none of the vote turnouts for the three main public-sector unions 
involved – the GMB, Unison and Unite – came even close to the threshold. For 
example, last year’slocal government strike over pay occurred after a turnout 
of only 19% 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/jul/10/public-sector-strike-july-10-what-striking-for>
.

Are figures published on strike ballot turnout? 

No. Under the current rules, trade unions are not required to state the 
turnout in a strike ballot. The best published data on thenumber of strikes is 
published by the Office for National Statistics 
<http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/bus-register/labour-disputes/annual-article-2013/art---labour-disputes--annual-article-2013.html#tab-Industrial-Analyses>
. It collects figures on the number of working days lost to strikes, but it 
does not count the strike ballot results or the turnout in those ballots.

The TUC has data on the strike ballot turnouts in seven recent disputes. The 
50% turnout threshold was reached in only three of the seven.

 * London Underground ballot results: Aslef – 81.3% turnout, 97.6% yes; RMT – 
(turnout figures not available), 91.7% yes; TSSA – 81% turnout, 76.5% yes; 
Unite – 82% turnout, 70% yes. 
 * Network Rail dispute over pay (resolved): 60% turnout, 80% yes. 
 * Tata Steel – ballot over pension changes (discussions ongoing): 76% and 84% 
turnout (at different sites), 88% yes. 
 * NHS pay dispute (resolved): Unison – 22% turnout, 68% yes; Unite – 15% 
turnout; 62% yes; Royal College of Midwives – 49.4% turnout, 82% yes; GMB – 23% 
turnout, 78% yes.

 * Local Government (resolved): Unison – 14% turnout, 58% yes (Unite and GMB 
had similar results). 
 * National Union of Teachers (ongoing): 27% turnout, 92% yes. 
 * Civil Service (2013 ballot): Public and Commercial Services Union – 28% 
turnout, 61% yes. 
Siefert said there was a rush by industrial relations academics to publish 
reliable figures on strike ballot turnouts in the wake of the government’s 
plans. He said: “There is no published data yet, but I’ve seen unpublished data 
that allows you to reach the conclusion that it would not have affected the 
tube and the firefighters strikes. But teachers, local government and civil 
servants would not have held their strikes.

“It is difficult to get the exact data because in each case you need the 
turnout and the number voting yes. And you can only get that from the unions.”

• This article was amended on 16 July 2015. An earlier version gave an 
incorrect figure for periods of strike action. The FBU, which supplied that 
figure, pointed out its mistake after the article was published.
