
Salva Kiir and Riek Machar’s joint opinion piece published in the New York 
Times on Tuesday is headlined with a simple plea: “South Sudan Needs Truth, Not 
Trials 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/08/opinion/south-sudan-needs-truth-not-trials.html>
”.

In it, the president and first vice-president of the world’s youngest country, 
apparently reconciled after atwo-year civil war 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/oct/28/south-sudan-civil-war-human-suffering-children-displaced-famine>
 between their followers that haskilled at least 50,000 people 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-southsudan-unrest-un-idUSKCN0W503Q> and been 
characterised bysome of the most depraved human rights abuses this century 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/oct/28/south-sudan-civil-war-inquiry-details-torture-and-forced-cannibalism>
, call on the world to back a truth and reconciliation commission to help 
staunch South Sudan’s many wounds.

Like South Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> and like Northern 
Ireland, they say, their homeland can only be healed if its people – “from the 
poorest farmer to the most powerful politician” – are given the chance to 
reflect on everything that has happened since war erupted in December 2013.

Related: South Sudan's leaders promise truth body to expose horrors of war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/08/south-sudan-leaders-promise-truth-body-new-york-times>

Naturally, there is a condition: “Those who tell the truth about what they saw 
or did would be granted amnesty from prosecution – even if they did not express 
remorse.”

The segue from that suggestion to the one at the heart of the article is 
neither subtle nor pretty; within three paragraphs, Kiir and Machar move from 
supplication to blackmail.

“In contrast to reconciliation, disciplinary justice – even if delivered under 
international law – would destabilise efforts to unite our nation by keeping 
alive anger and hatred among the people ofSouth Sudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-sudan>,” they write.

“That is why we call on the international community, and the US and Britain in 
particular, to reconsider one element of the peace agreement to which they are 
co-signatories: support for a planned international tribunal, the hybrid court 
for South Sudan. We call on them instead to commit to global backing for a 
mediated peace, truth and reconciliation process.”

If justice and accountability are allowed to prevail over truth and 
reconciliation, they warn, South Sudan will tear itself apart again as fighters 
faced with trials in foreign countries instead return to the battlefield.

“By taking this path we understand the consequences,” they acknowledge. 

“We know that it could mean that some South Sudanese guilty of crimes may be 
included in government, and that they may never face justice in a courtroom. 
However, there are recent precedents that demonstrate that this route is the 
most certain guarantee of stability. In Northern Ireland, a peace process 
brought bitter enemies to the negotiating table under a pledge of legal 
amnesty, and then into high office. Now, the country has guaranteed peace. The 
same is possible in South Sudan.”

Related: 'There's no work, no money': oil-rich but desperately poor South 
Sudan shuts up shop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/14/south-sudan-no-work-no-money-oil-rich-cash-poor>

In August, Kiir and Machar signed the peace deal that stipulated 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-34393329> the establishment of both a 
truth and reconciliation commission and a hybrid, African Union court with 
powers to try cases of genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes, and 
gender-based and sexual violence.

The ink on the document dried a long time ago. So why the sudden international 
appeal from the pair? It may have something to do with events in distant 
Senegal, where, last week,Chad’s former dictator, Hissène Habré, was found 
guilty of crimes against humanity, summary execution, torture and rape 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/30/chad-hissene-habre-guilty-crimes-against-humanity-senegal>
.

Habré, who received a life sentence, became the first former head of state to 
be convicted of crimes against humanity by the court of another country. The
institution that handed out the justice 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2013/09/02/statute-extraordinary-african-chambers> 
for which Habré’s victims had waited more than 25 years was set up by the 
African Union and Senegal.

In January, an expert panel told the UN security council 
<http://reliefweb.int/report/south-sudan/letter-dated-22-january-2016-panel-experts-south-sudan-established-pursuant>
 that Kiir and Machar “maintain command responsibility for their respective 
forces”, adding: “There is clear and convincing evidence that most of the acts 
of violence committed during the war, including the targeting of civilians and 
violations of international humanitarian law and international human rights 
law, have been directed by or undertaken with the knowledge of senior 
individuals at the highest levels of the government and within the opposition.”

Related: 'I'm a hero. I created a country', says the rebel driving South 
Sudan's brutal war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/09/riek-machar-south-sudan-rebel-leader-i-am-a-hero-i-am-a-victim>

It may well be that Kiir and Machar, two heroes of South Sudan’s long and 
bitter struggle for independence, are, finally, committed to peace. But it is 
equally possible that the veteran warriors are ready to put a gun to the heads 
of their people in the hope of avoiding trial.


A less self-serving opinion piece might have been written by any number of 
South Sudanese people: thewoman who was raped so many times that she stopped 
going to the clinic 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/15/un-accused-of-shocking-lack-of-action-over-murder-rape-south-sudan>
 for help; the 13-year-old boy who was the only one of 53 people tosurvive 
being locked in a boiling metal shipping container 
<http://time.com/leer-south-sudan/>; the parents of the boys who were castrated 
and left to bleed to death <http://www.unicef.org/media/media_82319.html>, or 
thepatients in the hospital that was looted and razed 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/jul/09/south-sudan-famine-conflict-independence-day>
.


Tens of thousands of others – including those who were murdered and whose 
blood and burned flesh were forced down the throats of the living 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/oct/28/south-sudan-civil-war-inquiry-details-torture-and-forced-cannibalism>
 – are no longer around to pontificate in the pages of the NYT.

What would any of them have asked for? Truth? Or justice? Perhaps they would 
have dared to demand both.
