
Once upon a time, male grooming was the preserve of narcissists: those few of 
us who might have accidentally fallen into a pond attempting to snog our own 
reflections. Such as Derek Zoolander. Now, it’s the norm for men to use 
“product” in our hair, moisturise our faces and know what the hell “serum” is. 
Blame it on the constant sense of living under social media surveillance and 
the need to be ever Instagram-ready. Last week, the Financial Times estimated 
the male grooming industry would be worth £1bn annually by 2018. With figures 
like this in mind, companies have done the inevitable and brought out 
male-groom subscription boxes.

A few years ago, companies such as FreshNeck <https://freshneck.com/>, Henry J 
Socks <https://henryjsocks.co.uk/> and Beer52 <https://www.beer52.com/> took 
the idea of “dads who like things in shoe boxes” and ran with it, offering 
subscription services for ties, socks and beer. Now, with Father’s Day around 
the corner (19 June: remember?), beauty companies likeLuxury Barber Box 
<https://box.luxurybarber.com/>, Harry’s <https://www.harrys.com/> and Birchbox 
<https://www.birchbox.com/men/shop> are offering US customers a similar 
subscription model for products such as face-washes, colognes and hair gels.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k94q%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k94q%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F837337e6f8e38c004e6b331dea1bf5d6f7067d28%2F0_213_3540_2384%2F3540.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Male%20grooming%20subscription%20boxes%3A%20perfect%20for%20men%20too%20modern%20to%20shop%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k94q%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Male+grooming+subscription+boxes%3A+perfect+for+men+too+modern+to+shop%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k94q%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F837337e6f8e38c004e6b331dea1bf5d6f7067d28%2F0_213_3540_2384%2F3540.jpg>
 A Birchbox men’s grooming kit. 
Those of us still struggling to make the transition from Lynx Africa to Lynx 
Dark Temptation, might not understand whom these products are for. “The modern 
man whose schedule doesn’t allow for shopping,” says David Gandy’sstylist, Joe 
Ottaway, who’s launching his own monthly Style Box 
<http://www.joeottawaystyle.com/style-club-memberships> as part of a bespoke 
personal grooming service (£150 for a 12-box subscription for a year). “In my 
mind, he is very time-poor, doesn’t work nine to five, works nine to nine, and 
doesn’t have the hours to dedicate to his grooming schedule.”

Related: Never mind the Botox: meet the men opting for non-surgical treatments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/24/never-mind-the-botox-meet-the-men-opting-for-non-surgical-treatments>

Dan Rookwood, US editor of Mr Porter and the mastermind behind its own 
one-shot box, theTravel Grooming Kit 
<http://www.mrporter.com/en-gb/mens/mr_porter_grooming/mr-porter-travel-grooming-kit--summer-2016/760259?ppv=2>
 (£75), says thebento style of beauty products speaks to the functional alpha 
in all of us. “Men want something functional that does what it says it’s going 
to do, such as reduce dark circles under the eyes, or freshen breath or thicken 
hair.”

Does Ottaway think this modern man will feel just as comfortable using 
moisturisers as they will products such as the scary-sounding PerriconeMD’s 
Cold Plasma gel (described as “an elixir” to combat wrinkles), featured in the 
Mr Porter kit? “Well, I think guys like a product that has very masculine 
marketing around it.”

Rookwood says. “They want something with packaging that conveys status. “They 
want something that will look good, whether it’s being examined by airport 
security, the guy at the sink in the gym changing room, or a nosy guest who is 
snooping around your bathroom.” Maybe we need to re-think our gifts for dear 
old dad. 
