
What does my python say about me?


“My snake says I’m not a judgemental person. As a pet, pythons are quiet – 
a contrast to my two kids.”

And what it really says


A python called Thor. Somehow I imagined it to be… well, to be bigger. Still, 
Peter looks happy with Thor, which is good to see. I like a man who’s relaxed 
about the size of his snake. Peter’s python might be petite, but it’s all his. 
Fnarr.

Sorry. Couldn’t resist. Jokes about snakes are impossible to avoid, so best to 
imagine a fnarr at the end of every paragraph. Anyway. Thor is Peter’s new pet, 
and he’s a good choice. Snakes make great pets, as long as you have a big tank 
with a tight lid for them to live in, and as long as you give them enough 
places in that tank to hide. Thor is a ball python and they get stressed if 
they don’t have a small, dark space to tuck themselves into…

Only a certain type of person wants a snake as a pet. Someone who’s not 
bothered about cuteness, who doesn’t like noise, who doesn’t want the trouble 
of regular walkies, or of serving up a lot of meals. Someone who operates 
outside our everyday social norms of tamed fluffy-wuffiness. Pythons are low 
maintenance, high impact pets. You get a lot of bang for your buck, with a 
python…

I wonder how Peter and Thor’s relationship will change as Thor grows. The 
maximum length that a ball python grows to is around 6ft (though males usually 
peak at 4ft). Peter doesn’t look like a man who scares easily, so I’m not 
worried about that. It’s more the weight of Thor when he’s fully grown. Peter 
seems fit, but he might have to do special workouts to keep doing that trick of 
wrapping his impressively lengthy snake all the way around his neck…Yes. Yes, I 
know. Sorry about that.

If you would like Miranda to cast an eye over your favourite possession, email 
a photograph tomagazine@observer.co.uk <mailto:magazine@observer.co.uk>
