
The government is quietly pressing on with plans to force all English state 
schools into academy status by 2022, using its regional schools commissioners 
as behind-the-scenes arms-twisters, Education Guardian can reveal.

Ministers seemed to have placated restive Tory backbenchers at the time of the 
Queen’s speech last month by backing down on proposals for blanket conversions 
of all schools. Some even thought it was a U-turn. However, they still say they 
want England’s system to be all-academy in six years. And the powerful but 
shadowy RSCs seem intent on enforcing this vision, though away from 
parliamentary scrutiny.

Related: Despite Nicky Morgan’s U-turn, our schools are still in a mess | 
Melissa Benn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/08/despite-nicky-morgan-academies-u-turn-schools-till-in-a-mess>

A letter sent to a federation of schools in Dorset by Rebecca Clark, RSC for 
the south-west, only two days after the Queen’s speech, seems to urge them to 
join a multi-academy trust. Writing to theChesil Education Partnership 
<http://www.chesil.org.uk/>, Clark signs off by saying: “I would add that it 
remains the government’s objective to achieve a school system where every 
school is an academy by 2022. My responsibility is to ensure that the 
government’s goal is achieved.”

Another letter sent two days after the Queen’s speech, this time to single 
academy trusts from Dominic Herrington, RSC for England’s south-east, said: “As 
we move towards full academisation, I am keen to ensure our region has enough 
capacity to meet the challenges ahead through the development and expansion of 
strong, high performing trusts.”

Neither letter went down well among all recipients. Our source for the Clark 
letter said the heads who received it were “pretty angry”.

There are likely to be many local battles ahead for this policy. The 
Department for Education declined our invitation to explain or comment.

Free school siting turns into postcode lottery


Imagine this. You plan to open a free school for 1,200 pupils. You publish a 
consultation document setting out two possible areas that both have a clear 
need for school places, in which it could be built. Those consulted are mainly 
supportive.

A few months later, it emerges the DfE has agreed to fund the school and for 
it to open – only not where the consultation told local residents it was going 
to be, but elsewhere in the town, where the shortage of places is less severe. 
Residents near the new site are outraged, saying they had no idea what was 
being planned.

So you pause the scheme while you re-do the consultation, right? Wrong.

The Knowledge Schools <http://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> Trust put 
forward its plans for Rugby free secondary school, in the east Midlands, with 
consultation saying last autumn it would be built either in the CV21 postcode, 
on the north side of Rugby’s railway tracks, or in CV23, on the outskirts of 
the town.

Yet the trust has since announced it has been given approval for the school to 
open in the CV22 code, south of the tracks, from September. It will start out 
in a former infants’ school and move to a new building on adjacent playing 
fields in two years.

Sally Chant, chair of local residents’ group Sustainable Hillside and Rokeby 
Education, said: “We are calling for a withdrawal of [DfE funding for the 
school] based on an invalid consultation.”

The free school’s website acknowledges the school’s location has changed, but 
says the DfE has said there is no need for a new consultation. Residents point 
out that even theNew Schools Network [pdf] 
<http://www.newschoolsnetwork.org/sites/default/files/Carrying%20out%20your%20free%20school%20consultation_0.pdf>
, which supports free schools, says that consultations should be reopened if a 
school’s site changes.

The DfE declined to comment.

Police station scheme arrested by planners


Fresh questions are likely to be asked about government spending on free 
schools now that a council has blocked an application to convert a former 
police station into a school. The building, in Hackney, was bought by the 
government’s Education Funding Agency in 2014 for a whopping £7.6m.

The Olive school, an Ofsted-outstanding primary that has been based in 
temporary premises in Stoke Newington, east London, had been hoping to set up 
its permanent home in the one-time Hackney central nick, two miles away.

At the time of the purchase, the Hackney Gazette 
<http://www.hackneygazette.co.uk/news/heritage/former_hackney_police_station_has_been_bought_for_free_school_1_3462398>
 quoted an estate agent saying its market value before the EFA’s involvement 
was only £3m. It has been empty since then.

Related: Suffolk’s Tory council cries foul over new middle school plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/24/suffolk-council-middle-school-plan-bury-st-edmunds>

Last week, Hackney’s planning committee blocked the application, accepting 
officials’ many concerns [pdf] 
<http://mginternet.hackney.gov.uk/documents/s49243/Former%20Police%20Station%20Committee%20Report.pdf>
 including traffic congestion caused by putting the 630-pupil school on a 
cramped site alongside a churchyard in a conservation area. Where now for the 
Olive, and the police station site? A spokesman for the Olive school said: “We 
are disappointed by the decision, particularly as the application received 
significant support from parents and local people. We will now review our 
proposed plans.”

Difficult times for squeezed middle


Finally, the DfE has backed down – for now at least – on plans to allow the 
opening of a middle school in Bury St Edmunds, after Tory Suffolk county 
council mounted a legal challenge.

The school, as reported here 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/24/suffolk-council-middle-school-plan-bury-st-edmunds>
, had been approved by ministers despite Suffolk having spent nine years 
getting rid of the middle-school system. It was due to open in September but 
will not now do so until 2017 at the earliest, after furious protests from 
local heads. The academy trust behind the school said its application for 2017 
remained under consideration by the DfE.
