
I submitted my PhD thesis a year ago, but I still don’t know if it has passed 
the viva. I still don’t know if I am qualified to say that I have a PhD, 
despite dedicating three years of work to it.

Related: Bad PhD supervisors can ruin research. So why aren't they accountable?
 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/dec/11/bad-phd-supervisors-can-ruin-research-so-why-arent-they-accountable>

I sent my thesis for examination with the approval of my supervisors, both of 
whom are professors in their disciplines. Since then, it has been examined 
twice and has been awarded an MPhil with minor corrections and an MPhil with 
major corrections (an MPhil is an in-between qualification, considered to be 
twice as much work as a master’s but half that of a PhD). A final decision has 
still not been made, and the university is considering my appeal and formal 
complaint.

Like most postgraduates, I’m hugely emotionally invested in my PhD. One of the 
most hurtful things I’ve been told during this process is that I am not 
“intellectually capable” of completing it. That kind of comment – along with 
the ongoing anguish over the result – has damaged my sense of self and my 
confidence, and the stress has caused problems in my personal relationships.

All I can do is cross my fingers that it will all work out for the best. With 
such discrepancies in opinions of my examiners, it is difficult to see the 
process as anything more than luck.

It seems wrong that a PhD is judged on an examination that only takes a few 
hours, with just two examiners having the final say on whether a contribution 
merits the qualification. Most candidates pass with minor corrections, being 
instructed to fix typographical errors, for example. Failure may sound 
implausible, but it can and does happen.

Although this situation can never be prevented entirely, the British system 
could look to other parts of Europe, Canada and the US to make the viva process 
fairer.

Related: Academics Anonymous: so many PhD students, so few jobs 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2014/may/23/so-many-phd-students-so-few-jobs>

Candidates in those countries are examined in front of an audience of their 
friends, family and colleagues, several of whom will also have read the thesis. 
This is known as the public defence system and can reduce the likelihood of 
examiners abusing the protection of a closed exam.

The greatest advantage of this is the potential for public scrutiny. It also 
gives candidates more confidence to challenge examiners when they are incorrect 
or focusing on irrelevant information.

Public defences usually have a greater number of examiners, including an 
independent chair and one of the candidate’s supervisors. The presence of a 
supervisor who believes that the thesis should pass can provide support and 
encouragement to the candidate. And an independent chair, who knows very little 
about the subject of the thesis, is better placed to examine the logic of the 
argument and the strength of the evidence.

The current system means that the academic judgement of examiners cannot be 
challenged. This allows examiners the freedom to make a decision based purely 
on the merit of the thesis, but it also means that they can make mistakes. A 
career in academia does not make one infallible.

There is the possibility of achieving a PhD by publication in the UK, allowing 
peer-review to partly take the place of examination. But this rarely used and 
once a thesis has been submitted through the traditional method, the 
possibility of a PhD through publication is removed.

Related: Academics Anonymous: 'Why are you doing a PhD at your age?' 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2014/jul/25/academics-anonymous-mature-phd-worthless>

Instead, a thesis that has been failed based on academic judgement should be 
presented to the scholarly community as a whole. The written testimonials of a 
number of internationally respected researchers who have read the thesis and 
judged it to have reached doctoral level should be able to overrule the 
academic judgement of the examiners. A PhD is, after all, a contribution to 
knowledge, not a piece of work designed to placate an examiner.

We need to make the viva system more balanced and PhD examiners more 
accountable. We need to look again at a system that allows students to study 
for four years, pass all preliminary checks, and yet leave without any 
qualification.

Reform is both necessary and urgent – to reassure candidates that their 
futures are not subject to the whims of examiners and to maintain the 
international standard of the British PhD qualification in an increasingly 
globalised university system. My experience is just one example of what an 
unaccountable viva system can mean, and it isn’t good.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
