
It’s one of the most famous artworks of the Stalinist era, but few westerners 
would recognise it quite as readily as that unrealised avant-garde icon of the
Bolshevik revolution <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Russian_Revolution>, 
Tatlin’s Tower <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tatlin%27s_Tower>. Vera Mukhina 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vera_Mukhina>’s 78-ft-high steel monument, 
Worker and Kolkhoz Woman 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Worker_and_Kolkhoz_Woman>, which has been 
celebrated on stamps and is the logo ofMosfilm, Russia’s oldest surviving film 
studio <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mosfilm>, was created to crown the Soviet 
pavilion at the 1937 Paris World’s Fair. It depicts a heroic couple whose arms 
are raised in unison, a man holding aloft the hammer, while a woman raises a 
sickle above her head. It is a prime example of social realism, the style 
imposed byJoseph Stalin <https://www.theguardian.com/world/joseph-stalin> as 
one ideologically befitting the art of the proletariat.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yxat%2Fsfb%23img-1&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yxat%2Fsfb%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8560af6b8d158c75aa90371b075c063da92e75b2%2F115_199_2272_3095%2F2272.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20kitchen%20slaves%20to%20industrial%20workers%20%E2%80%93%20the%20superwomen%20of%20Soviet%20art&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yxat%2Fstw%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From+kitchen+slaves+to+industrial+workers+%E2%80%93+the+superwomen+of+Soviet+art&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yxat%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8560af6b8d158c75aa90371b075c063da92e75b2%2F115_199_2272_3095%2F2272.jpg>
 V Stekolshikov, International Women’s Day (1959). Photograph: Yuri Petukhov 
Collection 
Mukhina, who died in 1953 (the same year as Stalin), was a winner of five 
Stalin prizes. Worker and Kolkhoz Woman was her most celebrated work, and a 
bronze model – on loan fromMoscow’s Tretyakov State gallery 
<http://www.tretyakovgallery.ru/en/>, will feature in the exhibition 
Superwoman: Work, Build and Don’t Whine, at the Gallery for Russian Arts and 
Design (Grad). The exhibition, ambitious in its scope, explores the iconography 
of the Soviet woman from theOctober revolution 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/October_Revolution> in 1917 to the collapse of 
the Soviet Union in 1991.

Mukhina’s depiction of a proletariat man and woman, side by side and sharing 
equally the symbols invested in the ideals of Soviet communism (although note, 
it is still the man wielding the forceful hammer), encapsulates the drive for 
women to be fully engaged in building the communist state, alongside men.In the 
words of Stalin’s predecessor, Vladimir Lenin 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=xHR-JptCWSIC&pg=PA68&lpg=PA68&dq=To+effect+emancipation+and+make+her+the+equal+of+man,+it+is+necessary+%E2%80%A6+for+women+to+participate+in+common+productive+labour.+Then+woman+will+be+the+equal+of+man.&source=bl&ots=vGFcGcPmhR&sig=JTTDiv0mqj6IDJGy21jcl45mID8&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjoidTwn6XNAhUJVz4KHb1eBygQ6AEIKDAB#v=onepage&q=To%20effect%20emancipation%20and%20make%20her%20the%20equal%20of%20man%2C%20it%20is%20necessary%20%E2%80%A6%20for%20women%20to%20participate%20in%20common%20productive%20labour.%20Then%20woman%20will%20be%20the%20equal%20of%20man.&f=false>
, in 1919: “To effect her complete emancipation and make her the equal of the 
man, it is necessary … for women to participate in common productive labour. 
Then woman will occupy the same position as men.” Of course, as the exhibition 
reminds us, the reality continued to be quite different. Moreover, reforms 
realised underLenin <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vladimir_Lenin>, such as 
legalised abortion, were reversed under Stalin, although women’s access to 
higher education and entry into professions such as engineering was encouraged 
with zeal underStalin’s five-year plans 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/First_five-year_plan_(Soviet_Union)>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yxat%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yxat%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F87b13d86128957b2faff9e4dd04e2ea944eebe7f%2F0_0_4067_2869%2F4067.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20kitchen%20slaves%20to%20industrial%20workers%20%E2%80%93%20the%20superwomen%20of%20Soviet%20art&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yxat%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From+kitchen+slaves+to+industrial+workers+%E2%80%93+the+superwomen+of+Soviet+art&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yxat%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F87b13d86128957b2faff9e4dd04e2ea944eebe7f%2F0_0_4067_2869%2F4067.jpg>
 M Gourevitch, Composition with Figures (1930s). Photograph: Yuri Petukhov 
Collection 
The title of the exhibition is taken from a poster by Aleksandr Deyneka 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aleksandr_Deyneka>, one of the leading 
proponents of Soviet social realism and an artist who was as decorated with 
honours as Mukhina. Work, Build and Don’t Whine – a title that was not in the 
least ironic when the piece was unveiled – is a 1930 poster depicting a 
discus-throwing sportswoman, aglow in the foreground of a scene otherwise 
dotted with indistinct male athletes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yxat%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yxat%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F590affdef5aa146ed24c4514903933a5d9748ec9%2F0_0_2317_3209%2F2317.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20kitchen%20slaves%20to%20industrial%20workers%20%E2%80%93%20the%20superwomen%20of%20Soviet%20art&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yxat%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From+kitchen+slaves+to+industrial+workers+%E2%80%93+the+superwomen+of+Soviet+art&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yxat%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F590affdef5aa146ed24c4514903933a5d9748ec9%2F0_0_2317_3209%2F2317.jpg>
 Aleksandr Deyneka, Work, Build and Don’t Whine (1930). Photograph: The City 
Museum, Saint Petersburg 
Stylistically, Deyneka is a far cry from early Soviet posters by radical 
avant-garde artists such asAlexander Rodchenko 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alexander_Rodchenko>, who, in the 1920s, was the 
most celebrated photographer and graphic artist to emerge post-revolution, and 
who worked to spread the message of Bolshevism. Rodchenko’s most famous poster 
is his brilliant and much spoofed1924 photomontage for the Lengiz Publishing 
House <http://www.theartstory.org/artist-rodchenko-alexander-artworks.htm#pnt_6>
, in which a young woman with cupped hand shouts out, her cry captioned in 
beautiful modernist typography. Under Stalin, Rodchenko was accused of 
“formalism”, an accusation that beset many avant-garde artists in the 1930s, 
and his work was duly censored. Artists such as Deyneka fulfilled the 
propaganda brief, but their posters, shorn of radicalism, are inevitably 
dull in comparison.

Rather than showcase the best of Soviet art, Grad highlights the art that 
promoted the idealised roles expected of women in their duty to the state; to 
show how these expectations shifted and changed, and how the unique burdens 
placed on women, as mothers and as workers, were heightened by rapid 
industrialisation and the long years of the cold war.

•Superwoman: Work, Build and Don’t Whine is at the Gallery for Russian Arts 
and Design <https://www.grad-london.com/whatson/>, in London, from 18 June to 
17 September
