
Parents of children with special educational needs and disabilities are taking 
legal action against an academy trust for proposing to bus their children from 
a well-performing school to a worse alternative because of limited resources.

The Dean Trust, which runs six schools in Manchester, Trafford and Knowsley, 
informed about 20 parents of children who are due to start atAshton on Mersey 
school <http://aomschool.thedeantrust.co.uk/> in September that the school had 
“reached its capacity” for disabled pupils, and that their children would 
instead attend lessons at the undersubscribed Broadoak school in Partington, 
six miles away.

Related: Academy trust accused of discriminating against disabled pupils 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/29/academy-trust-accused-of-discrimination-over-moving-disabled-pupils-dean-trust>

Parents said the move constituted segregation and expressed concern that it 
would single out their children as being different if they were forced to board 
a special bus to travel between the sites.

Education, health and care (EHC) plans are drawn up for children with special 
educational needs by local authorities, in consultation with parents, and 
specify which school would best cater to that child’s needs. Under the Children 
and Families Act 2014, a school is legally obliged to admit a child if it is 
named on their EHC plan.

James Betts, a specialist education lawyer with the firm Simpson Millar, who 
is representing the parents mounting the challenge, said they had a right to be 
angry and that the trust’s actions were unlawful.

“I doubt very much that any parent who had secured a place for their child at 
a particular school would accept being told late in the day that their child 
would be attending a different school,” said Betts. “This smacks of 
discrimination against children with special educational needs and that is 
unacceptable.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k5gq%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k5gq%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9511c441a0975769f0593ed55744dcfd8dbc5aba%2F0_265_6583_3950%2F6583.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Academy%20trust%20faces%20legal%20challenge%20over%20treatment%20of%20disabled%20pupils&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k5gq%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Academy+trust+faces+legal+challenge+over+treatment+of+disabled+pupils&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k5gq%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9511c441a0975769f0593ed55744dcfd8dbc5aba%2F0_265_6583_3950%2F6583.jpg>
 Manchester United’s teenage striking sensation Marcus Rashford is a former 
pupil at Ashton on Mersey school in Sale, Greater Manchester. Photograph: Paul 
Cooper/Rex/Shutterstock 
Ashton on Mersey school has sought to reassure parents that their children 
would still be on the school roll and that it would continue to have 
responsibility for their education. In a letter to parents, headteacher Aidan 
Moloney said the lower number of pupils attending Broadoak would mean the 
pupils with special needs could be taught in smaller class sizes.

Betts has sent a formal pre-action letter to the academy, which has until next 
Friday to respond. He said he hoped the letter would encourage the school to 
“honour the EHC plans” but said the parents would consider action through the 
courts if they failed to do so.


Local Labour councillor Andrew Western said the move could set a dangerous 
national precedent for academy trusts to “ship kids between schools as they see 
fit”.

Western said that while he understood the school’s capacity problem, it did 
not explain why it was only children with special educational needs who needed 
to travel for lessons. “These are children with a complex range of very 
different needs and to tell them that they have to spend 30 minutes to an hour 
on a bus, morning and afternoon, every day, is going to cause real 
complications for them.”

Related: Secret Teacher: Our obsession with targets is hurting vulnerable 
pupils 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/mar/19/secret-teacher-hated-school-worry-special-needs-students-will-too>

The Dean Trust’s chair, Brian Rigby, who is a Conservative councillor in 
Trafford, said the decision to move the children had been made because of lack 
of space.

“We’re between a rock and hard place trying to find a solution. If we weren’t 
a multi-academy trust we would have to say ‘I’m sorry, there’s no space’, but 
we’ve come up with this solution, which should ensure that every child has the 
best education.”

Rigby argued that the school’s success with teaching children with special 
educational needs meant that it took more pupils with learning difficulties 
than all other Trafford schools combined.

He said schools were “just bricks and mortar” and that teachers from Ashton on 
Mersey would travel with the pupils to give lessons at Broadoak. “Parents are 
quite willing to send their children six miles to Ashton on Mersey school, but 
disagree that we should send them six miles to another school,” he added.

Whereas Broadoak school is rated “good” by Ofsted, with the number of its 
pupils achieving five A* to C grades at GCSE below the national average, 
Ashton-on-Mersey received an “outstanding” rating in its most recent inspection.

Deborah Key, whose 11-year-old son Samuel has autism, said she did not want 
her son to go from an outstanding school with years of experience catering to 
children like him, to one less suitable. “It’s discriminatory. They want to 
keep all the clever children at Ashton – getting very good GCSEs – and then put 
children like my son in a less high-achieving school.”

Katy McAinsh, whose 10-year-old son was hoping to start at Ashton on Mersey 
school in September, said: “Can you imagine the kinds of comments that will be 
made when all of these children get on the bus every day. Children are cruel 
and they don’t think.”

She added: “If there’s an issue with overcrowding at that school then why are 
they not bussing the non-disabled children out?”
