
I remember the first time I went to City Lights – the first all-paperback 
bookstore in the US, founded in San Francisco in 1953 byLawrence Ferlinghetti 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2006/jul/01/featuresreviews.guardianreview10>. 
I was so intimidated I barely looked at the books on the shelves, maybe picking 
one up every now and then and pretending to read it, just so I had a reason to 
stand there. This place had a powerful influence not only on American poetry – 
with the publication of Allen Ginsberg'sHowl 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/feb/23/allen-ginsberg-howl-poem-film> in 
1955 – but also on the American consciousness, being the nation's most daring 
publisher of independent literature and an epicentre for progressive thought.

The immense popularity of Ginsberg's book and its obscenity trial also 
propelled the Beat generation into the international spotlight, with writers 
such asJack Kerouac <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/jackkerouac> and William S 
Burroughs <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/williamburroughs> directly 
influencing a generation of non-comformist youth. For the first and – arguably 
– only time, literature became a popular movement in the US: busloads of 
tourists from all over the world travelled to the North Beach book store in 
search of the famous "beatniks".

As a college student, the mythology of the Beats and their writing so inspired 
me and my best friend that we hit the road in 2003 and drove from Savannah, 
Georgia, to San Francisco, going hours out of our way at every opportunity just 
to give people rides and to embrace our adventure. We actually started calling 
each other Jack and Neal, which feels pretty embarrassing now, but we were 
living the dream and, though it wasn't ours, we were determined that it could 
be.

It was six years later that I moved to San Francisco, and I don't even 
remember the first event that got me hooked on City Lights. The poetry room, 
where it hosts most of its events (still as many as four a week), is relatively 
small, holding maybe 30 people, and I've been back so many times I've seen some 
authors release more than one book there. I'm still learning about the 
goings-on at City Lights, despite having contributed countless videos and an 
occasional audio file to its blog because, like any force of nature, it just 
keeps upping the ante: in almost four years of living in the city, I've seen 
week-long festivals and new imprints launched and it shows no signs of slowing 
down.
 The beat goes on … a music shop in North Beach, San Francisco. Photograph: 
Alamy 
All in all, City Lights puts out more than a dozen books per year and has now 
published more than 200 titles. I don't know how it does it – the staff hasn't 
got any bigger – but I do know the reverence I feel when I walk into the store 
is not diminishing. A  subversive attitude pervades it: people are welcome to 
sit in the basement or in the poetry room and read entire books if they want 
(and many argue there is no better spot to do so).

While most of the Beats are gone and tourists don't expect to find them, North 
Beach remains a destination for visitors and locals alike, as the neighbourhood 
has maintained the charm and vitality of an older time – no small feat in a 
city where the cafes are now largely full of tech developers and silent artists 
staring intently into their MacBook Pros. But even as tech companies buy out 
the poor neighbourhoods and the city's government buckles beneath their capital 
– cutting funding for the arts while giving tax breaks to dotcom start-ups – 
City Lights continues to flourish, providing an ever-fertile environment for 
writers, thinkers and the promise that they can change the world.
• City Lights Booksellers & Publishers is celebrating its 60th anniversary on 
23 June 2013, with events throughout the year (citylights.com 
<http://www.citylights.com/>; blogcitylights.com 
<http://www.blogcitylights.com/>).

Evan Karp is a poet, columnist and founder of the literary non-profit Quiet 
Lightning <http://quietlightning.org/>, and founding editor of Litseen.com 
<http://litseen.com/>

• For more information on holidays in the USA, visit DiscoverAmerica.com 
<http://www.discoveramerica.com/>
