
The weeks and months leading up to exams can be challenging for students (and 
parents and teachers alike). Now more than ever, young people seem to befeeling 
the pressure 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/may/14/calls-to-childline-over-exam-stress-break-records>
. So how can students revise better? Which techniques really work, and which 
don’t? What can students do to improve their memory, mood and concentration?

Before you do any revision

1. Eat breakfast
It is estimated that around 27% of boys and 39% of girls skip breakfast some 
or all of the time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2010/aug/16/third-pupils-skip-breakfast>. 
It’s not called the most important meal of the day for nothing:research has 
found that skipping this meal significantly reduces students’ attention 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0195666303001314> and their 
ability to recall information. Simply having a bowl of cereal will give 
students the concentration and memory boost they need.

Evidence suggests students who study in a quiet environment recall more than 
those who revise while listening to music

2. Put your phone away
This should be an obvious one, but for many it isn’t. Phones can be 
distracting; they arelinked to fomo 
<http://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/mar/08/children-mobile-phone-distraction-study-school>
 (fear of missing out), and evidence shows thatundergraduate students who spend 
more time texting and using social media get lower grades 
<http://sgo.sagepub.com/content/5/1/2158244015573169>. In another fascinating 
study,researchers found that the mere sight of a phone was enough to reduce a 
person’s ability to focus 
<http://econtent.hogrefe.com/doi/abs/10.1027/1864-9335/a000216>. The 
implication couldn’t be clearer: out of sight really is out of mind.


During revision sessions

3. Start early and spread it out
Actors don’t leave their rehearsals until the day before opening night. 
Athletes don’t only train the day before a match. To commit something to memory 
takes time. Spreading out your revision sessions on a particular topic (eg 
one-hour sessions over 10 days) is more effective than spending the same amount 
of time in one go (ie 10 hours in one day). This effect, known as “spacing”, 
helps because it allows time in between revision sessions to forget and 
re-learn the material. This strategy has been labelled as“one of the most 
robust across the entire history of experimental research on learning and 
memory” 
<http://www.suttontrust.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/10/What-Makes-Great-Teaching-REPORT.pdf>
 (pdf).

Related: Secret Teacher: last-minute revision classes do more harm than good 
<http://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/mar/26/secret-teacher-last-minute-revision-classes-do-more-harm-than-good>

4. Test yourself

Leading researchers in the field of memory consider testing yourself as one of 
the most effective ways to improve your ability to recall information 
<http://psi.sagepub.com/content/14/1/4.full.pdf+html?ijkey=Z10jaVH/60XQM&keytype=ref&siteid=sppsi>
 (pdf). Testing yourself also helps you check for any gaps in your knowledge. 
Practice papers provide a good starting point, as well as quizzing yourself at 
the end of your revision session.

5. Teach someone 
After you have tested yourself, teach the material to someone else. This has 
been found to help aid memory and recall: it is known as“the Protégé Effect” 
<http://ideas.time.com/2011/11/30/the-protege-effect/>. Teaching someone else 
requires you to learn and organise your knowledge in a clear and structured 
manner.

6. Think twice about using highlighters 
Despite being the favourite weapon of many students tackling revision, 
research suggests they don’t work very well 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-22565912>. People learn and recall 
information better if they connect it to other pieces of information. 
Highlighters don’t do this, they isolate single pieces of information. Quite 
often, students end up highlighting whole chunks and passages of text, which 
can give the appearance of having worked hard, but is of little value.

7. Don’t listen to music
Parents around the world rejoice: you now have a legitimate reason to insist 
that your child stops listening to Justin Bieber on repeat.Students who study 
in a quiet environment can recall more than those who revise while listening to 
music <http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/acp.2994/abstract>. Extroverts
 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/(SICI)1099-0720(199710)11:5%3C445::AID-ACP472%3E3.0.CO;2-R/abstract>
, and those with an exceptional ability tocontrol their attention 
<http://scholar.utc.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1312&context=theses>, are 
not negatively affected as much: but it doesn’t help. At best, for these 
students, it just doesn’t hinder them as much as everyone else.

8. Get some fresh air and exercise 
You cannot work all day, every day. Nor should you. Revision has to be about 
quality, as well as quantity. Going outside and getting some fresh air helps 
peoplefeel refreshed and better able to focus afterwards 
<http://pss.sagepub.com/content/19/12/1207>. Furthermore, doing a little bit of 
exercise helps people deal better withstressful situations: it reduces anxiety 
and increases self-esteem <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2795619/>
.

Related: Practice makes perfect: why mock exams are great for students’ brains 
<http://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/dec/03/practice-makes-perfect-why-mock-exams-students-brains>

9. Sleep
Students are encouraged to work hard and revise a lot before their exams: 
however, there comes a time when they need to stop and go to sleep. Knowing 
when can be tricky. There is a link between being aperfectionist and struggling 
to sleep <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17853284>. If a child is falling 
asleep within five minutes of their head hitting the pillow, they should 
probably be going to bed earlier. Other sleep tips includehaving regular 
bedtimes 
<http://www.innerdrive.co.uk/Release_Your_Inner_Drive/9-common-sleep-mistakes/>,
not being on your mobile phone in bed 
<http://www.innerdrive.co.uk/Release_Your_Inner_Drive/your-phone-at-night/>, 
but if you are,turning down the backlight on it. 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0003687012001159> 

As research into psychology continues to develop, we learn more and more about 
how best to help students learn. Revision time can be challenging as it often 
requires students to monitor their own behaviour when working independently at 
home. Hopefully, by teaching them about what helps improve their memory, mood 
and concentration, we can better equip them to meet the challenges head on.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
