
Ulrike Lunacek, the vice-president of the European parliament, has called on 
EU member states to do more to support female and child refugees arriving in
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and prevent gender-based 
violence.

In a debate on female political leaders’ policies in the face of the growing 
refugee crisis, Austrian Green MEP Lunacek said the numbers of women and 
children being displaced from their homes had increased. “A year ago, there 
were more men, but that has changed,” said Lunacek.

By January 2016, UN figures showed women and children accounted for 55% 
<http://www.europarl.ie/en/news_events/ep_news/2016/2016-1.html> of those 
reaching Greece to seek asylum in the EU.EU guidelines 
<http://www.europarl.europa.eu/sides/getDoc.do?pubRef=-//EP//TEXT+TA+P8-TA-2016-0073+0+DOC+XML+V0//EN>
 passed in March state that women and girls seeking asylum have different 
concerns from men and that women and LGBTI people are subject to specific forms 
of gender-based persecution.

According to the EU, the most basic facilities put in place to try to prevent 
gender-based violence – separate bathrooms and sleeping arrangements for women 
– are not being provided in EU reception or transit facilities for refugees. 
The guidelines state that “all asylum policies, including the assessment of 
asylum claims, should be gender sensitive”, including women’s right to make 
their own asylum applications.

“Women who travel alone, who are not married, or who are lesbian also need to 
be taken into account,” said Lunacek, calling on EU member states to prioritise 
access for women to education and healthcare, as well as ensuring they have 
safe physical spaces.

Refugees are not a crisis; they are human beings. We have a crisis of 
solidarity
Ulrike Lunacek 
Speaking at the global summit of Women in Parliaments 
<http://www.oecd.org/countries/jordan/women-in-parliaments-global-forum.htm>, 
the independent organisation that campaigns for a greater number and greater 
influence of women in political life, Lunacek criticised the creation of 
internal borders within Europe against refugees. “Refugees are not a crisis; 
they are human beings,” she said. “We have a crisis of solidarity, of not 
living up to our joint responsibility, which should have all 28 member states 
on board.”

On Wednesday, the UK prime minister David Cameron, climbed down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/04/david-cameron-concessions-syrian-child-refugees>
 over a previous decision not to accept unaccompanied refugee children already 
in Europe.


At the Women <http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> in Parliaments 
summit in Jordan, the president of Malta, Marie Louise Coleiro Preca, called on 
female political leaders to find a way to deal with the growing numbers of 
vulnerable people being displaced around the world.

Recent figures from the UN  <http://data.unhcr.org/mediterranean/regional.php>
show that 184,678 people have tried to arrive in Europe by sea across the 
Mediterranean so far this year, 43% of them from Syria. So far, 1,361 people 
are dead or missing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tqqc%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tqqc%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F173df18bbfe0d8a5804ed7d5f786a0539240e2d1%2F453_281_1780_1068%2F1780.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=More%20support%20needed%20for%20female%20refugees%2C%20says%20European%20vice-president&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tqqc%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=More+support+needed+for+female+refugees%2C+says+European+vice-president&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tqqc%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F173df18bbfe0d8a5804ed7d5f786a0539240e2d1%2F453_281_1780_1068%2F1780.jpg>
 Women in Parliaments global summit in Jordan on 5 May 2016. Photograph: Jane 
Dudman 
“In light of these horrible facts,” said Coleiro Preca, “we must bring the 
uniqueness of our position as women leaders to respond to those who argue that 
borders and fences are the only way to deal with the growing numbers of 
vulnerable people.” She said governments needed to find policies to promote the 
resilience and empowerment of vulnerable people.

Åsa Regnér, Sweden’s minister for children, the elderly and gender equality, 
said Sweden, a country of 10 million people, had taken in 160,000 refugees last 
year, two-thirds of them men. But 70,000 of the refugees were children she 
said, of whom about half were unaccompanied minors, almost all boys. To put 
that in context, Regnér said about 100,000 children were born in Sweden each 
year.

Last November, Sweden announced a sharp reversal  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/24/sweden-asylum-seekers-refugees-policy-reversal>
of its open-door policy towards people fleeing war and persecution and Regnér 
said that, given the difficulties facing all governments as a result of the 
large numbers of displaced people, working together would be vital. She also 
said gender equality should be included in all refugee policies from the start.

Related: 'We need a public education project about what it means to be 
European' 
<http://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2016/may/06/we-need-a-public-education-project-about-what-it-means-to-be-european>

In December, the Swedish government set up a network of female mediators, to 
increase the number of Swedish women in international peace processes.It argues 
<http://www.government.se/articles/2015/12/minister-for-foreign-affairs-margot-wallstrom-hosts-high-level-meeting-on-womens-role-in-peace-processes/>
 that almost half of all peace agreements collapse within five years, but 
research has shown that women’s participation in peace processes increases the 
change of agreements being reached and kept to.

Kholoud Khatatbeh, a member of the Jordan house of representatives, said this 
country, with a population of 7 million people, has taken in more than 1.5 
million refugees from Syria. “Syrians are automatically included in Jordan’s 
society,” she said. “Our people have shared their loaf of bread and their 
school seats.”

But Khatatbeh said the situation was putting pressure on the Jordanian 
economy, already suffering as a result of the world economic crisis and the 
rise in oil prices, and had changed the demographics of the country.

There were some places, she said, where the numbers of refugees exceeded the 
indigenous population. Khatatbeh said Jordan was asking the world to help, “but 
we have not shirked our duties”.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
