
My apologies to Dr Antonio Serrano for failing - due to pressure of work - to 
report his significant libel victory last week.

I'm glad to put the record straight now because, on 6 October, a high court 
judge awarded him Â£45,000 damages against theDaily Mail 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/dailymail>.

It took him a long time to secure the award. I reported way back in April 2013 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/apr/08/kelvin-mackenzie-libel-claim-daily-mail>
 that Serrano was suing the Mail over an article by its then columnist, Kelvin 
MacKenzie, that defamed him. The piece, published in April 2012, was headlined 
"A whole year of hell, thanks to a foreign doctor".

His action was hotly contested by the Mail's publisher, Associated Newspapers 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/associated-newspapers>, but Mr Justice 
Dingemans, ruled in the doctor's favour.

The judge said the article stated that Serrano had reported a patient - bus 
driver Kevin Jones - to the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA) over 
alcohol problems when there was no evidence to that effect.

The report to the DVLA followed a consultation between Serrano and Jones in 
January 2011 when Jones went to see him about pain from swollen legs. The DVLA 
withdrew Jones's bus driving and personal licences, and he lost his job.

The licences were reinstated in early 2012, when a letter from the DVLA stated 
that "from the information we have received you satisfy the medical standards 
for safe driving". Jones subsequently returned to work as a bus driver.

In April 2012, Jones's father saw an article in the Mail by MacKenzie about 
foreign doctors working in the NHS and thought MacKenzie would be interested in 
his treatment by Serrano.

The judge said: "Mr Jones said that he thought that his experience was 
relevant because while Dr Serrano spoke good English it was clear to him that 
cultural differences, for example about sense of humour and a failure to listen 
properly, had played a big part in what had happened to him."

But the judge found that there was "considerable evidence to justify Dr 
Serrano's actions", and it was "not wrong and inappropriate for Dr Serrano to 
write to the DVLA". There had not been a language barrier.

He ruled that the article had defamatory meanings which "cannot be justified", 
and that it "cannot be defended as honest comment".

He added: "Dr Serrano said his wife was upset by the article and he had been 
upset and ashamed by the anxiety and distress that she had been caused and that 
it was particularly hurtful and insulting to be attacked on the basis that he 
was a foreigner with an inadequate grasp of English when he'd been given no 
indication that any criticism of that kind was going to be made."

Mr Justice Dingemans rejected an application for aggravated damages, which Dr 
Serrano's counsel, Ronald Thwaites QC, had argued should be awarded because 
AssociatedNewspapers <http://www.theguardian.com/media/newspapers> had caused 
his client distress and injury to feelings by persisting with the defence of 
justification.

The judge said: "In my judgment the proper defence of an action is not to be 
taken into account in aggravation of damages in libel proceedings. Any other 
approach would be an impermissible interference with the vital right of the 
free press to defend itself, and would therefore be wrong."

In a statement after the ruling, Serrano said: "I am extremely pleased with 
the outcome of today's hearing. This article was irresponsible and should never 
have been written.

"As a family doctor I have always worked hard to provide the best treatment 
for my patients and local community. After a legal process that lasted two and 
a half years, I am now able to dedicate the rest of my time to my family and my 
profession."

His lawyer, Daniel Taylor of Taylor Hampton solicitors, said afterwards: "The 
right to a reputation is a vital human right, every bit as important as freedom 
of speech and a free press.

"It is right that doctors, or indeed any other dedicated professional, should 
know that where they have been subject to untrue and unjustified allegations by 
a tabloid or any other publication, the law is there to protect them."

Sources: PA Media Lawyer 
<http://www.medialawyer.press.net/article.jsp?id=10142079>/Daily Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/home/article-2782991/Doctor-wins-damages-bus-driver-libel-case.html>
/Pulse 
<http://www.pulsetoday.co.uk/your-practice/practice-topics/legal/gp-sues-daily-mail-for-200000-over-insulting-and-oppressive-article/20007337.article#.VC-fRecUqss>
/Private information
