
Over the past few weeks, women from across the aid industry have been coming 
forward to tell the Guardian and others their stories of sexual harassment and 
violence on the job. They range from offensive comments in the office to 
groping, discrimination, harassment and full-blown rape. But they also 
illustrate another trend: the difficulties of reporting such incidents, and the 
failure of many aid organisations to do anything about them.

When Megan Nobert went public 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jul/29/aid-worker-rape-humanitarian-south-sudan-sexual-violence>
 with her story of rape in South Sudan, and accusations ofrape in DRC Congo, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/30/united-nations-utair-congo-sexual-attack>
 also involving UN contractors, also surfaced, the UN was quick to say these 
were isolated incidents. “I wouldn’t call it a pattern,” saidUN spokesperson 
<http://www.un.org/press/en/2015/db150730.doc.htm> Stéphane Dujarric, in answer 
to reporter’s questions.

Related: Aid worker: I was drugged and raped by another humanitarian in South 
Sudan 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jul/29/aid-worker-rape-humanitarian-south-sudan-sexual-violence>

But Muriel Volpellier, the clinical lead at The Havens 
<http://www.thehavens.org.uk/>, a sexual assault referral centre in London, 
says she sees a steady stream of those who have worked overseas with charitable 
organisations and been attacked while on mission. Some fly back to the UK to 
seek help, others contact her by phone.

How serious is the situation? It is difficult to tell. Partly for these 
reasons, moving beyond anecdote is hard.The Headington Institute 
<http://www.headington-institute.org/>, a Californian based organisation 
specialising in psychological support for aid workers, have said that the issue 
is widely underreported. Few studies, even those focussing on aid worker 
security, even discuss sexual violence as an operational hazard. Christina 
Willie, author of a2011 report 
<http://www.insecurityinsight.org/files/Security%20Facts%202%20Gender.pdf> on 
aid, gender and security, told Buzzfeed recently: “We basically have no 
information on sexual assault. It seems women don’t feel comfortable reporting 
using the normal reporting mechanisms for security incidents.”

This does not surprise Volpellier, who says the aid workers that she sees, in 
addition to the normal reasons that survivors do not come forward, face 
specific challenges in handing their experiences.

Related: Secret aid worker: sexual harassment and discrimination in the 
industry 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jul/29/secret-aid-worker-sexual-harassment-and-discrimination>

“Those who have suffered sexual abuse feel shame, self-blame, uncertainty 
about what happened,” she says “But it’s especially hard to talk about if you 
work in a small office, with male colleagues, or because of the country you are 
in. There are some police forces that are best avoided.” Those who have been in 
touch with the Guardian also report fear of being branded a snitch, and the 
daunting prospect of tackling highly personal, private vulnerabilities while 
living and working in small communities.

An issue that also repeatedly surfaces in the accounts and stories is the 
difficulty of making complaints and of having those complaints taken seriously. 
“On one of my first missions, I tried to report a colleague who was physically 
and verbally harassing me every day,” one aid worker (now, ironically, a 
gender-based violence specialist) told us. “My country director just shrugged 
and said they’d never prove it. He said it’d be like trying to nail jelly to a 
wall.” Others report being told they need to toughen up: that if they can’t 
handle being in a difficult environment that they should leave, or that they 
must have done something to invite the unwanted attention in the first place.

For national staff, the problem is even more acute – and hidden. One aid 
worker formerly based in Kabul writes: “I worked with a national staff worker 
in Afghanistan who was raped in the office by one of the drivers. She could not 
tell anyone, and why? Because her husband would stop her from working, because 
he would have to kill the abuser, because she would be known in the community 
as a bad woman, because being raped is a crime for which you get six months 
imprisonment, and she would lose her children. Basically it would wreck her 
life. She opted instead to punch him square in the face and tell him to never 
ever touch her or any of the other female staff again.”

There is also a widespread perception that while perpetrators are rarely 
punished for their alleged actions, those who complain suffer career and 
reputational damage. One former humanitarian worker writes that the sexual 
discrimination and gender-based hostility in her office was so bad she left her 
job. “It was obvious and privately acknowledged, but never publicly dealt with. 
In fact, when my colleague went to complain to her female boss, she was told 
that if she brought it to HR’s attention, her boss would make she never worked 
for the organisation again.”

These stories are not new to those working on the frontline of this problem. 
Catherine Plumridge, a trainer specialising in delivering sexual aggression 
awareness training for aid organisations, thinks these examples are the tip of 
a problem which is impacting the whole aid industry. “Some agencies tackle this 
head on. But certain areas of the sector have a long way to go.” She believes 
that when incidents of harassment aren’t reported aid organisations are 
creating an environment where abusers flourish. “If someone is a sexual 
harasser, there’s a good chance they are doing other things more privately. I 
think grooming happens. It’s too close to being an environment in which those 
who behave this way can operate with impunity.”

Related: Humanitarian agencies need to stop failing their staff on mental 
health 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jul/31/aid-workers-casualties-mental-health>

So what can be done? Acknowledging that there is a problem and listening to 
those who want to talk is a start, says Plumridge. She and Volpellier are part 
of a CHS Alliance team organising anevent in London 
<http://chsalliance.org/news-events/news/save-the-date-sexual-violence-management-conference-for-the-humanitarian-sector>
 on 3 September looking at management of sexual violence for aid workers.

At the very least, says, Volpellier, agencies need to acknowledge and tackle 
the reality of sexual violence on the job – as a matter of reputation as well 
as to meet the duty of care of their staff. “It’s quite bizarre how these 
organisations present themselves as doing such good work, but treat their staff 
so badly.”

The Guardian Global Development Professionals Network will be exploring the 
issue of sexual harassment and discrimination in the aid industry over the next 
few months. If you have a story to share, particularly if you have experience 
reporting incidents to your employer, email globaldevpros@theguardian.com with 
‘Sexual harassment’ in the subject line.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development/> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
