
Time is running out to stop Britain leaving the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>. With just three days left, the polls 
are tight, and things could still go either way.

Recent polling shows that a third of voters may change the way they vote or 
make up their minds in the final week, with half deciding on the day, according 
toresearch by the London School of Economics 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/11/brexit-eu-referendum-vote-last-minute-decision-decide-lse>
.

With this in mind, remain campaigners are redoubling their efforts. Here’s how 
you canmake sure the UK remains a member of the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/20/the-guardian-view-on-the-eu-referendum-keep-connected-and-inclusive-not-angry-and-isolated>
 after Thursday.

Convince a friend, relative or neighbour

Given the nature of the referendum, just one vote could see us jettisoning the 
EU. A campaign called Talk to Gran is encouraging young people to speak to 
older relatives about why Britain remaining part of the EU is important for 
their futures. This relies on the assumption that older people are more likely 
to vote.

The campaign group Another Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> stresses the importance of 
face-to-face advocacy over media and political speeches. And it is keen to make 
sure people new to political campaigning feel empowered to do so.

“It’s not just about organised groups. Referendum campaigns often inspire 
people who were not previously active in politics to get involved. The key to 
winning the referendum will be getting out there and talking to people who are 
on the fence and persuading them that they should vote and back the progressive 
case for ‘in’,” the group says.

Persuade young people to vote

Young people are more likely to support the UK remaining a member of the EU 
but much less likely to vote. The 7,692,318 women and 7,782,178 men aged 18-35 
in the UK could swing the vote if they turn out on polling day.

53% of 18- to 35-year-olds back staying in 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/02/eu-referendum-young-voters-brexit-leave>
, against 29% who want to leave. Almost the reverse is true with voters aged 55 
and over. Given that over-55s make up a bigger slice of the electorate and they 
are more likely to vote, they hold a disproportionate weight in deciding 
Britain’s future relationship with the EU.

Make sure the young people you know vote – you could even offer them a lift to 
the polling station.

Write or share something on social media

The influence of friends and family must not be underestimated. A personal 
appeal to remain in the EU read on a social media account is much more engaging 
than a post from a politician or a link to a piece by a newspaper columnist.

If you can’t think of what to write, there are some compelling posts doing the 
rounds includingthis one by small business owner Nick Carter-Lando 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/14/digital-debate-how-viral-posts-shaping-eu-referendum>
 debunking the most popular immigration arguments by the leave campaign.

You could also copy and paste a paragraph from our editorial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/20/the-guardian-view-on-the-eu-referendum-keep-connected-and-inclusive-not-angry-and-isolated>
.

Make a meme or poster

Given social media is a useful way of persuading friends and family, you could 
use thismeme-making guide from Momentum 
<https://d3n8a8pro7vhmx.cloudfront.net/momentum/pages/219/attachments/original/1464368599/Meme_making_guide.pdf?1464368599>
, the leftwing pressure group. They also have a guide to running EU art 
workshops to create posters and flyers to adorn your windows or hand out to 
friends.

Join a campaign

Unlike other elections, referendum campaigning is something that may appeal to 
a much broader demographic and for this reason organisers are keen to make 
participation inclusive.

“Whether you’re young or old, a newcomer to politics or a seasoned campaigner, 
this is the time to get involved. Whether it’s leafleting, helping out on 
polling day itself, talking to your friends and family or making a donation, 
there’s a way for everyone to get involved,” says James McGrory,Britain 
Stronger In Europe <http://www.strongerin.co.uk/#FGdeM2KbLwhVtegl.97> campaign 
spokesman.

Labour In for Britain <http://labourinforbritain.org.uk/> says it will pair 
volunteers with more experienced campaigners to help them feel welcome and 
confident making arguments. “You can say what you’d rather do, if face to face 
is intimidating, and you’ll always have someone with you who has done it 
before. People can help in phone banks, if there’s a language barrier – you can 
help with leafleting,” a spokeswoman said.

On the website potential volunteers can leave their contact details 
<http://www.labour.org.uk/page/s/labour-in-get-involved> so one of the 
campaign’s volunteers can contact them.

Another Europe has put together a toolkit 
<http://www.anothereurope.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/aeip-toolkit-colour.pdf>
 for new campaigners. Leaflets are available to order by emailing
info@anothereurope.org <mailto:info@anothereurope.org> and the website has 
materials that can be downloaded.

Listings and maps of local events jointly organised with Momentum, including 
door-knocking in High Wycombe and stalls at Newcastle Haymarket, are posted on 
theirwebsite <http://yourref.peoplesmomentum.com/>.
