
Balfour Beatty <http://www.balfourbeatty.com/> and Interserve 
<http://www.interserve.com/>, two of the UK’s largest construction companies, 
have been accused of a raft of labour abuses by migrant workers employed on 
large-scale projects operated by companies that the firms co-own in Qatar.

Labourers on construction sites operated by BK Gulf, 
<http://www.bkgulf.com/projqatar.htm> co-owned by Balfour Beatty, and Gulf 
Contracting Company <http://www.gulfcontracting.com/> (GCC), co-owned by 
Interserve, allege that they have been exploited and mistreated by labour 
supply companies hired by the firms to furnish construction sites in Doha with 
cheap manual workers.

The alleged abuses include erratic or reduced payment of wages, passport 
confiscation, workers entering employment with high levels of debt bondage, and 
pay levels below those agreed when workers were recruited in their home 
countries. The workers spoke of a culture of fear and intimidation, with 
threats of arrest or deportation if they stepped out of line.

Related: Migrant workers suffer 'appalling treatment' in Qatar World Cup 
stadiums, says Amnesty 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/31/migrant-workers-suffer-appalling-treatment-in-qatar-world-cup-stadiums-says-amnesty>

The Guardian spoke to more than a dozen migrant workers, all of whom requested 
to remain anonymous due to fears of losing their jobs.

One labourer, employed by a supply company but working for GCC, which is 49% 
owned byInterserve <https://www.theguardian.com/business/interserve>, said he 
repeatedly asked his employer to let him leave Qatar after his salary was cut 
by 20%, but he was forced to stay. “I went to the [manager] and said, ‘I will 
give you the money for my plane ticket. Send me home.’ But he said, ‘Until and 
unless the contract finishes … you can’t go.’”


Labourers employed by labour supply companies but working for BK Gulf at 
Qatar’s national museum said they were earning a much lower salary than 
promised when they were recruited in Nepal. Some claimed their basic salary was 
only £135 a month. They said their wages were cut if they missed work due to 
illness, and they had to pay their own medical fees above £20.

“They withhold the first two months of salary … they do this to everyone,” 
said one worker from Nepal. “When I came here I was told by the agent that I 
could earn around 1,700 rials [£330] a month [with overtime]. If I had known I 
would only get 800 rials, and 200 rials for food, I definitely wouldn’t have 
come.”

Labourers working for BK Gulf at the museum praised safety management on the 
site, and two workers employed directly by GCC, building a office tower in 
Lusail City, said they were happy with the conditions of their labour camp. 
However,despite widely reported problems with the abuse and exploitation of 
migrant workers in Qatar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/25/revealed-qatars-world-cup-slaves>
 and elsewhere in the Gulf, these new allegations suggest that neither British 
firm has taken the necessary precautions to ensure supply chains are free of 
labour abuses.


Ray Jureidini, a professor of migration, human rights and ethics at the 
Research Center for Islamic Legislation and Ethics <http://www.cilecenter.org/> 
in Qatar, said: “Companies that use these workers contract only with the labour 
supply companies, not the workers. The workers are not on their books and they 
don’t look into the company they have contracted with. They don’t look at how 
workers were recruited, their salary or living conditions … whether they are 
trafficking victims. I call it the corporate veil.”

The Qatari authorities have launched initiatives 
<http://gulfnews.com/news/gulf/qatar/reform-of-qatar-labour-law-to-take-effect-in-december-2016-1.1643412>
 to improve conditions for migrant workers, including efforts to improve 
accommodation, such as building a flagship Labour City outside the capital.

However, some labourers working for BK Gulf and GCC continue to live in dire 
conditions in camps in the desert. In one apparently windowless room with beds 
for eight workers, clothes were strung on lines between the bunk beds and 
cooking pots were scattered on the floor. Men working for GCC claim there are 
up to 13 men sleeping to one room.

Qatari labour regulations state that there should be no more than four workers 
to a room in residential units and workers should be given at least four metres 
of personal space in communal areas.

 “There are no cupboards or anywhere to keep our clothes or any goods … we 
have to keep everything on our bed,” explained one worker.

“They only turn on the water [in our camp] for an hour. Five minutes in the 
morning, and one hour at night,” said one, who lives in a nearby camp. “The 
air-conditioning is installed but they don’t switch it on … there’s not even a 
lock on our door.”


British firms have not hesitated to join Qatar’s building boom, which is worth 
an estimated $220bn (£155bn) as the emirate gears up to host the World Cup.

Most foreign construction companies must work in partnership with a local 
company that owns 51% of the business. These local subsidiaries then commonly 
source workers through labour supply companies, small firms that hire out 
labourers to work for other companies.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tv6y%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tv6y%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd64880d8aab137cffb144463c377298e33764a0%2F0_0_3392_2266%2F3392.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Balfour%20Beatty%20and%20Interserve%20accused%20of%20migrant%20worker%20labour%20abuses%20in%20Qatar&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tv6y%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Balfour+Beatty+and+Interserve+accused+of+migrant+worker+labour+abuses+in+Qatar&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tv6y%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd64880d8aab137cffb144463c377298e33764a0%2F0_0_3392_2266%2F3392.jpg>
 Labourers on their way to work at Qatar’s national museum. Some workers (not 
pictured) allege mistreatment at the hands of their labour supply company. 
Balfour Beatty <https://www.theguardian.com/business/balfourbeatty> and 
Interserve said they were working within the parameters of Qatari law and 
rigorously monitored their labour supply companies to ensure good practice.

“BK Gulf WLL, in which Balfour Beatty has a 49% share, provides conditions for 
its workforce which go over and above local regulations and laws,” Balfour 
Beatty said.

“BK Gulf requires all of its labour supply companies and subcontractors to 
meet a selection criteria and code of conduct which includes requirements 
around operative working conditions. The company actively monitors its supply 
chain to ensure these standards and criteria are being met.”

It said it was reviewing labour supply companies and performing spot checks to 
ensure standards were being met.


Interserve said: “We are fully committed to supporting and protecting the 
health, safety and welfare of our employees and those working as part of our 
supply chain. We take these allegations extremely seriously and will 
investigate them thoroughly. If corrective measures are required, we will 
ensure they are implemented immediately.

“We only recruit through approved recruitment agencies, which we have assessed 
to ensure they meet our own high standards, industry best practice and comply 
fully with theQatar <https://www.theguardian.com/world/qatar> labour laws.”

Both companies denied that they retained passports as a way of restricting 
workers’ movements. They said they offered to store them with the workers’ 
permission.


It is the market norm across the Middle East for workers to pay large fees to 
agents in their home countries, according to Balfour Beatty.

The company said the maximum number of workers to a room was seven.

Related: Qatar: how have conditions for migrant workers changed in nine key 
areas? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/14/qatar-how-have-conditions-for-migrant-workers-changed-in-nine-key-areas>

Jill Wells, a policy adviser with the Construction Sector Transparency 
Initiative <http://www.constructiontransparency.org/home> and Engineers Against 
Poverty <http://www.engineersagainstpoverty.org/home>, said there are 
significant risks associated with construction companies using local labour 
brokers to source manpower.

“The importance of companies mapping out their sub-contracting recruitment 
chain is absolutely critical and contractors have to accept that if workers are 
on your site then they are your employees, even if they are hired by someone 
else,” said Wells.

“Construction is an industry dependent on working capital and most of these 
labour supply companies used by big companies are under-capitalised.”

The construction industry is coming under increasing pressure to act on 
migrant worker rights in Qatar. Last month, Amnesty Internationalcriticised the 
exploitation and forced labour of migrant workers 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/31/migrant-workers-suffer-appalling-treatment-in-qatar-world-cup-stadiums-says-amnesty>
 building stadiums and tourism sites for the World Cup. The UN’sInternational 
Labour Organisation (ILO) <http://www.ilo.org/global/lang--en/index.htm> last 
month gave Qatar12 months to end worker exploitation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/24/un-gives-qatar-year-end-forced-labour-migrant-workers>
 or face an official investigation.

“It is not enough for British companies to say they are operating in line with 
local norms when those norms have been criticised by human rights groups or to 
say they are working in compliance with local labour laws that have received 
widespread condemnation and fall short of the standards set by international 
bodies like the ILO,” said Damian Collins, a Conservative MP whocampaigns for 
reform of football’s world governing body Fifa 
<http://damiancollins.com/campaigns/categories/football-governance/categories/football%20governance/>
.

The Business and Human Rights Centre <http://business-humanrights.org/> said 
companies operating in the Gulf are likely to face growing pressure to ensure 
they have oversight into worker conditions all the way down their 
sub-contracting chains.

“Construction firms’ responsibility to migrant workers goes beyond domestic 
labour law.International standards 
<http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Publications/GuidingPrinciplesBusinessHR_EN.pdf>
 (pdf) expect companies to respect internationally recognised human rights, 
wherever they operate,” said Joseph Bardwell, a spokesman at the centre.

On 1 April, a clause in the UK’s Modern Slavery Act 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukdsi/2015/9780111138847> came into effect that 
requires large British companies to begin producing public statements outlining 
the actions they are taking to ensure their supply chains are free of slavery.

“It will be interesting to see the modern slavery statements that British 
companies in the Gulf produce, and whether they will avail themselves of the
convenient loophole 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/24/loophole-modern-slavery-bill-transparency-supply-chain-abuses>
 that the UK government placed in the act, which could avoid them having to 
report on the actions of their subsidiaries abroad,” said Aidan McQuade, 
director of Anti-Slavery International.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tv6y%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tv6y%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c2143bde9e352570ffad3081bfa20900ec1db1d%2F0_0_2214_1329%2F2214.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Balfour%20Beatty%20and%20Interserve%20accused%20of%20migrant%20worker%20labour%20abuses%20in%20Qatar&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tv6y%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Balfour+Beatty+and+Interserve+accused+of+migrant+worker+labour+abuses+in+Qatar&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tv6y%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c2143bde9e352570ffad3081bfa20900ec1db1d%2F0_0_2214_1329%2F2214.jpg>
 The eating area in a labour camp in Qatar. 
Rajan’s story

The journey from the glistening towers of central Doha to the vast labour 
camps, which house tens of thousands of workers, takes less than an hour, but 
in that time you travel from the first world to the third.

As you turn into the camps, the four-lane highways give way to pot-holed 
streets, lined with heavy goods vehicles, workshops and abandoned cars covered 
in dust.

Rajan* emerges from the shadows and slips into our car. He is too afraid to 
let us into his camp, in case his boss finds out.

Rajan is employed by a company that supplies workers to Doha Festival City 
<http://www.festivalcitydoha.com/wps/portal/dhfc/home>, a giant shopping mall 
under construction north of Doha.

The main contract for building the mall was won by Gulf Contracting Company in 
a joint venture. GCC is 49% owned by Interserve –Britain’s third largest 
construction firm by turnover 
<http://www.theconstructionindex.co.uk/market-data/top-100-construction-companies/2015>
.

According to Interserve, the contract for the shopping mall is worth £325m 
<http://www.interserve.com/case-studies/2014/building-qatar-s-biggest-mall-at-doha-festival-city>
.

Last summer, the supply company that employs Rajan cut the basic salary of 
many of its workers from 1,100 rials a month to 900, to match the lower salary 
of an incoming batch of workers, Rajan says. Most of the workers who had their 
salaries slashed have returned to Nepal, but Rajan and a colleague remain in 
Qatar.


When his salary was cut, Rajan asked his boss to let him return to Nepal, but 
he refused. Rajan said he submitted two letters of resignation, even offering 
to pay for his flight, but they were rejected.

“I don’t feel good,” said Rajan. “I have told the [manager] I want to go … but 
the company said, ‘There are no staff now so you have to stay here for two 
months and then you can go.’”

The company told him to stay put “or there might be problems”.

“I have already got a warning,” explained Rajan. “Three months back we were 
not given our salary on time … we held a strike … the [Qatari] sponsor came and 
threatened us and said it was the last warning. We can’t do anything now.”

One labourer who had been working for the same supply company, but not on the 
GCC site, said he was imprisoned then deported after a salary dispute with his 
employer.

Under Qatar’s kafala system, workers cannot leave their job or the country 
without their sponsor’s permission.The authorities have promised to reform some 
aspects of the system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/14/qatar-reform-labout-laws-outcry-world-cup-slaves>
, but these changes have been widely criticised as insufficient, and are not 
expected to come into force until December.

Like all the labourers interviewed by the Guardian, Rajan says his employer 
confiscated his passport, which is illegal under Qatari law. As part of its 
labour reforms, the authorities increased the fine for companies that 
confiscate passports to 25,000 rials a passport, but the practice remains 
widespread.

*Name has been changed to protect identity

• This article was updated on 13 April 2016 to include further comment from 
Interserve.
