
You’ve battled lesson plans and essay deadlines, got to grips with objectives 
and pedagogy, and handled cranky children and awkward staff. The chequered flag 
is in sight, but what should you keep in mind as your training year enters the 
home straight?

It’s likely that your teaching load will have increased in the final term. 
Greater independence gives you the chance to spread your wings and find your 
feet as a fully fledged teacher. But every silver lining has a cloud, and your 
marking and planning pile will probably have expanded. So here are a few 
thoughts to keep in mind through the chaos to make sure you are celebrating in 
the summer.

Get your paperwork together

Related: How to ace lesson observations: 10 tips for PGCE students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/may/11/how-to-ace-lesson-observations-10-tips-pgce-students>

No matter how much you shine in the classroom or nail the assignments, there’s 
no escaping the paperwork that comes with a PGCE. Little and often is a better 
way of tackling it than pulling an all nighter, desperately seeking proof that 
you’re aware of children’s social development. You’re judged against the 
teaching standards so the best approach is to systematically present evidence 
that you have met them. Getting everything in order now will help you spot any 
areas which are a little thin, and give you time to address them before 
judgement day.Gabrielle Cliff-Hodges 
<https://www.educ.cam.ac.uk/people/staff/cliff-hodges/>, senior lecturer in 
education at the University of Cambridge, recommends collating a mixture of 
evidence including the teaching file, reports and written feedback on lessons.

Final lesson observations

You’ll probably have had your fill of lesson observations, but the ones in the 
last term can take on a different feel. You know your class and will have built 
a relationship with them, meaning lessons can lose the stiltedness of the early 
days. This offers a great opportunity to demonstrate that you’ve met any of the 
standards that are missing.

Some trainees also find it useful to observe experienced teachers for a few 
lessons at this stage. You might find that you see them differently now you 
have had more experience, and it’s the type of thing you rarely have time to do 
as your career continues.

Say no

It probably won’t have escaped your attention that many schools are a little 
strapped for cash. When they see a young, dynamic and capable teacher they can 
sometimes be tempted to stretch your role beyond what you should be doing. 
While a bit of professional development can be great, there is a fine line 
between that and being overworked. I was asked to cover for a teacher on 
maternity leave when I was training – I still wake up in a cold sweat 
remembering the carnage.

Remember you’re still a trainee and entitled to support and time away from the 
classroom to reflect.

Apply for jobs

I fondly remember the mild awkwardness of sitting between two fellow trainees 
as we competed for the same job. While there can be a rush to apply for jobs 
after Christmas, you will be in a really strong position after summer halfterm. 
Established teachers on a permanent contract won’t be able to apply for any 
posts which are a September start, so you will be extremely attractive to 
schools that have vacancies for the beginning of the year.

Related: If you're a newly-qualified teacher without a job for September, 
don't panic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/teacher-blog/2014/may/30/nqt-job-september-vacancies>

But you must make sure the job will be right for you. Cliff-Hodges points out 
the importance of sharing information about your professional development thus 
far with your new school to ensure you continue to improve. She says: “You 
should think about how you will continue developing during your newly-qualified 
teacher (NQT) year, and share with your mentor the areas you feel you will need 
to address, as well as any ideas about how they can support you to achieve your 
aims.”

Remember how far you have come

You will undoubtedly be caught in a whirlwind of busyness but, especially when 
the going is tough, it’s worth remembering how far you have come. Whatever the 
difficulties you have faced, you’ve made it this far and you probably feel like 
a different person to the one who rocked up in September. You have very nearly 
made it – that is an incredible achievement and testament to your resilience 
and determination. When you get to the graduation celebration you will have 
earned that glass of fizz and then some.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
