
Take me there: Victoria park, east London


It's official: east London is the centre of the universe this summer, and with 
the Paralympics in full flow, visitors are being invited to live like a local 
in some of the area's hippest neighbourhoods. The Victoria Park House Company (
thevictoriaparkhousecompany.com <http://thevictoriaparkhousecompany.com/>) 
offers holiday lets in gorgeous private homes, from cool warehouse conversions 
to elegant townhouses. The company, which launched in time for the Olympics, 
unveils its new concierge service this month, offering guests everything from 
theatre tickets to a personal trainer. A three-night stay in a two-bedroom loft 
apartment costs from £800.

Jo's travel clinic: Pembrokeshire retreats


The dilemma Can you suggest somewhere romantic for an autumn break? We don't 
want anything too fancy (or expensive!), just somewhere we can switch off, 
preferably with a log fire and great views.Paula, by email

I'm completely captivated by the latest offerings from Under the Thatch (
underthethatch.co.uk <http://underthethatch.co.uk/>). The company has just 
added three new Pembrokeshire retreats to its portfolio of quirky cabins and 
traditional Welsh cottages. Striking just the right balance between rustic and 
romantic, Little Barn near Newport is a former artist's studio that has been 
converted into a delightful bolthole for two, overlooking its own pond, with 
distant views of Carningli mountain (from £350 a week). In the same bucolic 
spot but offering a little more comfort is neighbouring Ty Glas, a pretty 
pale-blue period cottage surrounded by meadows. With log fires and wood floors, 
it oozes simple charm (from £530 a week). Last but not least, Caban 
Llys-y-Fran, a little to the south, is a traditional tin cottage, compact and 
cosy, with glorious views from a veranda complete with hammock and outdoor 
woodburner, perfect for autumn evenings (from £221 for a three-night break). 
All three will be available from October.

If you have a travel dilemma, email Joanne O'Connor at magazine@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:magazine@observer.co.uk>

Three of the best food and drink festivals


Autumn is festival season for foodies, with great local produce being 
celebrated up and down the country. Here are three great events guaranteed to 
make your mouth water

Ludlow Food Festival, Shropshire Shropshire's foodie mecca puts on a 
tantalising spread. Don't miss the sausage and ale trails. 7-9 September (
foodfestival.co.uk <http://foodfestival.co.uk/>)

Hastings Seafood & Wine Festival A celebration of the town's fishery and 
vineyards. 15-16 September (
1066country.com/events/hastings-seafood-and-wine-festival 
<http://www.visit1066country.com/events/hastings-seafood-and-wine-festival>)

Aldeburgh Food & Drink Festival Suffolk's Snape Maltings will hold a two-day 
feast of workshops and tastings. 29-30 September (aldeburghfoodand drink.co.uk 
<http://www.google.co.uk/search?q=aldeburghfoodand+drink.co.uk&ie=utf-8&oe=utf-8&aq=t&rls=org.mozilla:en-US:official&client=firefox-a&channel=fflb>
)
