
I’d lost three charity jobs in quick succession (due to funding cuts) and one 
council housing post (thanks to the chancellor’s 2012 spending review) when, in 
2013, I found myself working for an “arms-length management organisation” in 
the south-east. It looks after my local council’s housing stock.

We have been fortunate enough to be funded from rental income from residents 
and, as a well-run organisation, we’ve so far managed to provide a decent 
service to our residents with limited job cuts.

When I started in my new role as a neighbourhood manager, the benefit cap and 
bedroom tax were already creating worry and stress for residents.

My main responsibilities are dealing with anti-social behaviour and linking 
residents to support services. We each manage a patch of more than a thousand 
council properties and don’t really have time to be support workers, but as 
others services are cut back that’s what ends up happening.


I remember sitting down with Edith, who had just turned 60, not long after the 
bedroom tax was implemented in 2013. She had lived in her council property for 
most of her life, and said that if she had to move due to “under-occupation” 
rules, it would kill her. With problems walking and no family close by, it was 
only the friendliness of neighbours on her street that stopped her from 
becoming completely isolated.

She was relatively lucky. We managed to help her get discretionary housing 
payments to tide her over until she was 62, and too old to be forced to move. 
Others were not so fortunate.
Soon the cuts seemed to be coming thick and fast. It was not simply the 
benefit money taken from residents, it was the reduction in support just when 
they needed it most.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjzn%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjzn%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F019c75960f4e6cee9eafc4ad8a987736a43f9175%2F0_248_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Each%20'investment%20opportunity'%20means%20a%20life%20of%20insecurity%20for%20a%20tenant&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjzn%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Each+%27investment+opportunity%27+means+a+life+of+insecurity+for+a+tenant&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjzn%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F019c75960f4e6cee9eafc4ad8a987736a43f9175%2F0_248_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
 In 2015 George Osborne decided to cut social housing rents at the same time as 
he is gradually selling off the country’s council housing. Photograph: Yui 
Mok/PA 
Last year, I visited a resident in temporary accommodation. Ahmed was 
suffering from depression and post-traumatic stress disorder and had limited 
English. He had been taken off the council’s housing register and was 
languishing in an overcrowded property because no one could help him bid for 
properties online.

Because of council efficiency savings you can no longer walk in and speak to a 
human so Ahmed, whose first language is Kurdish, couldn’t make an appointment 
to see a housing adviser. If he tried to phone the housing team, they never got 
back to him. It was only following several weeks of chasing on his behalf that 
I managed to resolve what turned out to be a “technical problem with the 
council’s website”, and get him back on the housing waiting list.


In the meantime, Ahmed and his family had no sofa, chairs or table, and were 
sitting on the floor of their home. I took him to my office and we filled out 
an online application for a crisis loan to get the beds for his children that 
he could not afford. It took me an hour to work out that there were basic 
errors with the form that would confuse even computer literate people, but 
again there was no one to discuss this with.

Unfortunately, what Ahmed eventually received didn’t stretch far. The charity 
furniture project the council relied on had closed the previous year, so the 
money he got barely covered the cost of a new cooker from the local Argos.


Just a few years ago things would have been different. Back then, I could have 
arranged for David from the local Age UK to carry out a home visit to advise 
and assist Edith with everything from debt to accessing local services. But Age 
UK can no longer afford this outreach service.

Related: I hate having to explain the housing crisis to women who feel life 
couldn’t get worse 
<http://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/jan/09/housing-crisis-women-domestic-violence-survivors-refuge>

Ahmed could have obtained a cheap fridge-freezer, cooker and a sofa through 
the local furniture project – which no longer exists. It’s also likely that he 
would have moved into permanent accommodation six months ago because he would 
have received help from an actual human at the housing department. Instead, 
he’s still stuck in overcrowded, temporary housing.

The only thing that helps both Edith and Ahmed to survive is a secure tenancy 
with social rents. These rights are being eroded every day.

In 2015 George Osborne decided to reduce social housing rents by 1% a year 
<http://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2015/jul/08/social-housing-rent-fall-chancellor-budget>
 at the same time as he is gradually selling off the country’s council housing. 
At a time when I need to support vulnerable residents more than ever, my job is 
again at risk: our posts are self-funded through the rents we collect, rents 
that are also supposed to fund council housing.

An independent shop closed down next to our offices last year. In its place 
stands a shiny new estate agents set to profit from the latest housing bubble. 
As I walked past the other day, I noticed some of our council properties for 
sale at sky-high prices above the strapline: “Buy to let investment 
opportunity”. To my mind, each of these investment opportunities could mean a 
life of insecurity and poverty for an Edith or an Ahmed in a rented property.

 * All names have been changed 
This series 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/series/public-servant-my-letter-to-the-public>
 aims to give a voice to the staff behind the public services that are hit by 
mounting cuts and rising demand, and so often denigrated by the press, 
politicians and public. If you would like to write an article for the series, 
contacttamsin.rutter@theguardian.com <mailto: tamsin.rutter@theguardian.com>


Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
