
At last month’s World Humanitarian Summit, Kenya’s Deputy President William 
Ruto announced thatthe decision to close down its two largest refugee camps, 
Dadaab and Kakuma, was final 
<http://www.nation.co.ke/news/-/1056/3215622/-/pjhdr4z/-/index.html>.

This is despite the fact the closures are in violation of international law 
and the UN has warned of the “devastating consequences 
<http://www.unhcr.org/5730b5f36.html>” they will have. Over 600,000 residents 
will be displaced, putting them atimmediate risk 
<http://www.refugeesinternational.org/blog/2016/5/4/kenya>. Moreover the forced 
closure betrays the most basic refugee rights, and can only lead to countless
human rights violations 
<http://www.refugeesinternational.org/blog/2016/5/4/kenya> as refugees 
returning to their home countries face grave consequences.

Kenya’s decision is not without precedent. In 2012, the Tanzanian government 
closed Mtabila refugee camp, forcing its 35,000 Burundian inhabitants 
<http://www.globalpost.com/dispatches/globalpost-blogs/rights/refugees-forced-out-tanzania-increasingly-violent-burundi>
 to find a new home back in Burundi, the country rife with violent conflict 
from which they’d fled. Violence in Burundi has since forced over 250,000 
residents to seek safety in neighbouring countries –137,000 of those back in 
Tanzania.

Yet Kenya’s situation is a symptom of a larger, more fundamental issue. The 
core of the problem is that camps are the foundation of the international 
community’s refugee response strategy. They have become the target for the bulk 
of humanitarian aid. Camps have become the beginning, and in many cases the 
end, of international support to the swelling refugee crisis.

Related: The volunteers turning refugee lifejackets into symbols of hope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/06/the-volunteers-turning-refugee-lifejackets-into-symbols-of-hope>

Camps, as their name suggests, are intended to be temporary solutions. Yet 
this is rarely the case: Dadaab and Kakuma for example are 25 years old. Dadaab 
was built in 1992 to provide temporary housing for 90,000 refugees fleeing 
Somalia’s violent civil war. It is now the largest refugee camp in the world – 
and Kenya’s third largest “city”.

 Kenya’s situation underscores the urgent need to find sustainable 
alternatives to camps, as well as find sustainable solutions for the millions 
of urban refugees who have either left or chosen to avoid them. Today, more 
than half of the global refugee population –an estimated 60% 
<http://www.unhcr.org/en-us/urban-refugees.html> – reside in urban areas, not 
camps. And an overwhelming majority –86%  
<http://www.unhcr.org.uk/about-us/key-facts-and-figures.html>– reside in 
developing countries.

And in these urban areas, NGOs around the globe are illustrating the 
possibility of creating alternatives to refugee camps. Their programmes strive 
to make it possible for refugees to achieve independence from international 
aid, find dignified living conditions, and establish long-term livelihoods 
while benefiting their host communities in myriad ways.

Related: Why we urgently need more collaboration to solve long-term 
humanitarian crises 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/24/humanitarian-development-agencies-collaboration-urgent-collaborating>

One programme in Kenya 
<http://www.goodpractices.urban-refugees.org/safe-house-for-unaccompanied-and-separated-refugee-girls/>
, for example, provides shelter and support to refugee women and children, who 
comprise more than half of the global refugee population and are at grave risk 
of sexual and gender-based violence. The safe house provides 24-hour security 
as well as vital counselling services, medical and legal assistance, and a 
supportive community for residents. The programme also facilitates positive 
exit strategies for residents, linking them to long-term living arrangements 
and sustainable care within the local community.

Another programme in Irbid, Jordan 
<http://www.goodpractices.urban-refugees.org/housing-solution-to-support-urban-refugees-and-host-communities/>
 creates housing for the city’s continual influx of Syrian refugees. In Irbid, 
housing has been a persistent issue. Whilecash-for-rent programmes 
<http://www.alnap.org/resource/20542> provide temporary solutions for refugees, 
they drive up rent prices on the local housing market and make life even more 
difficult for locals and refugees alike. The Irbidprogramme 
<http://www.jordantimes.com/news/local/out-box-housing-solution-helps-both-syrian-refugees-and-jordanian-hosts>
 is supported by the Norwegian Refugee Council (NRC), provides funding for 
local landlords to complete construction on multi-story buildings, creating 
housing for refugees while stimulating the local economy. So far, over 3,800 
housing units have been created for over 8,700 refugees, with over 8,000 more 
on a waiting list as the NRC expands to other urban areas throughout Jordan.

Related: Refugees don't just live in camps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/apr/19/refugees-dont-just-live-in-camps>



Beyond NGO programmes like these, countless community-based organisations 
provide vital support. Often the only source of support for urban refugees, 
these organisations are usually led by refugees themselves and illustrate the 
power of a reciprocal relationship between refugees and their host countries.

One example is the Young African Refugees for Integral Development 
<http://www.yarid.org> (Yarid), which has been serving the refugee community in 
Kampala, Uganda since 2008. Yarid’s founders, refugees who escaped violence in 
the DRC and resettled in Uganda, were inspired to create the organisation after 
witnessing firsthand the struggles of fellow refugees. Today, Yarid is a 
thriving community, tackling social issues including unemployment, public 
health, and ethnic conflicts, and providing vital education services to urban 
refugees from central Africa. However, scarce resources and an absence of 
international support mean these organisations struggle to survive.



Today, one in every 122 people 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/18/59m-people-displaced-war-violence-persecution-says-un>
 is someone who has been forced to flee their homes. The crisis is real – and 
Kenya’s situation is just one example of how precarious our global reliance on 
encampment has become. If we want alternatives to work, we need to invest in 
what’s working.

Refugee camps aren’t working – but a host of programmes around the world are. 
It’s time for the international community to demonstrate its commitment to 
resolving the global refugee crisis by investing in solutions that hold real 
promise.

Sonia Ben Ali and Marilena Hatoupis are co-founders of Urban Refugees 
<http://urban-refugees.org/>. 

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
