
As Channel 4 prepares to broadcast a programme created from the undercover 
filming in Birmingham by an interim agency social worker, we might expect it 
will do nothing to enhance the public perceptions of the city council nor of 
social workers. Nor will it promote more stable, safer and stronger services 
for children and families in the city. Indeed it may have helpeddrive 
children’s social work services outside the delivery and control of the city 
council 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/24/birmingham-childrens-services-run-trust-following-failures>
.

The council itself for many years had been its own worst enemy, presiding over 
frequent churn and change among senior children’s service managers. It was then 
wounded, weakened and worsened when it was undermined by Ofsted. And it has now 
been coerced, if not explicitly publicly forced, to lose control of its 
children’s social services by a government on a mission to remove statutory 
social work services, such as child protection investigations and decisions 
whether to seek court orders to remove children from families, from local 
authorities and direct public service provision.

We have to wait to see what the programme makers deliver from what they have 
been fed by the undercover social worker.

The political agenda of the government in England is to place these 
responsibilities and serviceswithin a market place 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/dec/15/outsourcing-future-childrens-services>
 which is being opened up to the commercial sector. Well-known outsourcing 
companies such as Virgin Care and Amey havealready engaged in meetings with the 
Department for Education 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/patrick-butler-cuts-blog/2014/oct/29/governement-advisors-finesse-child-protection-outsourcing-plans-market>
.

But in Birmingham, a platform to generate progress and performance was being 
created within the city council, with this recognised by Lord Warner,previously 
appointed by the government to be its independent adviser on Birmingham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/jun/11/norman-warner-tackles-birminghams-childrens-services-michael-gove>
, in an interview on Tuesday. There was every prospect of the current wise and 
experienced senior managers breaking out of the city’s cycle of disruption.

However, Birmingham is to be churned up and set back again. The time and 
attention that should have been given to creating stability and service 
improvement will instead be deployed to set up the complex new organisational 
and governance arrangements of an independent trust, with more complicated, 
confused and costly accountability for crucial statutory responsibilities to 
help families and to protect children. And this change iswelcomed by a local 
Labour MP <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-birmingham-36366411>. Indeed 
Labour seems accepting and acquiescent with what is being demanded by the 
government in Birmingham and nationally.

And what of the Channel 4 programme? Unlike the balanced three-part BBC 
television seriesProtecting Our Children 
<http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2012/jan/25/protecting-our-children-bbc-documentary>
 shown in 2012 about social work and child protection, with open access for 
over a year being given in Bristol to the programme makers, it is quite 
possible that the secretly (and inevitably slyly) filmed Channel 4 programme 
will concentrate on a presentation of poor and controversial practice and 
disillusioned workers.

This may not be so, and that what is presented will have balance and show what 
is good and going well alongside what is not good. We have to wait to see what 
the programme makers deliver from what they have been fed by the undercover 
social worker.

 But Birmingham is far from alone in having to deal with the difficulties of 
recruiting and retaining an experienced workforce in the context of increasing 
demand amid public sector cuts. This is the national context for children’s 
social services. Will this Dispatches programme give this national context? It 
is a context of more families experiencing greater poverty and difficulties, 
less help for families with children’s centres and other services being cut, 
and with this in part generating an 80% increase in child protection workloads 
for councils at the same time that they are in the midst of a40% reduction in 
government funding 
<http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/dec/15/child-protection-children-s-services-cameron-privatisation>
.

Maybe the programme will be presented as an exercise in whistleblowing, as 
with the shocking exposure through undercover filming of the dreadful abuse of 
disabled people at Winterbourne View. That documentary was clearly justified 
and its impact important, necessary and constructive.

But there are also dangers with an exercise – if this was the intention – of 
making a programme to present to the public a shocking story of professional 
and organisational failures and unacceptable behaviour.

Related: Birmingham children's services to be run by trust following failures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/24/birmingham-childrens-services-run-trust-following-failures>

First there is the potential to encourage and entice comments that will feed 
the storyline. It would be surprising if the programme in production did not 
have a brief and if that brief was not given to the undercover social worker 
doing the filming.

Second it can be exploitative with trust and friendship misused by creating 
the context where off-hand and unguarded comments are made which were never for 
a wider audience. What should be a safe space to offload, have cathartic 
moments, and perhaps be distressed and angry alongside colleagues amid 
stressful and emotionally challenging and confronting work is suddenly found to 
have been the territory for secret filming which is personally undermining and 
threatening. No amount of pixellation or shadowed faces will leave those filmed 
unrecognised, be they service users, colleagues, managers or partners in other 
agencies.

Thirdly, what is filmed will be many times much more than what is shown in the 
programme. There will have been much selection and editing to create a coherent 
programme and storyline. What is shown is likely to support the intention of 
the programme makers. Unlike the BBC series, it may not be wise to expect that 
it will be seen as fair and balanced by those working in Birmingham or indeed 
elsewhere.

Whistleblowing about poor practice and poor organisations should be encouraged 
and promoted. But there is also the danger of losing fairness and balance and 
leaving good people doing difficult jobs bruised and battered and feeling let 
down by a trusted colleague.

It remains to be seen what is delivered by Channel 4 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4>. I hope these fears are unfounded. 
But it may already be that this programme – even before being broadcast – has 
contributed to the delivery of a national political agenda and delayed and 
undermined the improvements which Birmingham needed to make.

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
