
For a small country like Britain, the idea of claiming one of the longest 
footpaths in the world sounds a little ambitious. But that’s what we’re up to 
with the creation of theEngland Coast Path 
<http://www.nationaltrail.co.uk/england-coast-path>, and the proposed 
completion date of 2020 is not too far away. The route will go all the way 
round the English coast, and a quick look at the map of this island nation, 
with its countless inlets, estuaries and jagged bits, shows that the projected 
total length of 2,795 miles is not as outlandish as it sounds.

It’s already possible to walk round the whole of the south-west peninsula, 
from Minehead in Somerset to Poole in Dorset, on the 630-mileSouth West Coast 
Path <http://www.southwestcoastpath.org.uk/>. This accounts for roughly a 
quarter of that target. There are also footpaths along substantial stretches of 
the coasts of Sussex, Kent, Essex, Lincolnshire and Northumbria.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t255%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t255%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc814e9707cbcc7efd95feb294a117c2cd9a1553c%2F0_0_5616_3369%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=England%E2%80%99s%202%2C800-mile%20Coast%20Path%20to%20open%20in%202020&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t255%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=England%E2%80%99s+2%2C800-mile+Coast+Path+to+open+in+2020&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t255%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc814e9707cbcc7efd95feb294a117c2cd9a1553c%2F0_0_5616_3369%2F5616.jpg>
 Part of the established South West Coast Path in Exmoor, north Devon. 
Photograph: Alamy 
Then there is the East Anglian rump of Suffolk and Norfolk. For a walker 
prepared to shuttle between the backs of beaches and the low tops of crumbling 
cliffs, this is perhaps the most dramatic of England’s hinterlands. The sea and 
the land have been fighting it out for ever, with thriving medieval ports like 
Dunwich in Suffolk now beaten back to a handful of streets. The remnants of the 
original Roman settlement are now more than a mile out beneath the waves.

The stretches of English coastline that do not yet have pedestrian rights of 
access are in various stages of negotiation involving landowners, user groups 
and other interested parties on the one hand, and the government’s advisory 
agency, Natural England, and the Department for Environment, Food and Rural 
Affairs on the other. There are 66 such stretches, overseen by eight teams. In 
each case, the process takes about three years and it finds England in its most 
meticulous vein of local democracy: intense consultation, on-path meetings, 
reports, period for objections and examination by independent DEFRA-appointed 
inspector. Finally, after another six to nine months for work on ground issues 
such as silage and drainage, the process produces a Commencement Order.

One stretch that is already up and running – or walking – is the 25-mile 
section between Sea Palling and Weybourne, which is part of the established 
Norfolk Coast path, one of England’s 15 National Trails (the South West Coast 
Path being the longest).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t255%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t255%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb850dc31714e22323045fd0ba3ba4297d7caa9c0%2F0_0_5661_3398%2F5661.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=England%E2%80%99s%202%2C800-mile%20Coast%20Path%20to%20open%20in%202020&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t255%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=England%E2%80%99s+2%2C800-mile+Coast+Path+to+open+in+2020&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t255%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb850dc31714e22323045fd0ba3ba4297d7caa9c0%2F0_0_5661_3398%2F5661.jpg>
 Crumbled defences on Happisburgh’s sea front last winter. Photograph: Alamy 
To come this way is to find yourself right on the frontline of the elemental 
war. In the Norfolk village of Happisburgh, four miles north of Sea Palling, 
people joke grimly that Beach Road is now more beach than road. Around here 
I’ve heard stories of householders having to pay for the removal of their 
collapsed homes; of insurance companies withdrawing cover; of sea-dredging 
being to blame for the currents ripping into the soft shore with extra force; 
of the tidal defences at Bacton gas terminal having a similar effect.

When I first came here, more than 20 years ago, I slept in a B&B from which I 
could hear the sea thudding, almost as if it was in the next room. This time I 
made sure to head a few crucial yards inland, to the Hill House pub in the 
village centre. My bedroom here is a converted signal box for the 
never-completed extension to the Great Eastern Railway.

One man in the village reckoned that if the sea comes just a couple of feet 
higher than in previous winter storms, it could spill over the lip of the dunes 
and flood all the low-lying ground between here and Norwich, nearly 20 miles 
inland.

Alarmist? Possibly, but then this coast is still awash with memories of the 
great floods of 1953, in which more than 300 people lost their lives. It may 
have been a different England – a post-war, monochrome place with Churchill 
still in Downing Street and the young Queen yet to be crowned in the wake of 
her father’s death – but the resonances are fearsomely topical. Infrastructure 
was trashed, bridges swept away, 160,000 acres of land washed out of production 
and £1.2bn of damage in today’s money. A train pulling out of Hunstanton was 
lifted clean off the rails by a following wave, and further south a miracle 
baby floated to safety in her cot.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t255%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t255%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F911f19ef675f85c7c6ed8391208fe3ac4da2ddc7%2F0_0_3129_1878%2F3129.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=England%E2%80%99s%202%2C800-mile%20Coast%20Path%20to%20open%20in%202020&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t255%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=England%E2%80%99s+2%2C800-mile+Coast+Path+to+open+in+2020&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t255%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F911f19ef675f85c7c6ed8391208fe3ac4da2ddc7%2F0_0_3129_1878%2F3129.jpg>
 Overstrand, near Cromer, taken a few years after the 1953 floods. Photograph: 
Robert Smithies for the Guardian 
The echoes of that disaster are almost audible along these massive sand 
fringes, the human responses defiantly, hopefully visible in the groynes taking 
the battle out into the water and the revetments doing their best to shore up 
the flaky little rearguard cliffs.

It’s easy to see why Natural England thinks the 2020 coastal path project is 
an idea whose time has come. Sally Fishwick, senior adviser for coast path 
delivery, points out that in Trimmingham, north Norfolk, a people-counter 
recorded 2,036 walkers on a newly opened stretch of path in the spring of 2014. 
In the same period last year, the number had risen to 3,097.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t255%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t255%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f094e8b9ad35f0e2c975d6f04445d04102ca0df%2F0_21_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=England%E2%80%99s%202%2C800-mile%20Coast%20Path%20to%20open%20in%202020&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t255%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=England%E2%80%99s+2%2C800-mile+Coast+Path+to+open+in+2020&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t255%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f094e8b9ad35f0e2c975d6f04445d04102ca0df%2F0_21_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 The beach at Mundesley. Photograph: Alamy 
To be on foot here is to court a slow hypnosis. Walcott, Broomholm, Paston 
(where the medieval family of that name wrote their famous letters), Mundesley 
(popular with Victorian holiday-makers), Sidestrand, Overstrand … The places 
pass by on their low ledges as the route leans to the left round the long 
shoulder of this embattled land. In the gaps between the towns and villages it 
has as strong a sense of Empty Quarter (the desert in the Arabian peninsual) as 
anywhere in the country.

Then, some 12 miles from my Happisburgh starting point, a bigger protrusion 
comes into view. From a distance it could be an enormous breakwater, until the 
unmistakable contours of an English seaside pier, with a theatre on the end of 
it, harden through the sea air. This is Cromer, jewel of the north Norfolk 
coast, where the crabs come from and the OAPs’ charabancs go to. I stayed at the
Hotel de Paris 
<http://www.leisureplex.co.uk/hotels/22-De_Paris_Hotel_Cromer.html> where, 
although in my sixties, I felt like a boy.

The last eight miles to Weybourne follows the relatively built-up shoreline 
via Sheringham, with its excellent crab restaurants, its throwback Little 
Theatre, itsrestored steam railway line  <http://www.nnrailway.co.uk/>to Holt 
and the indispensable Coasthopper bus plying the route. After all the beaches 
of the day before, the shallow slopes as I look inland seem to have acquired 
the grandeur of Himalayan foothills.
