
An accountant from the home counties has won the right to inherit a Scottish 
baronetcy in a pioneering case where DNA testing proved aristocratic 
entitlement.

The judicial committee of the privy council (JCPC) ruled on Monday that Murray 
Pringle, 74, who lives in High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire, should become the next 
baronet of Stichill.


The seven judges, who are justices on the supreme court in Westminster, found 
against the claims of Pringle’s second cousin, Simon Pringle, who is in his 50s 
and lives in Hastings, East Sussex.

The unusual dispute over the baronetcy, which was created by Charles II 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/mar/08/charles-ii-dimond-jubilee-president>
, was formally referred to the JCPC by the Queen. DNA evidence has never 
previously been used to resolve disagreements over hereditary titles.

A baronetcy is a title granted by the crown; it is not a peerage. Heirs do not 
succeed automatically on the death of the holder and must provide evidence 
proving their relationship to the deceased baronet.

The baronetcy of Stichill – a village near Kelso, Roxburghshire – was formally 
granted in 1683 to Robert Pringle of Stichill and the “male heirs from his 
body”.

The 10th baronet, Sir Steuart Pringle – a retired Royal Marines commander who 
survived an IRA bomb attack – died in 2013 aged 84. Simon Pringle is his son.

But DNA evidence 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/nov/24/baronet-of-stichill-privy-council-rule-dna-evidence>
 obtained from Sir Steuart as part of the Pringle surname project in 2010 – set 
up by Murray to determine the chieftainship of the clan – showed he was not 
part of the male Pringle family line.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m4nc%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m4nc%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60a1288ecd92ddd15b37dfbd49440eab9ae8d8ef%2F121_105_2925_1754%2F2925.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=DNA%20evidence%20proves%20accountant%20is%20true%20heir%20to%20Scottish%20baronetcy&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m4nc%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=DNA+evidence+proves+accountant+is+true+heir+to+Scottish+baronetcy&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m4nc%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60a1288ecd92ddd15b37dfbd49440eab9ae8d8ef%2F121_105_2925_1754%2F2925.jpg>
 Simon Pringle, son of the previous baronet, Sir Steuart Pringle. Photograph: 
Yui Mok/PA 
When that scientific conclusion emerged, Murray began to advance his claim to 
the baronetcy. He argued that Simon should not become the 11th baronet because 
there had been a “break in the line of paternity”.


The problem over the bloodline, it is suggested, arose following the death of 
the eighth baronet, Sir Norman Pringle, in 1919. The judges were told that Sir 
Norman and his wife Florence had three sons, Norman, Ronald – Murray’s father – 
and James.


In 1920, Florence made a formal statutory declaration saying Norman was the 
eldest son of the eighth baronet and was entitled to succeed to the title.


Lawyers for Murray Pringle, whose father was Ronald, argued that the eighth 
baronet was not Norman’s father. Ronald’s son, they said, was therefore the 
rightful successor.


Lawyers for Simon Pringle resisted the claim and questioned whether DNA 
evidence should be used to resolve the family dispute.


Disputed claims used to be referred to a standing committee of the privy 
council, who then advised the Queen on how cases should be resolved. These rare 
cases are now referred to the JCPC.


In its judgment, the JCPC said DNA evidence demonstrated to “a high degree of 
probability” that Norman was not the son of the eighth baronet and that there 
was no legal ground for excluding DNA evidence.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m4nc%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m4nc%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23dc20e4e7a20255595ef823774392b00b44e468%2F0_71_2680_1608%2F2680.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=DNA%20evidence%20proves%20accountant%20is%20true%20heir%20to%20Scottish%20baronetcy&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m4nc%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=DNA+evidence+proves+accountant+is+true+heir+to+Scottish+baronetcy&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m4nc%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23dc20e4e7a20255595ef823774392b00b44e468%2F0_71_2680_1608%2F2680.jpg>
 The judicial committee of the privy council (JCPC) courtroom, where the case 
was heard. Photograph: PR company handout 
On that basis they had concluded that Simon Pringle was not the “heir male” of 
the first baronet. Murray Pringle was the grandson of the eighth baronet and 
the “heir male” of the first baronet and was therefore entitled to succeed.


The judges expressed their sympathy for “the late Sir Steuart Pringle, a 
distinguished officer, who faced an unwelcome challenge in his autumnal years, 
and also Simon Robert Pringle, the heir presumptive, who had grown up in the 
belief that his father was rightfully the 10th baronet and that he would in 
time succeed to the baronetcy”.

The acceptance of DNA evidence in inheritance disputes, the justices observed, 
could have far-reaching implications. “In the past,” they concluded, “the 
absence of scientific evidence meant that the presumption of legitimacy could 
rarely be rebutted and claims based on assertions that irregular procreations 
had occurred in the distant past were particularly difficult to establish.


“Not so now ... DNA evidence [can] reopen a family succession many generations 
into the past. Whether this is a good thing and whether legal measures are 
needed to protect property transactions in the past, the rights of the 
perceived beneficiary of a trust of property, and the long established 
expectations of a family, are questions for others to consider.”
