
‘Resolving protracted crises is the only way out - it’s a blackhole for 
funding’

Sudhanshu S. Singh, chief functionary, Humanitarian Aid 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/aid> International, India
There is only one way out - global powers should try to resolve protracted 
crises which have become a blackhole for humanitarian funding. The conflicts 
absorb a major chunk of funding at the cost of the needs of people affected by 
natural disasters as well as development needs.

‘Create a global SDG tax’

Debabrata Nayak, research associate, Siddha Development Research and 
Consultancy
In every country that committed themselves to the SDGs, we could ask each 
member of the public to pay a small amount to help fund the goals e.g. two 
rupees per person in India. Suppose they were able to generate R1000 per day, 
then we should invest 60% of that onIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> itself and the rest should be 
deposited with the UN.


‘Remove restrictions on aid’

Hannah Mitchell, doctor

Related: We're losing $240bn a year to tax avoidance. Who really ends up 
paying? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/10/were-losing-240bn-a-year-to-tax-avoidance-who-really-ends-up-paying>

Central to SDG 3 is the aim of reducing the global maternal mortality ratio to 
less than 70 per 100,000 live births. Providing access to safe abortions would 
be an easy first step to take towards reducing maternal mortality rates (10% of 
all maternal deaths are linked to unsafe abortions) but restrictions on donor 
aid such as the Helms Amendment, which states that no American foreign aid can 
be spent on provision of safe abortion for women, are preventing funding 
getting through. This is just one example of a funding restriction preventing 
aid from getting to the most vulnerable.

‘Leverage ODA to mobilise other sources of public and private finance’


Diels Herman, programme officer, Flemish Interuniversity Council - University 
Cooperation for Development (VLIR-UOS)
We need to increase domestic resource mobilisation, reduce illicit financial 
flows, and better leverage Official Development Assistance to enhance its 
ability to mobilise other sources of public and private finance. How can it be 
used to create a better investment climate for greater private investment and 
foster development of domestic capital markets in developing countries?


‘Scrap the debt of governments who use their national funds for the SDGs’


Fredrick Kamusiime, trade advisor, Commonwealth Secretariat, Rwanda
Public-private partnerships, using pension funds, hedge funding, and effective 
tax policies will all help raise money. But developing countries must be in the 
driving seat in the implementation of the SDGs, and for governments willing to 
dedicate their national funds to implementation of key SDGs (such as those 
involving climate change), their equivalent debt should be scrapped.


‘Make Corporate Social Responsibility policies compulsory for businesses’


Related: 'The private sector thought it had a divine right to exist' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/24/private-sector-ngo-relationship-walt-macnee-mastercard>

Archana Sinha, Director, Health and Nutrition Initiative, Ashoka Innovators 
for the Public, India
In India, the 2013 Companies Act requires every organisation with a certain 
net worth to spend at least 2% of its average net profit on CSR activities. 
India is the first and only country to have done this. Companies are still 
figuring out how to allocate these funds, but the potential is huge.

‘Increase tax revenues raised from the extractive industries’


Alexandra Malmqvist, communications coordinator, Publish What You Pay
We need to look seriously at tax revenues to contribute to a country’s own 
sustainable development, in particular revenues raised from the extractives 
industries. However, with current agreements and power asymmetries, developing 
countries will struggle to raise adequate funds despite being resource-rich 
nations.

‘India and Israel have demonstrated billions can be raised through diaspora 
bonds’

Benjamin Scheder, graduate student, University of Cambridge
 Expat communities could be vital in providing crucial financing through 
diaspora bonds, for example. India andIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> have demonstrated that through this 
process billions can be raised. Diaspora bonds would not only provide 
additional funds, but also increase the interest and involvement of citizens in 
how the money is spent, increasing accountability and tackling corruption.

‘It’s not just about finding the money, it’s about ownership of the process’


Guy Norman, head of evaluation and research, Water & Sanitation for the Urban 
Poor

Related: Remittances are three times greater than aid – how can they go even 
further? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/11/remittances-three-times-greater-aid-sdgs>

The financing gap in the water and sanitation sector alone has recently been 
estimated at around $27 bn per year over the SDG period. Big number. In 
lower-middle-income countries, domestic resources are going to have to play an 
increasing role, but it’s not just about finding the money, it’s about 
ownership of the process. Commercial thinking is needed: water and sanitation 
utilities need to function as viable businesses, providing services that people 
want to pay for. The second piece of the puzzle is massively increased 
government investment, which was what historically helped Europe and US achieve 
water and sanitation services for all. There are severalways forward 
<http://www.publicfinanceforwash.com/>, ranging from improved tax collection 
capacity at the national level, through to improved systems for allocating and 
efficiently spending public money on water and sanitation, to local tax revenue 
systems (for example, redistributive sanitation tariffs collected through water 
bills).


Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
