
Almost a decade ago, when I still lived in Wales, my friend Joe was driving me 
home from the pub well after midnight on Christmas morning. We had been out 
drinking in Bangor, and he had very kindly offered to take me a couple of 
valleys over from where he lived to drop me off. We were on the winding bit of 
road going into Llanberis that we called “the bends” when I looked up at the 
sky. “Look at the stars,” I said. I had never seen them so clear. Joe pulled 
over and we just stood there, looking. I’ve rarely seen anything like it.

That Snowdonia has just been awarded international dark sky status 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-wales-north-west-wales-34997841> does not, after 
that singular experience, surprise me (though I will admit that when my editor 
mentioned the award to me, I thought at first she meant dark skies during the 
daytime).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ez4k%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ez4k%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff677a31320d34c496ad85df16c3cf4e527054da6%2F0_154_5616_3366%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20praise%20of%20Snowdonia%2C%20a%20land%20of%20legend%20and%20beauty&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ez4k%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In+praise+of+Snowdonia%2C+a+land+of+legend+and+beauty&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ez4k%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff677a31320d34c496ad85df16c3cf4e527054da6%2F0_154_5616_3366%2F5616.jpg>
 Snowdon Mountain Railway. Photograph: Christopher Furlong/Getty Images 
Related: Five of the best scenic bike rides in Wales 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/sep/22/five-best-scenic-bike-rides-wales-snowdonia-pembrokeshire>

The wet Welsh weather is legendary and, growing up surrounded by mountains, I 
often felt as though a mass of black clouds sat atop the valley like a large 
cloth hat, dispensing a permanent wall of drizzle. There’s a saying around 
these parts, that if you can’t see Snowdon, then it’s raining. If you can see 
it, it’s still raining. But when the weather is clear in Snowdonia there is no 
better place to be.


What a place to spend a childhood; we roamed for miles, and hours, on end, 
granted freedom by our parents, provided we avoided the bypass, advice we 
ignored, and came home in time for tea. In the summers we would swim in the 
lakes, ignoring the usual, touristy suspects for what we termed “secret lakes”, 
always a few miles out of the village or up a mountain and usually deserted. 
I’ll never forget the time I saw Llyn Dwythwch – rumoured to be populated by the
Tylwyth Teg (Welsh fairies) – and swam in its cool, clear waters. We would swim 
in the rivers, too, up beyond the waterfalls just below the tracks of the
Snowdon mountain railway <http://www.snowdonrailway.co.uk/> – a not entirely 
safe endeavour because of the strong currents.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ez4k%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ez4k%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69f623168191ad246ab9ad7da7f0f9fb06b2cc6b%2F0_0_3615_5433%2F3615.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20praise%20of%20Snowdonia%2C%20a%20land%20of%20legend%20and%20beauty&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ez4k%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In+praise+of+Snowdonia%2C+a+land+of+legend+and+beauty&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ez4k%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69f623168191ad246ab9ad7da7f0f9fb06b2cc6b%2F0_0_3615_5433%2F3615.jpg>
 Castell Dolbadarn Photograph: Alan Novelli/Alamy 
Another favourite activity was to ride our bikes up Pen-y-Pass, the merciless 
mountains looming over us on either side. To this day, the ruggedness of the 
landscape makes, in my mind, the rolling English hills feel wimpish in 
comparison. Just beyond the boundaries of the park, the industrial quarrying of 
those edifices claimed the lives of my ancestors and made some Englishmen very, 
very rich. Look at a map of the national park and you’ll see a hole in the 
middle –Blaenau Ffestiniog 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/feb/11/blaenau-ffestiniog-snowdonia-national-park>
, excluded on the grounds of ugliness.

Its impossible to be a child in Snowdonia and not feel the presence of Welsh 
history and mythology everywhere you go. From the monster of Llyn Tegid to the 
fate of Cantref Gwaelod, which now lies beneath the waves – though you can 
still hear the church bells ring, they say – the stories I grew up with 
dominated my imagination. (That village, according to legend, suffered an 
accidental drowning; a more deliberate flooding occurred when they drowned
Tryweryn <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Llyn_Celyn> in 1965 to make a reservoir 
for Liverpool).

As children, we were fascinated by the face of the lady of Snowdon, set 
against the single remaining tower ofCastell Dolbadarn 
<http://cadw.gov.wales/daysout/dolbadarncastle/?lang=en>, built by Llywelyn the 
Great, and where we would shimmy up the chimney (or toilet chute, we weren’t 
sure which) to a secret room. Beddgelert, too, was a favourite place, where the 
same Llywelyn was rumoured to have murdered his dog, believing it to have 
killed his son when it was in fact protecting him from a wolf. Above Beddgelert 
is Dinas Emrys, the hill-fort attributed to Vortigern, beneath which I used to 
read over and over of how a young Merlin witnessed the battle between the red 
and white dragons (the red dragon won, obviously).


It’s no surprise that, with my name, the tales of the Mabinogion loomed large 
in my childhood, too. I had a map of Wales on my wall that marked the locations 
of the main stories, and would ask my father again and again to tell them to 
me. Though it wasn’t until adulthood that I learned about the fate of Rhiannon: 
accused of infanticide and cannibalism, and made to sit by the gate of the 
castle and tell her tale to travellers, before carrying them on her back.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ez4k%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ez4k%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a90f9866beca3c1fd39a1a9f22436744ff0d103%2F0_0_4550_2731%2F4550.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20praise%20of%20Snowdonia%2C%20a%20land%20of%20legend%20and%20beauty&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ez4k%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In+praise+of+Snowdonia%2C+a+land+of+legend+and+beauty&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ez4k%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a90f9866beca3c1fd39a1a9f22436744ff0d103%2F0_0_4550_2731%2F4550.jpg>
 Harlech Castle. Photograph: Alamy 
Having grown up there, it is impossible for me to untangle the landscape of 
Snowdonia from the language and culture and history of this part of Wales. It 
feels as though it lurks in my bones. But even those unfamiliar with the place 
and its past will find wonder in this part of the world.

Related: Wales’ perfect new wave: Snowdonia’s inland surfing lake 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/aug/01/surfsnowdonia-surfing-lake-wales-snowdonia>

I meet people all the time who spent their holidays on the beach at Harlech or 
at Betws-y-Coed. “Oh, my family had a holiday cottage there,” they will say, 
sometimes, and I will say nothing of Meibion Glyndŵr or the thorny issue of 
second homes and their impact on the local community. Tourists are welcome and 
come in droves, but leave a property standing empty and you could face double 
council tax. Aged eight, we once crept into a particular cottage that had been 
abandoned for nearly 30 years to marvel at the 1970s decor, canned goods and 
board games, rotting slowly as no one claimed them.


For those who love the outdoors, whether camping, kayaking, bouldering, 
climbing 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/aug/23/how-to-climb-mount-snowdon> or 
wild swimming, Snowdonia is a natural tourist destination. It’s brilliant for 
children, especially those preoccupied with steam trains, as my brother was. The
Fun Centre in Caernarfon <http://www.thefuncentre.co.uk/>, the beaches of the 
Llŷn peninsula 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/gallery/2014/apr/04/cool-holiday-cottages-lleyn-peninsula-wales-in-pictures>
, and theGreenwood Forest Park <http://www.greenwoodforestpark.co.uk/> all lie 
outside Snowdonia’s boundaries but are well worth a visit for families staying 
in the area. There are some excellent pubs, and restaurants too, though 
climber’s caffPete’s Eats <http://petes-eats.co.uk/>, near the park’s 
north-western boundary, will always have a special place in my heart, as will
the large beer garden of the Dolbadarn pub 
<http://www.tripadvisor.co.uk/LocationPhotoDirectLink-g186448-d1312541-i119667186-Dolbadarn_Hotel-Llanberis_Snowdonia_National_Park_North_Wales_Wales.html#73673626>
, framed by foliage and overlooked by the church. There is nowhere on the 
planet that I would rather be on a sunny day. And, of course, when night falls, 
the stars really are quite something.

