
Recipes. They’re seldom controversial. The section of a newspaper, magazine or 
website devoted to what you’re having for your tea isn’t usually the stuff of 
online petitions or open displays of fury (unless you’re arguing over the 
origins of hummus, cultural appropriation or the best paella). But all hell 
broke loose this morning afternews that the BBC was “archiving” thousands of 
its recipes on BBC Food 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/17/save-bbc-recipe-archive-petition-signed-by-more-than-25000-people>
 (part of the broader conversation about the Beeb’s “distinctiveness” from the 
commercial sector) was discussed on Radio 4.

“The BBC is removing 11,000 recipes and people can’t cope,” squealed the 
Metro. Well, not exactly: users will still be able to access recipes if they 
have the dish names or urls – they will be “archived or mothballed” (given the 
uproar, the BBC has produceda guide to exactly what’s happening 
<http://www.radiotimes.com/news/2016-05-17/what-exactly-is-happening-to-bbc-online-recipes>
).

The hashtag #bbcrecipes has been trending all morning with the likes of 
Suzanne Moore and Owen Jones using it to make wider points about defending the 
BBC (“They can take our lives, but they can never take our #bbcrecipes! 
<https://twitter.com/OwenJones84/status/732518649525735424>”); while journalist 
and author Chris Eaking 
<https://twitter.com/ChrisEakinNews/status/732487061857411073> and Jack Monroe 
tweeted on the value of free recipes 
<https://twitter.com/mxjackmonroe?lang=en-gb> in an age of processed food, 
obesity and poverty. There were alsoseveral imaginative offers 
<https://twitter.com/MxJackMonroe/status/732538215949815809?lang=en-gb> to 
reproduce the archive on other platforms (some more seriousthan others 
<https://twitter.com/radiowarburton/status/732517372804923392>).


What’s cheering in the furious reaction to this row (we’ll leave aside the big 
conversations about theBBC <http://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> and licence 
fees, access to free content and competition) is how valued recipes are. With 
this in mind, we’ve put together our own best loved and most popular recipes, 
with picks from editors at Observer Food Monthly and the Observer Magazine, 
Weekend Magazine, Cook and G2, including current recipe-givers Nigel Slater, 
Yotam Ottolenghi, Felicity Cloake, Rachel Roddy, and some from our own rich 
archive, which includes the likes of a fresh faced Heston Blumenthal.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ja5x%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ja5x%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19e20d5ab72ab3d2bbfecb3544a5174f8ce120d8%2F0_144_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Never%20mind%20the%20BBC%20%E2%80%93%20here's%2020%20years%20of%20top%20Guardian%20recipes&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ja5x%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Never+mind+the+BBC+%E2%80%93+here%27s+20+years+of+top+Guardian+recipes&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ja5x%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19e20d5ab72ab3d2bbfecb3544a5174f8ce120d8%2F0_144_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 A taste of summer: gooseberry pie from Simon Hopkinson. Photograph: Jason Lowe 
for the Observer 
Notable recipes over the years

Back in 2002, when people still wrote letters, Weekend’s mailbox was full of 
praise for this recipe fromHeston Blumenthal for triple-cooked chips 
<http://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2002/jun/22/weekend7.weekend10>. Much 
imitated, never beaten.

The Observer’s Nigel Slater is a man of many recipes. This grilled chicken 
with basil butter 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2005/aug/14/foodanddrink.features26> 
one from 2005 recently prompted him to say “I sometimes think it’s my favourite 
recipe of all”.

Felicity Cloake’s method of road-testing techniques and recipes from a 
multitude of different chefs in pursuit of perfection is always popular, but 
never more so than when applied to everyday dishes. Witness thiscolumn, 
including her technique for frying the perfect egg ran (and ran.) 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2012/nov/08/how-to-cook-the-perfect-fried-egg>

In December 2011, Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall did us all a favour when he 
sharedhis mum’s shepherd’s pie 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/dec/09/favourite-recipes-crowd-fearnley-whittingstall>
 recipe.

An all-time favourite, from 2007 – Dan Lepard’s groundbreaking 100-page guide 
to baking <http://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/bakingguide> featured 
everything you need to know, from pastry techniques to bread recipes (including 
“the easiest loaf in the world”).

Although Yotam Ottolenghi is often singled out for long lists of ingredients, 
this paneer recipe 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/apr/04/paneer-recipes-yotam-ottolenghi-paratha>
, from April 2014, features justtwo ingredients.

Nigella Lawson’s rhubarb meringue pie 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/28/20-best-spring-recipes-part-4-alice-waters-nigella-lawson>
, featured in OFM, combines orange and rhubarb to spectacular effect beneath a 
luscious meringue topping.


At Christmas, it’s become traditional to look towards Nigella or Delia, and 
thischilled out Christmas from the former 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/13/nigella-lawson-chilled-out-christmas-recipes>
, featuring sweet potato macaroni cheese, drunken noodles and lemon pavlova, 
was anything but traditional.


Jamie Oliver’s classic tomato spaghetti and strawberry and ginger nut ice cream
 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2009/may/12/jamie-oliver-budget-meal-recipes>
 signalled the start of a real interest in budget recipes back in 2009 …

... and talking of cooking on a budget, in 2005 in Weekend Magazine, Angela 
Hartnettshowed us all how to cook well for a fiver a day 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2005/jul/16/foodanddrink.shopping> …

… and they didn’t get more budget than Jack Monroe’s 9p bean burger – born out 
of having just a can of kidney beans in the cupboard “and a three-year-old who 
wanted a burger” – which was one of the first and most popular recipes she ran 
in the Guardian back in 2014.This video 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-kIaAUsX3Xg> talks about the inspiration 
behind cooking on a budget and includes the recipe.

Back in 2009, Jane Baxter introduced many of us to the joy of stuffed 
courgettes 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2009/jul/18/riverford-summer-recipes>
in her summer recipe special.


Simon Hopkinson’s gooseberry pie 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/jun/15/simon-hopkinson-new-recipes-summer-food>
, commissioned specially for OFM in June 2014, is one of his all-time favourite 
summer recipes and, he said, “almost exactly how my mother made one of her 
sugary fruit pies”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ja5x%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ja5x%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fecb40a87781288572b5d25f4e8226065acf86aff%2F0_160_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Never%20mind%20the%20BBC%20%E2%80%93%20here's%2020%20years%20of%20top%20Guardian%20recipes&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ja5x%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Never+mind+the+BBC+%E2%80%93+here%27s+20+years+of+top+Guardian+recipes&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ja5x%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fecb40a87781288572b5d25f4e8226065acf86aff%2F0_160_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 Not just any beef sandwich: a twist on an old favourite from Nuno Mendes. 
Photograph: Jill Mead for the Guardian 
How do you improve a beef sandwich? If you’re chef Nuno Mendes, you marinate 
the meat in its own fat, cook it in oil and then serve it with … yep, some more 
fat 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/02/nuno-mendes-late-winter-recipes-steak-sandwich-piri-piri-sprouts-cake>
. This recipe isn’t the healthiest we have ever run, but it was one of the most 
popular.

“Pie is a mystery restrained by pastry. Believe me, pie is your friend,” said 
Fergus Henderson, presenting this excellent St John beef and kidney pie 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/feb/26/20-best-comfort-food-recipes-part-3>
 in OFM’s 20 best comfort food recipe special in 2014. Indeed.

Jane Baxter and Henry Dimbleby’s falafel recipe 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/mar/20/worlds-best-falafel-recipe-henry-dimbleby-back-to-basics>
 from Cook will take you as close to falafel perfection as you can get without 
a plane ticket to Egypt.

Adam Liaw touched a nerve when he published the five simple dishes and the 
mistakes you’re making with them 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/australia-food-blog/2015/oct/15/adam-liaw-five-simple-dishes-and-the-mistakes-youre-making-with-them>
 on Guardian Australia’s food blog last year.

In 2013, as reports of the New York Cronut craze hit the UK, G2 got Edd Kimber 
(winner of the first Great British Bake Off) to come up withhis own fauxnuts 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/jun/05/edd-kimber-lemon-vanilla-fauxnuts-recipe>
. When Dominque Ansell revealed that theofficial recipe took three days to make 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/shortcuts/2014/oct/07/official-cronut-recipe-dominique-ansel-three-days>
, Edd’s just became more appealing.

Rachel Roddy’s recipes are exercises in simplicity, and this twice-cooked 
broccoli dish 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/03/twice-cooked-broccoli-repassati-recipe-rachel-roddy>
 is a case in point. Six ingredients, 20 minutes, eminently accessible, and 
reliably delicious.

Readers voted this chickpea, courgette and pepper stew 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/nov/18/nigel-slater-chickpea-courgette-and-pepper-stew>
 byNigel Slater one of their all-time favourites.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ja5x%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ja5x%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F885850de8d49ae880f50ce924b9c784f5ea9db03%2F0_0_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Never%20mind%20the%20BBC%20%E2%80%93%20here's%2020%20years%20of%20top%20Guardian%20recipes&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ja5x%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Never+mind+the+BBC+%E2%80%93+here%27s+20+years+of+top+Guardian+recipes&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ja5x%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F885850de8d49ae880f50ce924b9c784f5ea9db03%2F0_0_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
 Just perfect … chocolate cake from Felicity Cloake. Photograph: Felicity 
Cloake for the Guardian 
Cook’s 10 best sandwich recipes feature from a couple of years ago included the
droolsome Borough Market’s three-cheese toastie 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/apr/20/10-best-sandwich-recipes> 
fromBill Oglethorpe.

“You may wonder if the world needs another recipe for chocolate cake – but I 
found it surprisingly hard to track down one that actually tasted, as well as 
looked the part,” saysFelicity Cloake. “This, in my opinion, is the definitive 
teatime chocolate cake 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2012/nov/21/how-to-cook-the-perfect-chocolate-cake>
.”

But just in case you need one more … this easy cocoa cake 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/may/16/cocoa-chocolate-baking-recipes-birthday-cake-brownies-ruby-tandoh>
 from Ruby Tandoh is one every parent needs up their sleeve come birthday cake 
time.

For something rich and spicy, try Nigel Slater’s red aubergine curry 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/oct/16/nigel-slater-warming-autumn-suppers>
, originally published in November 2009 and included in OFM’s most popular 
recipe special.

Chef Jeremy Lee’s hake with herb sauce 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/jul/29/20-best-summer-fish-dishes-part-2-ofm-turbot-hake-lobster>
 was “as joyous to behold as it is to eat,” he said. OFM included it in their 
best summer fish special and readers agreed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ja5x%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ja5x%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ddd18a6edc2c280fc55de78cd76819ef8c4db03%2F0_39_4134_2481%2F4134.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Never%20mind%20the%20BBC%20%E2%80%93%20here's%2020%20years%20of%20top%20Guardian%20recipes&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ja5x%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Never+mind+the+BBC+%E2%80%93+here%27s+20+years+of+top+Guardian+recipes&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ja5x%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ddd18a6edc2c280fc55de78cd76819ef8c4db03%2F0_39_4134_2481%2F4134.jpg>
 Crushed Puy lentils with tahini and cumin, by Yotam Ottolenghi. Photograph: 
Colin Campbell for the Guardian 
Some of our most popular recipes published in the last three years

How to make the perfect pulled pork, by Felicity Cloake  
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2013/jan/31/how-to-cook-perfect-pulled-pork>


Yotam Ottolenghi’s lentil recipes 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/jan/03/lentil-recipes-yotam-ottolenghi>

10 best cauliflower recipes, Cook 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/apr/06/10-best-cauliflower-recipes>

Rachel Kelly’s recipes for leftover chicken 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/23/21-recipe-ideas-for-leftover-roast-chicken>

Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall’s recipes for sourdough 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/may/10/hugh-fearnley-whittingstall-recipes-sourdough>

Gwyneth Paltrow’s juice recipes 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/sep/07/gwyneth-paltrow-juice-recipes>

How to mix the perfect Old Fashioned, by Felicity Cloake 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2014/jul/17/how-to-mix-perfect-old-fashioned-cocktail>

Adam Liaw’s 10 recipes you should be able to make from scratch by the time 
you’re 30 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/australia-food-blog/2015/sep/30/adam-liaws-10-dishes-you-should-be-able-to-cook-by-the-time-youre-30>


10 foods to make from scratch, by Dale Berning Sawa 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/01/cheap-food-diy-homemade-ingredients>

Jack White’s perfect guacamole 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/shortcuts/2015/feb/09/jack-white-stripes-guacamole-recipe-perfect-avocado>

Three soup recipes that beat bone broth, by Hen Clancy 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/06/the-bone-broth-backlash-three-soups-that-dont-take-days-to-make>
