
Jimmy Erickson went to prison for a violent felony when he was 25. When he was 
released, at 46, he felt reformed and determined to build a new life. A month 
and a half later, he got a job with Butterball Farms, a Michigan company with a 
track record of hiring former prisoners.

Erickson has now been with Butterball for seven years and has received several 
promotions. He married and bought a home. At first, Erickson says, he battled 
against a constant anxiety that everyone knew about his criminal history and 
judged him for it. So he concentrated on proving himself from the moment he was 
hired.

“At first I was apprehensive about trying to form relationships with people, 
but I had the mindset that this was my opportunity,” he says. “I’d work my 
shift and whenever they needed someone to stay over, I volunteered. Anything 
they asked me to do, I did it.”

Butterball represents a growing number of companies hiring former inmates. 
Major corporations like Target, Home Depot,Walmart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/wal-mart> and Koch Industries have joined 
more than 100 cities and 19 states in passing “ban the box” legislation to 
prohibit employers from requiring job applicants to check a box indicating 
whether they have a criminal record. Checking that box often leads to automatic 
exclusion from consideration without the opportunity to explain the nature of 
the crime.

Instead, more companies wait until later in the interview process to ask about 
criminal history, a change aimed at giving those with a record a fair chance to 
compete for jobs. In November, the Obama administration followed suit, taking 
executive action to “ban the box” in federal hiring. And, just last week, a 
bipartisan congressional task force on prison reform released a report 
<http://colsontaskforce.org/final-recommendations/Colson-Task-Force-Final-Recommendations-January-2016.pdf>
 calling for stronger employment and other programs to help ex-offenders 
reenter society.

Related: Exclude criminal records from job applications, companies urged 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/oct/15/exclude-criminal-records-from-job-applications-companies-urged>

Most people coming out of the prison system don’t have the smooth transition 
to employment that Erickson had. A2009 study 
<http://www.nij.gov/topics/corrections/reentry/pages/employment.aspx> found 
that up to 75% of ex-offenders were unemployed as long as a year after release. 
Employer surveys show thatalmost 90% of large companies do employee background 
checks 
<http://www.cbpp.org/research/full-employment/strategies-for-full-employment-through-reform-of-the-criminal-justice>
, and most are not willing to hire someone with a criminal record.

“Six or seven years ago, employers looked at you like maybe you had a screw 
loose when you talked about hiring ex-offenders,” said Joyce White Vance, US 
attorney for the Northern District in Alabama who has worked with the 
Birmingham Business Alliance to encourage hiring of ex-offenders. “Now it’s 
much more part of the mainstream conversation.”

Law enforcement officials, civil rights organizations and business leaders say 
giving former inmates a better shot at employment is good for business and 
society. More than 65 million people in the US have a criminal record, from 
low-level property crimes to violent felonies. More than 600,000 are released 
from prison every year <http://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/p14.pdf>. Excluding 
such a large group of people from the employment pool, they say, is impractical 
and bad for the economy, costing tens of billions of dollars annually 
<http://www.cbpp.org/research/full-employment/strategies-for-full-employment-through-reform-of-the-criminal-justice%23_ftn26>
.

Some businesses simply see it as the right thing to do, realizing that those 
who have criminal records face an uphill battle to find jobs and frequently end 
up back in the legal system partly because they couldn’t find work to support 
themselves. In fact, cutting the skyrocketing cost of running prisons, which 
house nearly 2.4 million inmates nationwide, has been a major incentive for 
finding employment for former prisoners, Vance says.

Employers are finding that by being more inclusive, they are benefiting from 
employees like Erickson who are determined to excel.

“We’ve found that just by us giving that opportunity, a lot of people so 
appreciate it that what we get back as a company in return is much greater than 
what we ever gave in the beginning,” says Bonnie Mrozcek, chief talent officer 
for Butterball Farms.

Butterball is a leader in the effort to get more so-called returning citizens 
into stable employment. But its original motive wasn’t strictly altruistic, 
says Mroczek – 20 years ago, Butterball was having trouble filling positions 
and wanted to expand the applicant pool. The company discovered ex-offenders 
were great workers with lower turnover rates on average than other employees.

The company began to champion for hiring former inmates but found strong 
resistance from the business community. So in 2012, Butterball, based in Grand 
Rapids, started the 30-2-2 initiative 
<https://csgjusticecenter.org/nrrc/posts/leaders-of-michigans-30-2-2-initiative-make-case-for-hiring-employees-with-criminal-records/>
, which set out to get 30 employers in its hometown to hire a minimum of two 
former inmates and track their job performance for two years, hoping to show 
other businesses that ex-offenders could be desirable, competitive applicants.

These days, companies in the initiative are also working with job placement 
services and staffing agencies to find suitable job candidates. Now the 30-2-2 
program isbeing adopted in New Orleans 
<http://www.nola.com/business/index.ssf/2013/12/us_attorney_kenneth_polite_urg.html>
.

Related: Ex-inmates find honest jobs courtesy of banker and colleague, the 
bank robber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jan/21/ex-prisioner-jobs-social-entereprise-blue-sky>

Matching businesses with potential employees remains a significant challenge 
overall. Agencies that offer skill training to former prisoners historically 
lack the staff to build a strong relationship with local businesses and place 
job seekers. But that’s changing with more funding from the US Department of 
Labor to fund those liaisons, says Stephanie Akhter, the re-entry and 
employment project manager at the Council of State Governments Justice Center.

A patchwork of state and federal regulations that are intended to ensure 
public safety have also created a major barrier for ex-offenders to find work. 
Those rules typically impose restrictions on voting, access to housing, public 
benefits and jobs, but they sometimes create unintended consequences. A classic 
example is that many states prevent formerly incarcerated people from working 
as barbers and stylists, even though these are common job training programs in 
prisons. A national study by the American Bar Association 
<http://www.abacollateralconsequences.org/> identified a staggering 38,000 
state and federal statutes that impose such consequences on people convicted of 
crimes, the majority pertaining to employment.

Many businesses remain wary about hiring people with a criminal past because 
they worry that ex-offenders pose safety risks, says Madeline Neighly, a senior 
policy advisor for corrections and reentry at CSG Justice Center. Some 
businesses also cite concerns about getting sued by other employees for failing 
to conduct a good background check if the former inmates they hired turned out 
to be problem workers. But, according to Neighly, there is little evidence that 
this represents a significant risk, and some states now have regulations to 
shield employers from negligent hiring claims.

“It’s natural for people to have a stigma, but once you expose hiring managers 
or executives to real people, it diffuses the stigma,” says David Rattray, 
executive vice president for education and workforce development at the Los 
Angeles Chamber of Commerce, which is part of a pilot program,Back on Track LA 
<https://oag.ca.gov/news/press-releases/attorney-general-kamala-d-harris-announces-los-angeles-recidivism-reduction>
, that helps ex-offenders get jobs and education. The chamber hired two former 
inmates and hosted a summit last fall to line up support for the program. It 
also takes members on tour of the local jail to dispel stereotypes.

“It’s not a simple ‘just add water’ solution,” Rattray says. “But if we do it 
at the LA Chamber, I think we will get more and more employers learning from 
other employers and us, and choosing this option.”
