
Q I would like to paint the splashback areas in our kitchen to use as 
chalkboards for messages, etc. The only blackboard-style paint I can find is in 
black or dark green, and none of the major manufacturers seems to do colour 
matching in this kind of paint.
Sarah McKelvie


A Brilliant idea! However, as blackboards need to be easily visible, with a 
high contrast between the surface and chalk, paint companies only sell black or 
dark green. Try International Paints' Magnetic Blackboard Paint (
www.international-paints.co.uk <http://www.international-paints.co.uk>), which 
gives you the option of chalk or magnets. But you will end up with chalk dust 
all over the place (it won't taste like flour), and as it has a high volatile 
organic compound (VOC) level, it might off-gas toxins on to your 
food-preparation surfaces, so it's only recommended for areas with high 
ventilation. You could try a magnetic paint fromwww.magneticpaintshop.co.uk 
<http://www.magneticpaintshop.co.uk>, which sells a dark grey iron filling 
paint that can be coated in a colour of your choice: just add fridge-magnet 
letters.

Q I have failing eyesight, and one major area of irritation is the morning 
ritual of shaving and grooming in a steamy bathroom with a fogged-up mirror 
balanced on the windowsill. Would I be better off with a flat or a magnified 
mirror - and if it's magnified, how strong should it be? A shaving mirror with 
a built-in light might be good, as our bathroom is pretty gloomy. Lastly, can a 
film be applied to the glass to keep it fog free?
David Siddle


A A good bathroom mirror will have side lights so that your face is lit from 
straight on, cutting out heavy shadows from overhead lights which make you look 
tired and saggy. It also helps if you can see yourself clearly, but warm steam 
condenses on a cold mirror surface. The perfect solution could be a side-lit 
heated mirror, which uses an electrical heating element to warm it to 30C, 
preventing condensation - it can be operated by the bathroom light or a 
touch-sensitive switch (www.heatedmirrors.co.uk <http://www.heatedmirrors.co.uk>
)

Â· If you have an interior design question for Oliver Heath, email him at 
ask.oliver@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.oliver@observer.co.uk>
