
As the scale of the recent catastrophe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/07/the-great-barrier-reef-a-catastrophe-laid-bare>
 on the Great Barrier Reef has become widely known, a clamor has occurred 
across Australia.

People are grieving and furious about the devastation of our reef. I have lost 
count of the number of distressed people I have talked with, distraught at what 
has happened, hardly knowing what to say.

All over the country, people are justifiably angry. At Greenpeace, we’ve 
established a mockKids’ party 
<https://act.greenpeace.org/ea-action/action?ea.client.id=1845&ea.campaign.id=51146>
 for the duration of the election period, to give voice to the wisdom of 
children as one way of speaking about the unspeakable.

But, amid the uproar, some voices have been noticeably absent. It seems that 
in the face of what Prof Justin Marshall of the University of Queensland has
called 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/planet-oz/2016/apr/21/mourning-loomis-reef-the-heart-of-the-great-barrier-reefs-coral-bleaching-disaster>
 “Australia’s biggest ever environmental disaster”, the nation’s big business 
bosses have little to say.

Related: The Great Barrier Reef: a catastrophe laid bare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/07/the-great-barrier-reef-a-catastrophe-laid-bare>

Since the shocking revelation 
<http://www.bbc.com/news/world-australia-35914009> in March that the reef had 
experienced the worst bleaching event on record, the Business Council of 
Australia has issued press releases on various topics including the
Australia-China CEO round-table 
<http://www.bca.com.au/media/statement-on-the-australia-china-ceo-roundtable-april>
, the release of theAustralian Competition and Consumer Commission’s review of 
the east coast gas market 
<http://www.bca.com.au/media/bca-statement-on-the-accc-review-of-the-east-cost-gas-market>
 and thelaunch of the commonwealth’s smart cities plan 
<http://www.bca.com.au/media/bca-statement-on-governments-smart-cities-plan->. 
But the BCA has not seen fit to make a single media statement on the fate of 
the reef.

Not content with silence, the Minerals Council of Australia has gone one step 
further, calling for more of the same. In the midst of the unprecedented 
devastation to the reefcaused 
<https://theconversation.com/great-barrier-reef-bleaching-would-be-almost-impossible-without-climate-change-58408>
 by global warming, the MCA found its voice tocommend 
<http://www.minerals.org.au/news/adani_mining_lease_approvals_welcome> the 
granting of the Carmichael coalmine leases as a “sensible decision”.

The MCA has also continued 
<http://www.minerals.org.au/news/bipartisan_recommendations_for_environmental_deductible_gift_recipients_are_sensible_and_timely>
 to vocally attack the hundreds of thousands of Australians who speak up for 
the reef through its campaign against the tax-deductible status of certain 
environmental charities.

According to MCA doublespeak, what the Carmichael approvals really show is 
that coalmining projects “can work alongside the continued protection of unique 
environmental areas like the Great Barrier Reef”.

This is typical of the “climate makers 
<http://tomburke.co.uk/2012/01/23/tom-burkes-political-commentary-durban-talks-were-not-a-failure-for-climate-policy/>
”, the bosses of those thermal coalmining companies and others who produce and 
burn the fossil fuels that make the greatest contribution to global warming. It 
is the climate makers whose reputations now bear the mark of the white coral.

But not all mining is the same. The MCA currently represents the full gamut of 
the industry – from the more responsible extractives at one end of the spectrum 
to the fossil fuel mining reef bleachers at the other. Too often the agenda of 
the MCA appears to be driven by the latter.

Do all of the member companies 
<http://www.minerals.org.au/mca/mca_member_companies> of the MCA support the 
positions taken by the body? What about theassociate members 
<http://www.minerals.org.au/mca/mca_member_companies>, which include 
universities, accountants and law firms? Do they support attacks on nature 
charities? Do they really want to attach their reputations to supporting the 
specific development of a giant coalmine like Carmichael?

Related: How to show 'the stench of death' on the Great Barrier Reef – Behind 
the Lines podcast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/audio/2016/jun/16/how-to-show-the-stench-of-death-on-the-great-barrier-reef-behind-the-lines-podcast>

Hidden behind the corporate veil are the actual human beings who make the 
decisions. Running every coalmining company are flesh and blood directors. What 
motivates these people? I have never metBob Cameron 
<http://www.centennialcoal.com.au/About-Us/Board-of-Directors.aspx> or David 
Moult <http://www.centennialcoal.com.au/About-Us/Board-of-Directors.aspx> of 
Centennial Coal, for example, but I wonder what drives them? OrRobert Millner 
<http://www.afr.com/business/mining/coal/why-new-hopes-robert-millner-will-keep-buying-coal-20151006-gk2dxo>
 andShane Stephan 
<http://www.newhopegroup.com.au/content/about/leadership/shane-stephan> of New 
Hope Coal? Or any of the other thermal coal company bosses. How do they 
rationalise their work? Do they feel any personal culpability for the rise in 
global temperatures or the increase in ocean acidification? Are they remotely 
bothered by the stories of studentsweeping 
<http://www.scientificamerican.com/article/bleaching-hits-93-percent-of-the-great-barrier-reef/>
 at the bleaching of the reef? Does the white coral ever haunt their dreams?

Maybe the top brass of the coal companies genuinely don’t care. After all, in 
strict economic terms, the Great Barrier Reef is merely an inconvenient 
business externality for the coal industry. A couple of years ago, the then 
chief executive of the (now defunct) Australian Coal Association, Dr Nikki 
Williams, apparently saw the collapse of Arctic sea ice asworth a dismissive 
quip <http://t.co/7qijGP9al4> in a speech to the Sydney Institute. 

The fossil fuel mining industry has been in moral freefall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/apr/15/australiansforcoal-is-the-latest-sign-of-an-industry-in-values-freefall>
 for some time. The Guardian’sexposé  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/13/peabody-energy-coal-mining-climate-change-denial-funding>
of the extent of US coalminer Peabody’s funding of climate denial is just the 
latest example. But the rest of Australia’s mining businesses do not have to be 
dragged down by association with the bleachers.

There is a relevant precedent in Australia. Rio Tinto has just celebrated the 
20th anniversary 
<http://www.riotinto.com/documents/Rio_Tinto_Why_Agreements_Matter.pdf> of its 
historic turn to negotiation instead of confrontation with Australia’s 
Indigenous peoples after the Mabo high court decision and the Native Title Act. 
That change of direction by one big company – which was then followed by others 
– transformed politics.

It is in the interests of those mining companies who do not dig out climate 
and reef destroying fossil fuels to differentiate themselves. The 
future-oriented and responsible wing of the mining industry can take a 
different path.
