
An ad campaign featuring girls using slimming pills that promise dramatic 
weight loss to prepare for a beach holiday has been banned after 200 complaints 
that it promoted an unhealthy body image.

XLS Medical, a slimming aid readily available online and in stores, including 
Boots, ran an ad showing two already slim girls discussing an upcoming holiday 
via text messages and pictures.

One girl explains how she took the product, which promises “up to three times 
more weight loss versus dieting alone”, in preparation for the beach trip. Her 
friend complains that she will “never fit into [her] holiday wardrobe”.

The campaign, which ran on TV and YouTube, finishes with the girls on holiday 
posing together for a photo.

The Advertising Standards Authority <http://www.theguardian.com/media/asa> 
received 200 complaints, including from British Naturism, that the campaign was 
irresponsible for promoting an unhealthy body image, particularly among young 
girls.

Omega Pharma, the parent company of XLS Medical, said the product can help 
slimming as part of a calorie-controlled diet and healthy lifestyle. The 
company said it was not about women with low body confidence, but about 
“holiday preparation” and “elation” at the common goal of reaching a “healthy 
target weight”.

Related: Corset ad promising 'sexy, tiny waist' banned for being irresponsible 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/13/corset-ad-banned-velform-mini-waist-asa>

The ASA disagreed, saying the ad presented the girl who was concerned about 
fitting into her holiday wardrobe as “needing to lose weight despite her 
already slim and healthy appearance”. It said the ad was socially irresponsible 
and was about the character having a poor body image.

“The combination of her slim build and healthy weight created the impression 
that, despite her healthy physical appearance, weight loss was still 
necessary,” said the ASA. “The overall impression created by the ad presented 
an irresponsible approach to body image and confidence. In that regard, we 
concluded the ad was socially irresponsible and, therefore, breached the 
[advertising] code.”

Last month, the ASA banned a TV ad showing women using a corset to squeeze 
their waists to a “sexy, tiny” size 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/13/corset-ad-banned-velform-mini-waist-asa>
 for being irresponsible.

Last year, Protein World’s controversial “beach body ready” 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jul/01/protein-world-beach-body-ready-ads-asa>
 campaign was cleared by the ASA despite nearly 400 complaints that it 
objectified women.
