
Ruth Davidson <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/ruth-davidson> has launched 
the Scottish Conservative manifesto with a candid admission that it is not a 
programme for government but a programme for a strong opposition, and pledged 
to succeed where Labour has failed in holding the Scottish National party to 
account.

Starting with a bracing acknowledgement that “the SNP are miles ahead in any 
poll you care to mention”, while insisting theConservatives 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> were heading for their best 
ever result in May’s Scottish elections, Davidson did away with the usual 
political conventions and told activists in Glasgow she was applying for the 
vacancy of leader of a strong opposition.

Setting out the manifesto’s 10-point programme for opposition, she insisted a 
“genuine clash of ideas” in parliament led to better government.

Calling on Scotland’s “strong sense of fair play”, she added: “The Labour 
party has had nine years, six leaders and no success in holding the SNP to 
account … it’s time for somebody else to get a go.”

In an appeal to voters across the political spectrum, she said: “I know there 
is a huge yearning out there for somebody to do that job. And I also know that 
there are many people who have never voted for us before – or ever thought 
they’d consider it.”

Related: Scottish Conservatives best opposition to SNP, says Ruth Davidson 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/07/scottish-conservatives-best-opposition-to-snp-says-ruth-davidson>

Underlining her party’s unionist credentials, Davidson pledged to oppose a 
second Scottish referendum no matter what the outcome of June’s EU referendum. 
Directly matching the SNP’s plans for a summer independence drive, Davidson 
announced her own initiative to state the positive case for the union.

“The legacy from the referendum is that we on the pro-UK side have allowed ‘no 
thanks’ to be seen as a constant negative. If we are to counter the SNP’s 
constant misinformation, this must change. The case for independence is dead. 
The case for the union must now be made,” she said.


Beyond the constitution, the manifesto promised to campaign against two 
controversial SNP policies: the Named Persons Act andcuts to college places 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/scottish-independence-blog/2014/sep/24/nicola-sturgeon-faces-cuts-and-hard-choices-as-domestic-realities-bite-at-holyrood>
.

It called for NHS spending to rise by a minimum of 2% each year, and argued 
for an additional £300m to be invested in improving mental health treatment 
over the next parliament.

Davidson also set out plans to build 100,000 new homes during the next five 
years, including a £1bn pledge to improve energy efficiency in homes. This was 
immediately welcomed byWWF Scotland <http://www.wwf.org.uk/scotland/>, the 
conservation charity.

The charity’s director, Lang Banks, said: “Their commitment to support all 
homes to reach a minimum ‘C’ energy performance standard would help the 1.5m 
households currently living in a cold home. It’s good to see proposals to 
address the emissions that come from heating, but continued support for nuclear 
and fracking is a distraction whenScotland 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> could be the EU’s first renewable 
electricity nation.”

Related: Nicola Sturgeon's tax plan will cost Holyrood £900m, says IPPR 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/13/nicola-sturgeon-tax-plan-holyrood-ippr-snp>

On tax, the key policy battleground between Labour and the SNP 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/13/nicola-sturgeon-tax-plan-holyrood-ippr-snp>
, the manifesto offered no surprises, reiterating the support for deficit 
reduction and insisting it is “vital Scotland retains competitive rates of 
income tax which are no higher than in the rest of the UK”.

Davidson had been expected to contest the Holyrood elections as the only 
leader campaigning for cuts in the new Scottish rate of income tax, which came 
into force at the beginning of April, but was forced to abandon her plans after 
learning of George Osborne’s intention to make far deeper spending cuts.

The manifesto also pledged to push the SNP to make further savings in the 
public sector, despite Scotland’s local government association,COSLA 
<http://www.cosla.gov.uk/>, describing the latest round of cuts as 
“undeliverable”.

It also included plans to amend popular SNP policies on tuition fees and 
prescription charges 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/oct/16/scotland-nicola-sturgeon-cuts-prescription-charges>
, setting a new graduate contribution for tuition fees at £1,500, only payable 
once the graduate is earning more than £20,000. Davidson has argued that the 
gradual reintroduction of prescription charges would raise £65m by the end of 
the next parliament to invest in frontline NHS services.

Spanning new and traditional elements of Tory support, the 48-page document 
included a pledge to support a review of the Gender Recognition Act as well as 
to stand up against land reform measures “that undermine individual property 
rights”.


Davidson’s personal popularity remains strong, and polling for the Times on 
Tuesday revealed that Scottish voters view her as more genuine, competent and 
trustworthy than the Labour leader, Kezia Dugdale, and believe she would be 
better at holding the SNP to account.

However, despite the host of fresh candidates being paraded at Wednesday’s 
manifesto launch, concerns remain over whether Davidson has successfully 
detoxified the Tory brand in Scotland. The same polling for the Times found 
that the Conservatives had dropped a point on the constituency vote since last 
month, falling to 18%, while Labour has gained two, rising to 21%. On the 
regional list vote, the Conservatives were also down one point and Labour up 
two, putting them at 18% and 19% respectively. The SNP stood at 50% in the 
constituency vote and 45% on the regional list.
