
I first met Pat in New York when I was working on the New York Times in 1987. 
They wanted a famous writer to give a tour of Green-Wood Cemetery. I suggested 
her and she agreed, and we went on this weird little walking tour. After that 
we corresponded often, and she invited me to stay for the weekend. She was 
living in this beautiful, remote part of Switzerland, near Lugano, in a house 
she had largely designed herself. From the outside it was a low, white-winged 
building that looked a bit like the Pentagon, with no windows. Inside it was a 
magnificent space that appeared to be nothing but windows. I’m not sure how she 
managed to pull off the same trick in her house that she did in her work. Quite 
sensibly she had built a separate wing for guests, far far away from where she 
worked and lived. She was a lovely hostess, but her regular diet consisted of 
scotch, beer and cigarettes. There was an ominous-looking ham hock in a pot; 
I’m a vegetarian, so that wasn’t very promising. By the end of the weekend I 
was delirious because I was starving.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F26%2Fcarol-video-review&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F26%2Fcarol-video-review&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F26%2F1448556028959%2FKP_615987_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carol%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F26%2Fcarol-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Carol+-+video+review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F26%2Fcarol-video-review&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F26%2F1448556028959%2FKP_615987_crop_640x480.jpg>
 Carol - video review 
I had brought along my then-girlfriend, who was of white South African 
heritage, and Pat made some assumptions about her that weren’t true. Her first 
question was: “What do you think about this one man one vote thing then?” My 
reaction was the same as if I’d been with an elderly relative – you’re 
embarrassed and try to say: “Let’s not have that conversation again, Pat.” Like 
many Americans who choose to live in Switzerland, she complained a lot about 
taxation. That seems to have fostered certain other conservative views – 
racism, I suppose. She was in the vanguard of support for Palestinian rights, 
and this often teetered into outright antisemitism.

Pat refused to engage with me for six months after the visit, until finally I 
picked up the phone and called her. Apparently I had deeply offended her by not 
commenting on the paintings that were hanging on the walls, some of which she 
had done herself. I hadn’t said anything because I didn’t like them. You don’t 
expect people who are so convinced of their own standing to be so sensitive in 
other ways. What I learned from that was: always comment on the hostess’s 
accoutrements.

Pat didn’t suffer fools at all, but she was very funny, in the way only 
incredibly dark people can be. She was always looking for things that could 
turn her mind in a curious way. You can’t be even a reasonably good writer, let 
alone a great one, while holding on to your nihilism. She could be great in 
company, and she was generous with her time and advice, always asking to read 
what I wrote, which in my experience is quite rare.

People say: “Don’t meet your heroes”, but I was not disappointed. She was 
complex in exactly the way that real human beings are complex. She died in 
February 1995, on the night I was opening one of my plays in the UK – a play 
I’d dedicated to her. I felt as if there was some devilish angel perched on my 
shoulder. It was a friendship full of coincidences and synchronicities, and I 
treasure it.

Phyllis Nagy wrote the screenplay for Carol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/carol>, out now
