
Cycling advocates are split over the effectiveness of new laws that have come 
into effect inNew South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales>.

Cyclists are now required to carry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/21/nsw-cyclists-must-carry-id-and-will-face-same-fines-as-drivers-under-new-laws>
 ID – although this will not be enforced until 2017 – while fines for 
infringements such as failing to stop at red lights or pedestrian crossings 
have risen to up to $425.

Related: Hold on to your helmets, here comes the latest anti-cycling 
legislation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/27/hold-onto-your-helmets-here-comes-the-latest-anti-cycling-legislation>

A minimum one-metre clearance zone for motorists overtaking riders has also 
been introduced.

New South Wales police issued more than 450 infringement notices to cyclists, 
including for not having bells, ina one-day blitz 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/26/cyclists-fined-393-times-during-new-south-wales-police-blitz-on-thursday>
 in Sydney’s CBD last Thursday.

Advocates are split on the measures, with some raising broader concerns 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/22/advocates-split-over-nsw-governments-changes-to-cycling-laws>
 about NSW roads minister Duncan Gay’s apparent antipathy towards cyclists.

Gay has described himself as “the biggest bike-lane sceptic in the government” 
and described inner-city Sydneysiders as “anti-roads zealots”.

Bicycle Network chief executive Craig Richards has said the new laws are a 
barrier to bike riding, and questioned their effectiveness in increasing road 
safety.

Related: Police fine hundreds of cyclists as harsh penalty regime due to begin 
in NSW 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/26/cyclists-fined-393-times-during-new-south-wales-police-blitz-on-thursday>

We’d like to hear how the new laws have affected you as a driver or a cyclist. 
Do you feel they are likely to be effective in keeping all road users safe? Or 
do they not go far enough?

Share your stories by clicking on the “Contribute” button on this article, and 
we’ll feature the most relevant responses on the site.


You can also contribute using the Guardian app – search for “GuardianWitness 
assignments”.

 * GuardianWitness <https://witness.theguardian.com/> is the home of readers’ 
content on the Guardian. Contribute your video, pictures and stories, and 
browse news, reviews and creations submitted by others. Posts will be reviewed 
prior to publication on GuardianWitness, and the best pieces will feature on 
the Guardian site. 