
Covert racism and discrimination persist in the UK’s colleges and 
universities, according to new film, Witness, commissioned by the University 
and College Union (UCU). The project, initiated by the UCU Black Members’ 
Standing Committee, chronicles the experiences of the union’s black members.

Related: How much does your university do for racial equality? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jan/19/how-much-does-your-university-do-for-racial-equality>

Gurnham Singh, a lecturer in social work, explains: “There is a massive 
abundance of what are called micro-aggressions … it’s like death by a thousand 
cuts. When you experience them all the time, those micro-agressions have a 
cumulative effect.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzX0oiheri48&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzX0oiheri48&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzX0oiheri48>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzX0oiheri48&media=>
 Gurnham Singh 
Kirsten Forkert, a lecturer in media theory, says: “There is an assumption in 
higher education that it is already a progressive workplace and problems like 
racism don’t exist. So when you try to raise this issue the response is: ‘We 
don’t have to deal with issues like that.’”


She adds that that job insecurity and casualisation present more of a worry 
for ethnic minority staff. “There is a sense that your face doesn’t fit,” she 
says.

Gargi Bhattacharyya, professor of sociology, says it is “very difficult for 
staff in further and higher education to explicitly talk about racism at work”.

“People use codes, or only talk about it in a small group, but in the wider 
workplace people find it difficult to use the ‘R’ word,” she explains.

Related: Forget equality and diversity, my university only cares about 
appearances 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jan/29/forget-equality-and-diversity-my-university-only-cares-about-appearances>

Josephine Kwhali raises the issue of supposedly unconscious bias. “I don’t 
think some of it is unconscious, I think that’s a get out clause,” she says. 
“After years of anti-racist debates, policies, strategies, universities banging 
on about increasing diversity ... if it still is unconscious, there really is 
something worrying about what it will take for the unconscious to become 
conscious.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DY6XDUGPoaFw&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DY6XDUGPoaFw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DY6XDUGPoaFw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DY6XDUGPoaFw&media=>
 Josephine Kwhali 
The UCU, which is holding a day of action 
<https://www.ucu.org.uk/action-against-workplace-racism> against workplace 
racism on 10 February, has also released the results of asurvey 
<http://www.ucu.org.uk/media/7861/The-experiences-of-black-and-minority-ethnic-staff-in-further-and-higher-education-Feb-16/pdf/ucu_bmesurvey_report_feb16.pdf>
 of more than 600 black members, which found that although direct 
discrimination on the basis of colour is rare, more insidious forms of racism 
are commonplace. The results show that black staff are less likely to take up 
high-grade posts than white colleagues, and are more vulnerable to the stresses 
caused by bullying at work.

The latest figures 
<http://www.runnymedetrust.org/news/594/272/Black-Students-Must-do-Better-than-White-Students-to-get-into-University.html>
 from the Runnymede Trust show that the overwhelming majority of professors – 
92% – are white, with just 15 black academics in senior management roles across 
the entire British university system.

Related: HE leaders: 'There ought to be far more black professors' 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2011/jun/20/professor-harry-goulbourne-south-bank-university>

One respondent to the UCU survey wrote: “Black and minority ethnic staff, who 
are often more qualified than their counterparts, are often bypassed through 
indirect action or behaviours.”

Meanwhile, seven out of ten respondents reported that they were sometimes or 
often subject to bullying and harassment from managers.


One said: “In the past 15 months my line manager has threatened me with 
disciplinary action on four occasions and started a grievance against me once. 
None of his threats have been taken up by the institution, which also refused 
the grievance. At our last staff meeting he referred to me as ‘unprofessional’”.

When asked to rank the best measures to challenge racism, “effective sanctions 
against perpetrators” was the preferred option, followed by “improved support 
for black staff”, and “better training for senior staff”.

 * Watch the film in full:
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSGOMEXQe63E&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSGOMEXQe63E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSGOMEXQe63E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSGOMEXQe63E&media=>
Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
