
If you missed out on tickets to see Benedict Cumberbatch playing Hamlet, don’t 
despair. A new book,Benedict Cumberstitch 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/324279/>, contains 15 
cross-stitch patterns of the actor, including one of the “Alas, poor Yorick” 
scene, complete with skull. So now you can stitch your own hunky Hamlet and 
keep him under your pillow. Other gems include Cumberbatch with an otter, 
Cumberbatch photobombing and Cumberbatch dancing withMichael Fassbender 
<http://michael-fassbender-online.net/>.

Related: Share your Benedict Cumberbatch fan art with us 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/sep/14/share-your-benedict-cumberbatch-fan-art-with-us>

The book’s author Colleen Carrington, a cross-stitch designer and big 
Cumberbatch fan, has been stitching since the age of eight (she is now 32). “It 
is really easy, very relaxing – and thoroughly addictive,” she says. For those 
who didn’t learn at school, all you really need to know is that x-shaped 
stitches are used to form a picture on a gridlike fabric. Each pattern will 
tell you what size fabric you need; what “count” it should be (how many 
stitches per inch); how many strands of thread to use (up to six); and which 
colours. Then it’s just a case of counting stitches.

Cross-stitch is traditionally associated with Home Sweet Home-type folk art or 
embellished napkins, but it is rapidly losing its old-fashioned image. A new 
generation of stitchersshare patterns on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Cross-Stitch-Patterns/143935322318569>, sell 
their designs onEtsy <https://www.etsy.com/uk/market/cross_stitch_pattern>, and 
meet up to stitch socially, including atMr X Stitch <http://www.mrxstitch.com/>
’s hangouts inManchester 
<http://www.mrxstitch.com/about/mr-x-stitch/workshops-presentations/x-stitch-hangout-manchester/>
,Bedford 
<http://www.mrxstitch.com/about/mr-x-stitch/workshops-presentations/x-stitch-hangout-bedford/>
 andLondon <http://www.drinkshopdo.com/whats-on/2014/march/mr-x-stitch-hangout>
. These stitchers aren’t embroidering tablecloths or doilies; they’re making 
slogan T-shirts, quirky cushions and, over atUrban Cross Stitch, designer 
deckchairs 
<http://www.urban-cross-stitch.com/index.php?route=product/category&path=9>. 
Some turn treasured photographs into cross-stitch, using software such as PC 
Stitch, KG-Chart or Win/MacStitch. And if they do make samplers, they are 
likely to have rather rude messages, like those atSubversive Cross Stitch 
<http://subversivecrossstitch.com/blog/>.

Start practising now, and you can stitch Sherlock in time for the Christmas 
special. Come to think of it, a framed version would make rather a nice present 
for a fellow fan. 

Benedict Cumberstitch by Colleen Carrington is published by Kyle Books on 24 
September
