
Name: 3nder.

Age: Two.

Appearance: Alphanumeric-stringy.

What the hell is it? A BBC3 spin-off of EastEnders? A madly meaningless brand 
name for a new soft drink, a la 7Up? An old-skool Grauniad typo?It’s an app 
that allows people who are interested in tr0ili3m to get in touch with each 
other.

What? Troilism. Threesomes.

Oh, so it’s Tinder <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/tinder> for people 
who are already bored with the people they met on Tinder?No! Hush! It’s 
absolutely nothing like Tinder.

Are you sure? Yes. Founder and CEO Dimo Trifonov says it’s pronounced 
“Three-ender” 
<http://finance.yahoo.com/news/tinder-match-group-iac-lawsuit-against-dating-app-tinder-for-threesomes-hinges-on-pronunciation-of-3nder-174355239.html>
.

That makes sense, and I think that’s how I’d say it too. But it also looks 
like it could be “Thrender” or “Thrinder”. Rhyming with …Shh! Match Group, 
Tinder’s owner, agrees with you and issuing 3nder for trademark infringement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/23/tinder-sues-threesome-app-rival-3nder>
, citing anarticle 
<http://nypost.com/2015/10/23/tinder-for-threesomes-gets-500000-investment/> in 
which Trifonov is quoted as saying that it “can be pronounced ‘Thrinder’ to 
rhyme with Tinder”.

Related: Tinder sues threesome app rival 3nder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/23/tinder-sues-threesome-app-rival-3nder>

Isn’t he banged to rights, then? Although only by one party, in this case. Not 
necessarily. “Can be” is not the same as “officially known as”, is it? It’s 
optional. “True to our openminded values, we embrace all the various 
pronunciations,” says 3nder’s latest press release.

Still, it does seem a bit like they could have been enjoying some benefit on 
Tinder’s etymological coattails …Nonsense. 3nder has disbursed £5,000 on 
marketing, and it’s clearly been money well spent. Revenue is up 1,000% and the 
user base up 30% in the last year.

£5,000? But that’s nothing. No one ever went broke underestimating the 
willingness of the public to bump uglies in unlikely combinations.

Hmm. What is the legal requirement to prove trademark infringement? That the 
typical consumer would reasonably confuse the offending mark with the 
plaintiff’s mark.

Will the hormone-drenched brain processing centres and dilated pupils of 
either set of app users be affecting their vision, d’you think?Doubtless the 
judge will take all this into consideration, along with any side effects of 
chlamydia and gonorrhoea medication before he swipes left or right with his 
verdict.

Do say: “What a 3lling case!”

Don’t say: “Doesn’t Tinder <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/tinder> 
rhyme with Grindr too? And was released six months later, looking suspiciously 
like a Grindr for straights?”
