
Children working in Indonesia’s tobacco fields are being exposed to acute 
nicotine poisoning and serious safety hazards as child labour continues 
unabated in the industry according to anew report by Human Rights Watch. 
<https://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/report_pdf/indonesia0516web_0.pdf>


The world’s fifth-largest tobacco producer,  
<http://faostat3.fao.org/browse/area/*/E%20(>Indonesia has more than 500,000 
tobacco fields feeding the national and international tobacco markets. While 
international and domestic laws prohibit minors from performing hazardous work, 
thousands of children continue to work in tobacco fields saysHuman Rights Watch 
<https://www.hrw.org/>, which interviewed 130 children about working conditions 
on small-scale farms across the country.

Related: Silence far from golden for child labourers in the mines of Uganda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/20/child-labour-uganda-gold-mines-silence-far-from-golden>

Indonesia’s national labour laws prohibit children under the age of 15 from 
working and children under 18 from performing hazardous work, including work 
where they might be exposed to harmful chemicals.

Despite this, Human Rights Watch says that its researchers found children as 
young as eight being routinely exposed to nicotine, toxic pesticides, extreme 
heat and other dangers as a result of their work cultivating and harvesting 
tobacco leaves.

Children interviewed for the report in four of Indonesia’s tobacco growing 
regions complained of vomiting, nausea, headaches and dizziness – side-effects 
that the group says are consistent with acute nicotine poisoning, which occurs 
when nicotine is absorbed through the skin while handling tobacco, and could 
have lasting adverse effects on a child’s brain and physical development.

As well as exposure to nicotine poisoning, children interviewed by the human 
rights group came into regular contact with pesticides, fertilisers and other 
chemical agents without adequate protection. Only a few children said they wore 
any protective equipment while handling tobacco or using dangerous chemicals.

Indonesian tobacco companies and multinational firms purchase tobacco grown in 
Indonesia. Although the majority of tobacco grown in Indonesia is used for 
domestic production, in 2013,Indonesia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia> exported tobacco worth about 
$200m (£137m).

Tobacco grown in farms across the country often enters domestic and 
international supply chains through a complex chain of middle-men, tobacco 
leaf-buyers and farming co-operatives.


Human Rights Watch says that the failure of domestic and international buyers 
of Indonesian tobacco to monitor and track their supply chains meant that it 
was impossible for them to ensure that their products were not made with 
hazardous child labour.

“Tobacco companies shouldn’t contribute to the use of hazardous child labour 
through their supply chains,” saysMargaret Wurth 
<https://www.hrw.org/about/people/margaret-wurth>, children’s rights researcher 
at Human Rights Watch. “When tobacco companies don’t even know where the 
tobacco they purchase has come from, there’s no way they can ensure children 
haven’t put their health at risk to produce it.”

Related: Carrying bricks, picking potatoes: all in a day's work for Syrian 
children in Lebanon | Nick Grono 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/02/carrying-bricks-picking-potatoes-work-syrian-refugee-children-lebanon>

The International Labour Organisation (ILO) defines hazardous work 
<http://www.ilo.org/ipec/facts/WorstFormsofChildLabour/Hazardouschildlabour/lang--en/index.htm>
 as “work which … is likely to harm the health, safety or morals of children”.
The UN body estimates that there are up to 1.5 million children working in 
Indonesia’s agricultural sector, which includes tobacco as well as rubber and 
palm oil. 
<http://www.ilo.org/jakarta/areasofwork/WCMS_126206/lang--en/index.htm>


According to the World Bank, just under 12% of Indonesia’s rural population 
lives below the national poverty line 
<http://data.worldbank.org/country/indonesia>. Many of the children interviewed 
by Human Rights Watch for its report said that they worked in the tobacco 
fields to contribute to the family income.

Human Rights Watch is calling for the Indonesian government to update its list 
of hazardous occupations for children to explicitly prohibit any work that 
involves direct contact with tobacco.
