
Even if the public are uninterested in Jeremy Corbyn’s attitude towards “the 
media”, then journalists certainly are.

Over the past couple of days I’ve noticed several queries on Twitter about the 
new Labour leader’s likely media policy. There was a clear indication that he 
does not plan to follow the established rules of engagement with the mainstream 
media on Sunday morning, when he declined an invitation to appear on the Andrew 
Marr Show –his new deputy, Tom Watson, stepped in 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/13/tom-watson-mandate-labour-deputy-leader-trident>
.

Related: Tom Watson urges Corbyn to hold Labour debate on Trident and Nato 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/13/tom-watson-mandate-labour-deputy-leader-trident>

Instead, Corbyn attended the Camden and Islington NHS Mental Health Trust fun 
day in central London 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2015/sep/13/corbyn-prepares-his-shadow-cabinet-as-blunkett-and-mandelson-warn-of-labour-crisis-politics-live#block-55f563d1e4b09cf135ec9d72>
, giving a speech to a small crowd in what he described as a his “first 
official engagement” since becoming party leader.

— Jeremy Corbyn MP (@jeremycorbyn) September 13, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/jeremycorbyn/status/643020742414737408> 
Attended & spoke at Camden & Islington NHS Mental Health Trust's Fun Day 
-important annual community engagement eventpic.twitter.com/sZO81K6yGT 
<http://t.co/sZO81K6yGT>
 <https://twitter.com/jeremycorbyn/status/643020742414737408> 
In many ways, it is as one would expect of a man who has had anything but a 
good press throughout his parliamentary career. He doesn’t much care for 
newspapers.


Why should he? Like all leftwingers, especially those prepared to stand up for 
unpopular causes, Corbyn has suffered from a mixture of marginalisation and 
demonisation.

Being marginalised – meaning ignored – has also meant that his TV appearances 
have been few and far between. Again, that has hardly endeared him to 
mainstream broadcasters. So his single statement about the media during his 
leadership campaign,made to the Financial Times 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/5e7c3ca6-4999-11e5-9b5d-89a026fda5c9.html>, amounted 
to just three sentences:

I think there is far too much concentration in the hands of too few and so I 
would look at that again. Diversity in media is something that is intrinsic to 
a democratic society. We do not want the whole media owned by one person.

This was interpreted, possibly correctly, as an intention to tackle Rupert 
Murdoch’s concentration of media ownership 
<http://www.pressgazette.co.uk/content/corbyn-signals-intention-tackle-murdochs-concentration-media-ownership>
. But, of course, Corbyn will need to win the next general election to turn an 
intention into action.

On his website there is a piece, written just before the London mayoral 
election in 2008, in which Corbyn argued that“the role of the print media needs 
to be seriously challenged” 
<http://jeremycorbyn.org.uk/articles/media-dirty-tricks/>.

He was particularly concerned about what he detected as pro-Boris Johnson and 
anti-Ken Livingstone coverage of the contest in theLondon Evening Standard 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/london-evening-standard>.

Corbyn wrote: “While there’s nothing wrong with the forensic examination of 
any candidate’s policies or record, there is something deeply disturbing about 
the way in which the media have obsessed themselves with Livingstone, while the 
shallow banality of Johnson’s rather flimsy policy pronouncements remain 
unchallenged.”

It might be expected of a man of the left that he sees some virtues at the 
very least in Britain’s public service broadcaster. But he will not have been 
overly impressed with last Monday’s BBC Panorama,which his supporters regarded 
as something of a hatchet job 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/jeremy-corbyns-team-send-complaint-to-bbc-over-its-hatchet-job-panorama-programme-10495955.html>
. Several described it as an establishment smear and Corbyn’s team argued that 
it was factually inaccurate and complained to the BBC to demand an apology.

It is unclear whether that programme was the reason for Corbyn pulling out of 
a planned appearance on Sunday’sAndrew Marr 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/andrewmarr> Show.

Nor will Corbynites have been amused by the piece to camera in the BBC news 
bulletins on Saturday by its political editor, Laura Kuenssberg. She suggested
Labour <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> had not learned lessons 
from its past.


What are we therefore to make of Corbyn’s future relationship with the media? 
Most newspapers will continue to deride him and will continue digging deep into 
the archives to discover material about him they regard as embarrassing.

One paper he can look to for support is the Morning Star, the daily that takes 
its editorial line from the Communist Party of Britain. The paper, believed to 
have a circulation between 10,000 to 20,000, published a rare Sunday edition 
celebrating his election win –“Jeremy Storms to Victory” 
<https://twitter.com/suttonnick/status/642785206479548416> – and editor Ben 
Chacko joined Marr on BBC1 for his paper review.
— Nick Sutton (@suttonnick) September 12, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/suttonnick/status/642785206479548416> 
Victory Sunday Special edition of Morning Star: Jeremy storms to victory 
#tomorrowspaperstoday 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/tomorrowspaperstoday?src=hash> #bbcpapers 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/bbcpapers?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/fckASQzVLA 
<http://t.co/fckASQzVLA>
 <https://twitter.com/suttonnick/status/642785206479548416> 
Perhaps the Daily Mirror, having supported Andy Burnham 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/andyburnham>, will build bridges. The 
Guardian and the Independent are likely to offer impartial coverage. But Corbyn 
will not be cosying up to the Sun, à la Tony Blair. He will not make the 
mistake of posing with a copy of the paper, as Ed Miliband did. And he will not 
cooperate with the Daily Mail.

Rightwing papers will treat him as they did Michael Foot 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/michael-foot> and Neil Kinnock. And he 
probably accepts that there is nothing to be done on that front. But will he 
dare to advance a media policy based around ownership redistribution? Will it 
include a demand that Murdoch’s UK company divests itself of certain titles?

Despite his new deputy, Watson, not sharing his politics, he will find that 
they hold very similar views about the press.

In a speech in December last year, Watson – a supporter of the Hacked Off 
campaign <http://www.theguardian.com/media/hacked-off-campaign> – accused the 
press of operating“like a mafia 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2014/dec/04/tom-watson-the-intimidating-press-operates-like-a-mafia>
, intimidating here, bribing there, terminating careers when it suits them and 
rewarding their most loyal toadies.”

He also scorned the regulator, the Independent Press Standards Organisation, 
set up by publishers.

Corbyn and Watson are going to have a torrid time. That may enhance their 
standing within the Labour movement, but the relentless drip-drip-drip of 
negativity in the mainstream press will surely have an effect on the 
uncommitted centre ground.

At least, in Scotland, Corbyn has one strong press supporter 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2015/aug/20/daily-record-joins-the-morning-star-in-supporting-jeremy-corbyn>
, the Daily Record. Conceivably, that could win back Labour votes from the SNP.
