
At 5am on the day of the eviction university student Mary Nadunga woke her 
three children, fed her baby and started packing their belongings into a hired 
van. At 10.45am the bailiffs arrived and handed her a paper declaring the 
family officially homeless.

“I was vacuuming because I wanted to leave the place clean and they told me to 
stop and give the keys to the landlord. It was at this moment it hit me that we 
were actually homeless. I cried but I told myself to stop and be strong,” she 
says.

Nadunga was in the final year of a BSc honours degree in health and social 
policy at London Metropolitan University (LMU) and it was just before a 
deadline for assignments. And she is not the only one. A survey by LMU last 
month found that homelessness among students is a hidden problem many are too 
ashamed to admit.

It found students sleeping on floors and couches, sharing homes with friends 
and relatives, in hostels or in local council emergency accommodation. Patrick 
Mulrenan, a senior lecturer in housing and inclusion at LMU, who with 
colleagues Simon Cox and Julia Atkins conducted the survey, says: “I was 
shocked by the scale and experiences of homelessness.” They surveyed 
undergraduates at just one of LMU’s 10 schools – the school of social 
professions – and found 27 students homeless.

Many are parents returning to education to better their lives, who end up in 
poor-quality temporary accommodation and are moved frequently, often far away 
from the university, says Mulrenan. “Some were travelling two to three hours to 
get here. Most cried in the interviews because it was the first time they had 
admitted being homeless. They had been too proud to tell their friends or even 
their families,” he says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yj5c%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yj5c%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95bef81c5a926f32000a1f90ab5839d83a22cf95%2F1690_384_2192_2192%2F2192.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hidden%20homeless%3A%20the%20students%20ashamed%20to%20admit%20they%E2%80%99ve%20nowhere%20to%20sleep&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yj5c%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hidden+homeless%3A+the+students+ashamed+to+admit+they%E2%80%99ve+nowhere+to+sleep&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yj5c%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95bef81c5a926f32000a1f90ab5839d83a22cf95%2F1690_384_2192_2192%2F2192.jpg>
 Patrick Mulrenan, senior lecturer at London Metropolitan University, found 27 
homeless students in just one of the university’s 10 schools 
The increase in homelessness has coincided with a rise in the number of mature 
students taking advantage of student loans to get a degree and better jobs. But 
with no solid income or families or friends to guarantee their rents, they 
struggle to find a place to live.

Mulrenan found it wasn’t a problem only for mature students, however. Young, 
single students had been put on the streets when landlords sold properties, or 
because they had been unable to provide the rent guarantees private landlords 
demanded.

Melita Warwick, 23, from Donegal in Ireland, was made homeless in her first 
year of an LMU degree in social work. “The landlord sold the flat and evicted 
us in the January of my first year,” she says. “We found another place, but two 
days before we were due to move in they told us to put the rent and deposit 
into a strange account and we became suspicious. It was a con and so we didn’t 
pay but I had nowhere to live. I ended up crying on the doorstep of a former 
LMU student and he let me stay for a while. It was very difficult doing my 
assignments and I got the worst marks for them.”

The new student maintenance loans for living costs of up to £8,200 a year or 
£10,702 in London are supposed to make it possible for anyone to attend 
university, regardless of income and background. But universities have been 
selling off their accommodation and signing agreements with private companies 
to build higher-end accommodation to attract rich international students. 
Poorer students are being left to the mercy of the private rental market, says
Unipol <https://www.unipol.org.uk/home>, the non-profit student accommodation 
organisation. In London the ownership of student accommodation changed from 30 
to 50% privately owned between 2011-12 and 2015-16, it says.

Related: Home or away – is student accommodation becoming a luxury? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/may/26/student-accommodation-university-live-parents>

Martin Blakey, Unipol chief executive, is not surprised by the LMU finding. 
“It’s hard to get figures on homelessness because universities don’t monitor it 
but I strongly suspect that it is a problem not just for LMU,” he says. “Even 
in Leeds, when we hold viewings for family accommodation we find that people 
want to move in within days. When we ask about their present contracts, they 
are often extremely vague about where they are living. In London, student 
accommodation is being left to the market, so special groups, such as students 
with families, need greater help and support if they re to survive in the 
market-driven jungle.”

Mulrenan believes he and his colleagues have found the tip of an iceberg. 
“Just today two more came forward. Given what we have found, we believe 
homelessness among students will be a problem for post-1992 universities with a 
non-traditional intake in any area with high housing pressures,” he says.

Housing <https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing> is the second biggest 
problem brought to the University of East London’s student money, advice and 
rights team. “It comes close after problems funding childcare,” says acting 
manager Debbie Lindsay. “Once they have student loans they lose some of the 
other benefits they may have been getting. If students are evicted they find it 
very hard to get back in because they need guarantors, fees and deposits.”

The students’ stories are heartbreaking, says Mulrenan. “They are determined 
to get a degree to better their lives and make their families proud. They told 
us ‘I look at my children and I want them to be proud of me’ and ‘my father 
tells everyone that his daughter is getting a degree’ and ‘I’m staying strong 
because I want to better myself and set a good example to my children.’”

Nadunga was living in Edmonton Green, north London where her older children, 
aged 13, nine and seven, were settled in schools. On eviction day the council 
found them temporary accommodation in Feltham, west London, a 27-mile journey 
by car or between two and three hours by public transport.

“We went to the council housing office and they told us we were moving to 
temporary accommodation in Feltham and gave us a map. We had never heard of 
it,” she says.

It took three trains to get to LMU and the children’s schools. “The house was 
nowhere near a bus stop so we had to get a taxi to the station. By the end of 
that week everyone was absolutely exhausted. We had no friends here, we knew no 
one. We felt isolated and depressed,” she says. But the story has a happy 
ending because after two months, they found a place to rent back in Edmonton 
Green and Nadunga is due to graduate next month.

Related: Soaring student rents push college accommodation to brink of crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/aug/15/soaring-student-rents-college-accommodation-crisis>

LMU student Sharon Henry and her daughter Sade were made homeless in Acton, 
west London, when their landlord sold their flat. “How I passed my first and 
second year at university I do not know. We had to move three times. Your 
concentration level drops, you get stressed, you cry,” she says. “I am not 
quarrelling about university fees. The government is doing me a favour by 
giving me a student loan and I really appreciate it. In Jamaica I could never 
afford to go to university,” says Henry, who came to England 20 years ago and 
is a care worker.

Though she was given notice by her landlord, Ealing council said it could do 
nothing until the day she was evicted. Sade, 16, says: “We had to get our 
things out before the bailiffs came and we couldn’t carry everything so we lost 
lots of stuff. We went back but the door was locked.”

The family was given a room in a hostel in Hillingdon, west London, which 
meant Sade had to leave home at 6.30am to get to school. After two months they 
were moved to temporary accommodation in nearby Hayes, after Sade’s school 
intervened with social services because a male caretaker at the hostel was 
entering the room uninvited.

Eighteen months later they are still in the former council-owned maisonette 
that now belongs to a private landlord. The walls and ceilings have large 
patches of black mould, the roof leaks and there are periodic rat infestations 
and boiler breakdowns. Despite the housing problems, Sade achieved 13 GCSEs 
last year and her mother graduates with a BSc honours degree in community 
development and leadership next month.

LMU has welfare and housing staff but few of the homeless students had 
approached them. “We can’t solve the housing shortage but we need to give a 
clear message to students that there is nothing to be embarrassed about,” says 
Mulrenan. “All universities have to provide information on groups accessing 
their courses and it would be really useful to have homelessness monitored.”
