
With the EU referendum <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> 
drawing near, we continue to quiz our expert panel with small business’ 
questions on Brexit. This week they discuss the plight of the self-employed in 
the event of an out vote:

I’m a self-employed UK citizen but I would like to move to another EU country 
to freelance – how might Brexit affect me doing that?

If you have a question about the impact of the EU referendum, you can submit 
it here. 
<http://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/mar/15/question-brexit-ask-expert-panel-eu-referendum>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tz63%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tz63%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbec6ceda03dd627a798451c86dc62c7b43ea2004%2F0_135_1449_1811%2F1449.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I'm%20self-employed%20%E2%80%93%20would%20Brexit%20stop%20me%20from%20freelancing%20in%20another%20EU%20country%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tz63%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%27m+self-employed+%E2%80%93+would+Brexit+stop+me+from+freelancing+in+another+EU+country%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tz63%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbec6ceda03dd627a798451c86dc62c7b43ea2004%2F0_135_1449_1811%2F1449.jpg>
 Photograph: Jakob Lessin 
Sebastian Dullien 

Senior policy fellow at the European Council on Foreign Relations 
<http://www.ecfr.eu/> and professor of international economics at HTW Berlin, 
University of Applied Sciences.

As with so many questions concerning Brexit, the exact answer depends on what 
kind of deal the British government would negotiate with the rest of the EU 
after leaving the union.


If Britain would secure a deal similar to that of Switzerland, then 
potentially not much would change for self-employed who want to move to the EU. 
As Swiss citizens are allowed today to start working on a self-employed basis 
in the EU, so would British citizens.

The agreement with Switzerland includes a symmetric freedom of movement of 
both workers and self-employed between the EU and Switzerland. Not only can the 
Swiss work in other EU member states, EU citizens can also settle and work in 
Switzerland. It is not yet clear whether Britain would seek such an agreement 
after leaving the EU.

At least some of those campaigning for Brexit emphasise the potential to limit 
the mobility of workers between the EU and Britain. If this became the British 
stance in the negotiations for a post-Brexit partnership with the EU, it is 
difficult to imagine that the EU will grant British workers (and British 
self-employed people) full access to the single market while the immigration of 
EU citizens to the UK is limited.

The EU made it very clear after the Swiss referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/14/switzerland-implications-referendum-curbs-immigration>
 calling for alimit to immigration from the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/10/switzerland-talks-eu-immigration-referendum>
 that such an asymmetric move would not be acceptable. There is no reason why 
Britain should be treated more favourably than Switzerland here.

Hence, if Britain wants to limit migration into the UK after a vote for 
Brexit, self-employed Britons will have a much harder time moving to one of the 
remaining EU countries as well.
 Photograph: PR 
Simon McVicker

Director of policy and external affairs at IPSE <https://www.ipse.co.uk/>. He 
is also a board member of EFIP, the European Forum of Independent 
Professionals, which represents the self-employed at EU level through targeted 
research and advocacy.

Britain’s membership of the EU means UK citizens are entitled to freelance 
<http://ec.europa.eu/social/main.jsp?catId=457> in any of the 27 other member 
states. Each country has its own rules on self-employment for non-EU citizens, 
and while each is different, most require a work permit in order to freelance 
there. In both France and Germany, for example, potentialnon-EU freelancers 
<http://ec.europa.eu/social/main.jsp?catId=470> need to prove that their 
business will benefit those countries. The freelancer also has to prove they 
can finance the business entirely by themselves (by means of a bank statement 
with a significant number of zeros). However, if you can satisfy these 
requirements, there can be “fast-track” systems of sorts, which can be 
completed online.

If freelancers plan to use a UK bank account, Brexit could make getting paid 
more complicated. Being able to move capital freely – one of thefour central 
tenets of the EU <http://europa.eu/scadplus/constitution/objectives_en.htm> – 
may become more difficult in the event of an out vote. Social security 
agreements between the UK and EU states are unlikely to change significantly, 
although theEuropean Health Insurance Card  
<https://www.gov.uk/european-health-insurance-card>(EHIC) is one obvious 
concern.

 Of course, the UK will seek to make agreements with all of the remaining 
member states to help resolve these issues. But this would take a significant 
amount of time to achieve, and nothing is for certain. Brexit would also mean 
that control over employment law, for example, will be returned to the UK – 
perhaps making it more attractive to set up a business here instead.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tz63%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tz63%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffdd2dd93e7a0264c182bb3958b4a33d9a5d2d843%2F0_15_903_1129%2F903.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I'm%20self-employed%20%E2%80%93%20would%20Brexit%20stop%20me%20from%20freelancing%20in%20another%20EU%20country%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tz63%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%27m+self-employed+%E2%80%93+would+Brexit+stop+me+from+freelancing+in+another+EU+country%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tz63%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffdd2dd93e7a0264c182bb3958b4a33d9a5d2d843%2F0_15_903_1129%2F903.jpg>
 Photograph: Karl Attard 
Philip Landau 

Founder member of Landau Law, which are specialist London-based employment law 
solicitors. He writes regularly for the Guardian on topical employment law 
matters, including how European judgments impact the UK. He advises daily on 
employment law matters, most of which derive from Europe.

As a European Union citizen, you have the right to work in any other EU 
country on a self-employed basis. A vote for Brexit could have serious 
implications for freelancers. Unless there are reciprocal arrangements in 
place, you are likely to need to show your proposed business has a beneficial 
economic impact, and have proof that the operation can be fully covered by your 
own resources or bank loan. You may also need to show how your business will 
impact on employment and vocational training, together with how it could 
contribute to the national or regional economy.

As a self-employed person, you will almost certainly also need to apply for a 
special residence permit. It is likely this would only be valid for a short 
period of time before needing to be renewed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tz63%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tz63%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2555866d6a2a0c7fc0db6bf7ffaae97750de8f1%2F2356_0_2961_3701%2F2961.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I'm%20self-employed%20%E2%80%93%20would%20Brexit%20stop%20me%20from%20freelancing%20in%20another%20EU%20country%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tz63%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%27m+self-employed+%E2%80%93+would+Brexit+stop+me+from+freelancing+in+another+EU+country%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tz63%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2555866d6a2a0c7fc0db6bf7ffaae97750de8f1%2F2356_0_2961_3701%2F2961.jpg>
 Photograph: Alexis Haulot 
Panos Koutrakos

Professor of EU law and Jean Monnet professor of EU law at City University 
London and a barrister at Monckton Chambers. He has written widely on various 
aspects of EU law, including trade, international treaties and foreign affairs. 
He has given evidence at the House of Commons foreign affairs select committee 
on the costs and benefits of EU membership for the UK.

As an EU citizen, you have the right to move with your family to another EU 
country, live and work there and enjoy equal treatment with the nationals of 
that country.

There are also rules about the recognition of your professional qualifications 
<http://europa.eu/youreurope/citizens/work/professional-qualifications/recognition-of-professional-qualifications/index_en.htm>
. These rights are enforceable before the courts of that EU country. These 
rights are part and parcel of EU membership. You may exercise them anywhere in 
the EU as self-employed persons from other EU countries may also exercise them 
in the UK.

In the case of Brexit, these rights would depend on the agreement that the UK 
reaches with the EU. If, for instance, the UK joined theEuropean Economic Area 
<http://www.efta.int/eea/eea-agreement/eea-basic-features> (like Norway), you 
would still have these rights. If, on the other hand, no such arrangement was 
made, you would lose these rights. Instead, you would need to comply with any 
immigration and other rules that EU countries have for non-EU citizens.

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
