
For me, freshers week just means a sea of litter. The promo people are posted 
along the streets by 8am every morning, holding stacks of neon flyers for 
uninspired club nights and drinks deals. By noon these are all over the 
pavement and grass of our otherwise beautiful campus. Tomorrow another layer 
will form on top. And then another.

Related: Freshers’ week: the staff perspective 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2014/sep/12/-sp-freshers-week-university-staff-perspective>

We’re a week in now and it’s a noisy mash-up of people shouting through 
megaphones, handing out flyers and waving temporary flags and banners. Some of 
the posters are exactly the same as last year, so these terrible places have 
clearly not changed at all. Some of them don’t even list what music they play, 
just how close they are to campus – the only selling point is that you don’t 
have to trip very far to get there.

This morning as I was coming in, I saw two of these guys put a poster on top 
of a warning sign for roadworks, so I told them to take it off. Actually, I 
said to them that they may as well not put it on because I was going to take it 
off the moment they stepped away. They did as I asked: I’m a terrifying, pushy 
American.


I was complaining to one of my colleagues a few days ago and he said he was 
upset too – because nobody had offered him any flyers. “How old must I look?” 
he asked. “When do they switch over to not offering?”


I reminded him that he doesn’t want to go to those horrible clubs. “I know,” 
he said. “But I want to be invited!”


I even saw some of the touts giving out T-shirts the other day; they’re really 
trying hard to get these students’ cash. They prey on this cohort of 18- and 
19-year-olds who are managing their money alone for the first time, thinking 
that they will be easily separated from it. And I suppose they are right.


It just sucks that these students’ first week of adulthood is spent trying not 
to slip on wet club flyers as they find their way around campus. It probably 
doesn’t project the picture of academia they had imagined.


Related: Learn from our mistakes: freshers' week regrets 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/sep/14/learn-from-our-mistakes-freshers-week-regrets>

I hate this commercialisation and the idea that these young people are easy 
targets, ready to be sucked dry. I don’t think the students particularly like 
it and I’m sure that the university doesn’t; these advertisers put stickers all 
over everything (even on our official campus maps, I have noticed) so somebody 
is going to have to take them off. It’s ridiculous.


But otherwise I really like freshers week; it’s energising to see the new 
students come in. I mostly deal with master’s and PhD students and that intake 
is great. We took them out this week and it was fun to hear their ideas. 
They’re so excited to be here and I think the undergraduates feel the same way. 
This is a big step for them.


Watching the freshers go by is really quite nice. They’re in little packs of 
people that they probably never knew before, all moving together, all looking 
at their phones. It’s really cute. They look a little bit lost, but ready to go.

• This week’s anonymous academic is a research associate at a Russell Group 
university.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>.
