
We will soon be coming to the end of what by any measure has been an epic 
debate. The government’shousing and planning bill 
<http://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/jan/05/expert-views-housing-bill-end-affordable-housing>
, which left the House of Lords on 27 April, has gone through several days of 
discussion and seen 18 government defeats.

This is an unequal contest. The Lords can test, challenge and amend but in the 
end the government will prevail. This is particularly the case for proposals 
that wereincluded in the Conservative party manifesto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/03/no-further-concessions-on-housing-bill-minister-vows>
. Due to the introduction of English votes for English laws, for which this 
bill was the first test case, the government has a majority of more than 50 in 
the Commons.

Related: Our last chance to restrain the housing bill is with the Lords | Bob 
Kerslake 
<http://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/jan/26/housing-planning-bill-house-of-lords>

Nevertheless some important improvements have been made. Fixed-term council 
tenancies can now be up to 10 years rather than five, and longer if children 
are involved. Where higher value council houses are forced to be sold to fund 
housing association right-to-buy discounts, there will now be a commitment in 
the bill that these should be replaced one-for-one (and two-for-one in London). 
The starter homes offer has been modified to make it less of a quick windfall 
gain for those who are able to take advantage of it. Rent increases for those 
caught by the pay-to-stay plan – which would see higher earning council tenants 
charged higher rents – will be less steep.

But the fundamental concerns about the fairness of the bill still remain. One 
group of people, those with the wherewithal to buy, are being helped at the 
expense of those on lower incomes who are in greater need. Local authorities 
will now be required to include 20% of starter homes in all future planning 
applications, which will largely squeeze affordable rented housing out of 
planning agreements. The forced sale of higher value council houses, unless 
they can be replaced like-for-like, will reduce the stock of much needed family 
housing in areas of greatest demand. The homelessness charity Shelter has 
calculated that23,500 local authority homes will need to be sold a year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/03/councils-sell-up-to-145m-housing-a-year-fund-right-to-buy>
 to fund right to buy, a third of all council houses that become vacant. We 
need to help those who want to buy, but this should not be instead of those 
whose only real option is social rent.

Publicly provided, social rented housing is now seen as toxic. This is 
something that I deeply regret

Perhaps the most worrying part of the bill is what it tells us about the 
government’s underlying view on the future of social housing. There has been 
much debate over the years about how social housing has changed from being a 
general source of housing for ordinary people on lower incomes, to being 
increasingly available only to those in most desperate need. Providing housing 
for a third of the population in the 1980s, it now houses less than half of 
that. With the changes in this bill, the numbers will fall further still and 
social housing will not just be residual, but temporary and contingent.Social 
housing <https://www.theguardian.com/society/social-housing> tenants who 
progress in life will be expected to pay more rent and ultimately make way for 
others in greater need. Social houses will no longer be homes to settle down 
and plan a future in, but a temporary welfare benefit.

Previous Conservative governments boasted about the number of social rented 
houses they had built. Many Conservative controlled councils still feel the 
same way. Over the course of this bill though, I have reluctantly come to the 
conclusion that for the leading figures in this government, publicly provided, 
social rented housing is now seen as toxic. This is something that I deeply 
regret.

In time, I believe the government will come to regret this also. It is simply 
not possible to deliver the new housing the country needs without building more 
houses of all types and tenures, including social housing.

The debate in the Lords is soon coming to an end but the debate in the country 
should not. Our housing crisis desperately needs a fair, locally led and 
practical response. Organisations such as Shelter, the Chartered Institute of
Housing <https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing>, and the Local Government 
Association, who have done such a great job in supporting us during the passage 
of the bill, will have their work cut out for some time to come.

Join the Guardian Housing Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/housing/register/> to read more pieces like 
this. Follow us on Twitter (@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/GuardianHousingNetwork/?ref=hl> to keep up with the 
latest social housing news and views.
