
Since the Open University (OU) was launched in 1969, almost two million 
students have passed through its doors, working to achieve their dream of 
getting a degree. Many come to us with little education beyond GCSE and we have 
prided ourselves on helping them to change their lives through our 
tried--and-tested system of distance education delivered locally. That system 
is now under serious threat.

Last month the Open University announced that it would shut the doors of seven 
of its nine regional centres in England, including the one where I work. This 
will mean relocation for a few, but redundancy for more than 500 people working 
in those centres. Management insists that the plans are driven not by finance 
but by a desire to “put students first”. This just doesn’t stack up.

Related: ‘This change will be the end of the Open University as we know it’ 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/oct/20/open-university-strike-ou-regional-centres-moocs>

They are right in thinking that this drastic move will radically alter the 
student experience – but my colleagues and I don’t think it will be for the 
better. The big idea is that by concentrating support in just three of the 
centres in England – Manchester, Nottingham and Milton Keynes – and four in the 
rest of Britain and Ireland, the university will be able to afford to stay open 
a few hours longer each evening to answer student queries.

It seems unlikely that the people answering the phones and emails will be the 
academics who are empowered make decisions on how those calls are acted on 
(granting extensions, authorising additional support, advising on careers, 
offering advice on future course options and so on). So what will be the 
benefit for students? Not much.

Management has tried to justify the proposal by pointing out that many 
students never set foot in a regional office – but it is the more vulnerable 
and disadvantaged that often do.Students with disabilities 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/health/news/11011206/Woman-gains-degree-by-blinking-after-stroke-leaves-her-unable-to-walk-and-talk.html>
 and mental health issues, students in need of individual support sessions, PhD 
students requiring supervision, students with childcare issues (usually women) 
who can only attend daytime tutorials, students seeking careers advice – they 
all rely on regional offices.

It is hard not to see the shrinking of local support as shrinking away from 
the very students the OU was set up to serve

As does student X, who suffers from chronic anxiety and wanted to take her 
exam in the familiar setting the regional centre provided. And student Y, whose 
computer had broken down and needed to use one of ours to meet a submission 
deadline. The regional offices provide a lifeline for these and many, many 
students like them. It is hard not to see this shrinking of local support as a 
shrinking away from the very students the OU was set up to serve.

Regional centres don’t only serve students. My office is also used by numerous 
research groups for public talks, training events with our tutors, meetings 
with employers, interviews for new staff, by an educational charity that is 
given space it could not otherwise afford, and by various university committees 
for meetings.

In response, the university says it will hire office space from commercial 
providers as needed. But the staff in regional centres have expert local and 
institutional knowledge. They have contacts with the study centres where our 
tutorials are held and can step in when things inevitably go wrong. They 
maintain contacts with education officers in local prisons. They know the right 
person to send to invigilate a home exam for students with particular problems. 
And what about the academics like me who will become homeworkers? We will be 
cut off from the creative exchange of ideas that makes workplaces work.

Staff at regional offices have local and institutional knowledge that will be 
lost

Should the closures go ahead, the shortest journey for any of the affected 
staff from a current centre to their next nearest would be from Oxford to 
Milton Keynes – a distance of 40 miles. Staff in Gateshead will have to endure 
a five-hour round trip of 250 miles to their nearest centre in Edinburgh. And 
does anyone seriously believe that the needs of a student or tutor living in 
Penzance can be best met by someone sitting at a computer in Nottingham or 
Milton Keynes? Is this really putting students first?

We’re not known for our militancy at the OU. If you dust off the archives, you 
will not find any record of union members taking strike action, apart from in 
national disputes. We are now beingballoted for strike action 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-34537686> and even staunch opponents of 
industrial action say they are prepared to come out on strike, me included.

Much of this anger comes after the university insisted at the end of last week 
that it was going to push ahead with the plans despite theOU senate rejecting 
the proposals <http://www.ucu.org.uk/7627#.Vh-bXeA5C9U.twitter>. The senate 
described the plans as “very high-risk” and “failing to support the academic 
mission of the university”. They also advised the university to explore other 
options. However, the OU announced the next day that it was determined to push 
ahead with the plans, which will now go before the University’s main 
decision-making body, the council, on 24 November.

Related: Distance learning taps in to virtual reality technology 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/feb/19/distance-learning-taps-in-to-virtual-reality-technology>

I’m delighted to see awareness of and opposition to the closures is growing 
and spreading beyond the confines of the OU, as articulated byone of my 
colleagues 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/oct/20/open-university-strike-ou-regional-centres-moocs?CMP=share_btn_tw>
 earlier this week. Ourpetition 
<http://speakout.web.ucu.org.uk/open-university-regional-centre-closures/> has 
already received more than 5,300 signatures and MP John Mann has tabled anearly 
day motion <http://www.parliament.uk/edm/2015-16/509> in the House of Commons 
that opposes the closures.

The OU has operated successfully for nearly 50 years by blending contemporary 
technologies with direct and personalised contact. It’s about to risk both its 
operational effectiveness and institutional reputation unless it recognises 
this simple truth: distance education needs local dedication.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. Email article 
pitches to us at highereducationnetwork@guardian.co.uk
