
The mayor of London, Sadiq Khan 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/sadiq-khan>, has moved to ban from the 
city’s transport network adverts that promote unrealistic expectations about 
body image and health.

Khan, elected in May, has told Transport 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> for London to stop running 
body-shaming ads amid concerns that the advertising “can demean people, 
particularly women”.

He had pledged to tackle advertising on the tube network during his campaign 
after ads such as the “Beach body ready” campaign last April led to protests. 
An online petition calling for their removal attracted more than 70,000 
signatures.

The company behind the ads, Protein World, was accused of “directly targeting 
individuals, aiming to make them feel physically inferior to the unrealistic 
body image of the bronzed model, in order to sell their product”.

It was not banned by the Advertising 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/advertising> Standards Authority despite more 
than 200 complaints.

Related: 'Beach body ready' tube advert protests planned for Hyde Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/apr/27/mass-demonstration-planned-over-beach-body-ready-tube-advert>

In a statement, Khan said: “As the father of two teenage girls, I am extremely 
concerned about this kind of advertising which can demean people, particularly 
women, and make them ashamed of their bodies. It is high time it came to an end.

“Nobody should feel pressurised, while they travel on the tube or bus, into 
unrealistic expectations surrounding their bodies and I want to send a clear 
message to the advertising industry about this.

The mayor’s office said it had also asked TfL 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/tfl> to set set up a steering group in 
partnership with its advertising agencies, Exterion Media and JCDecaux, to 
monitor and review compliance with rules. Between them the two companies manage 
TfL’s £1.5bn advertising business, which runs around 12,000 ads a year.

TfL’s commercial development director, Graeme Craig, said: “Advertising on our 
network is unlike TV, online and print media. Our customers cannot simply 
switch off or turn a page if an advertisement offends or upsets them and we 
have a duty to ensure the copy we carry reflects that unique environment.”
