
Three years ago teacher Simon Poote spotted a disused strip of land on the 
grounds ofLong Crendon school <http://www.longcrendon.bucks.sch.uk/> in 
Aylesbury. Instead of giving over the 15-metre square lawn to recreational use, 
or simply ignoring it, Poote saw potential for creating an outdoor learning 
space for the primary’s year 1 to 6 students. The only snag was how to pay for 
the plot’s transformation.

“We have lots of space but not much money,” says headteacher Sue Stamp. The 
school therefore appealed to parents, local businesses and the community to 
donate everything from landfill material to create small hills, to unwanted 
play equipment to build a trim trail and tunnels for the children to explore. 
Help came thick and fast, and the area now boasts a fully equipped thatched mud 
kitchen and a system of pipes and pulleys to transport water around the site.

Stamp insists outdoor learning has become more than just a project for the 
school, “it’s a way of life” she explains. The whole ethos of the school is to 
be outdoors as much as possible, rain or shine, so that students of all ages 
also take part in forest school activities in a wooded area alongside the 
playing field two days a week, learning skills such as fire lighting and making 
charcoal, as well as being allowed to climb trees, all under supervision.

Related: How to teach ... foraging 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/may/09/how-to-teach-foraging> 

Many of the outdoor activities they undertake are linked to curriculum 
subjects, and complement classroom lessons rather than detract from them. A 
factor which Stamp believes has played a part in the school’s continuing exam 
success. But outdoor learning is far more than an academic exercise – the head 
claims the impact on children’s mental health and wellbeing is undeniable.

“We have seen an amazing difference in some children,” she says. “Children who 
just didn’t engage in the classroom suddenly come into their own when they get 
outside.” Students who are less academically inclined gain in confidence and 
Stamp claims she has seen them step up as leaders in practical group activities 
for the first time.

Importantly, students are encouraged to take ownership of their own learning 
during outdoor learning sessions and teachers ask the children to set personal 
targets such as improving resilience, problem solving and working with others.

Giving pupils the freedom to make decisions about their own learning is 
incredibly empowering for children, claimsJuliet Robertson 
<http://creativestarlearning.co.uk/about-juliet/>, an education consultant and 
outdoor learning expert. Not every child will be motivated by the promise of 
getting their hands dirty, so it’s vital they are given a choice. The teacher 
therefore needs to take a back seat from initiating and directing the lesson 
and place trust in the student to lead instead.

The more we took them into natural spaces, the calmer they became.
Juliet Robertson 
The author of Dirty Teaching 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/dirty-teaching.html>, and former headteacher, 
first observed the benefit of outdoor learning as a 19-year-old gap year 
student volunteering at an urban environmental education centre in Philadelphia 
in 1987. She was working with a group of 11 to 14-year-old boys who were 
considered successes because they weren’t addicted to crack cocaine. Although 
the centre had very little budget and the rundown area had few nearby parks, 
they would take the teenagers outdoors as frequently as possible. Over time 
they noticed these boys began to thrive and flourish.

She says: “The more we took them into natural spaces, the calmer they became, 
the more concentrated they were and the less paper tiger talk – the big talk 
from the hood – there was.” It was a classic “Xbox detox”, Robertson adds, and 
is something that researchers have observed repeatedly when studying the effect 
of nature on the brain.

A 2010 study from the University of Rochester 
<http://www.rochester.edu/news/show.php?id=3639> found that spending time 
outdoors not only makes you happier, it can lead to an increased sense of 
vitality. It has also been found to have acalming effect on the mind 
<http://willsull.net/resources/KaplanS1995.pdf>, ease depression 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/09/23/walk-nature-depression_n_5870134.html>
, sparkcreativity 
<http://psp.sagepub.com/content/early/2012/03/15/0146167212436611.abstract> and 
improve attention and focus 
<http://archive.boston.com/bostonglobe/ideas/articles/2009/01/04/how_the_city_hurts_your_brain/?page=full>
.

A five-year study, which examined 500 children from 14 primary schools across 
Melbourne, Australia, found that those children who spend break times in more 
natural playgrounds as opposed to asphalt onesfeel better rested 
<http://www.smh.com.au/national/education/learning-comes-naturally-for-some-20100123-mrnw.html>
 and therefore more able to concentrate back in the classroom. The researchers 
discovered that had a direct correlation to exam results and attainment.

But despite these findings, a recent survey of parents revealed that  
three-quarters of UK children spend less time outside than prison inmates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/25/three-quarters-of-uk-children-spend-less-time-outdoors-than-prison-inmates-survey>
. This means schools have an opportunity to make a huge difference to young 
people’s mental health by increasing time spent outdoors. Where, though, should 
a teacher approaching outdoor learning for the first time start?

According to Robertson “there are many ways to skin the outdoor cat” and no 
perfect formula. However, there are a few practical steps teachers can take 
which will help them get projects off the ground.

First of all, taking part in a scheme such as the John Muir award 
<https://www.johnmuirtrust.org/john-muir-award> – which encourages people to 
get involved in environmental activities – works as an incentive for both 
teachers and students. The organisation also provides useful advice and 
resources for participants, giving teachers the knowledge they need to get 
projects off the ground. Robertson also recommends sticking to very 
straightforward activities and points to theMission Explore 
<https://www.missionexplore.net/> website for lesson ideas. The Learning 
through Landscapes <http://www.ltl.org.uk/> site is another mine of helpful 
resources, particularly for schools interested in running horticulture projects.

Related: A geocaching treasure hunt helped my students learn about the 
landscape 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/teacher-blog/2013/apr/04/geocaching-geography-history-teaching-landscapes>

Schools in urban areas with little or no nearby green spaces can, however, 
feel limited by the opportunities for outdoor learning. Stephen Lockyer, deputy 
head atThe Mead School <http://www.meadschool.info/> in Tunbridge Wells, does 
not believe that location is a barrier though.

By getting his students involved in geocaching, children have found themselves 
embarking on real world treasure hunts around the country. The activity which 
started in 2001 involves hiding containers filled with small gifts in all 
manner of places, uploading the coordinates tothe official website 
<http://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/teacher-blog/2013/apr/04/www.geocaching.com>
 and then leaving them for others to find using GPS.

Lockyer explains that there are often hundreds of geocaches hidden in urban 
centres and their hunts have taken them as far as Hadrian’s Wall. The potential 
for other schools to get involved is therefore enormous and claims students 
feel a sense of ownership from secretly planting something in public spaces.

He says some students do feel stifled and restricted by the classroom. The 
outdoors however can feel a lot less threatening or uncomfortable for those 
children and he has noticed pupils with behavioural challenges are particularly 
receptive to the freedom which that environment brings.

With exam season now in full swing, there is the temptation to spend more time 
indoors revising and swotting for tests. However, Lockyer insists there has 
never been a better time to take lessons outside.

“It’s de-stressing by deception,” he says. “You are taking them out on the 
premise of learning something, but actually it’s a much more relaxing 
environment than the classroom for lots of children, especially at this time of 
year.”

The green schools series 
<http://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/green-schools> is supported by the 
WWF <http://www.wwf.org.uk/>. All content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled “brought to you by”. Find out morehere 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
