
Here’s a test that will really get on your wick. You have a small candle, a 
box of drawing pins and a book of matches. Your task is to attach the candle to 
the wall so that it does not drip on to the floor below it. What do you do?


Answer Pin the box to the wall and then stand the candle in it. If you thought 
of pinning the candle to the wall or melting some of the wax and using that to 
glue it on, nice idea, but it doesn’t work (go ahead, try it). This test is 
commonly used by psychologists to measure the personality trait of “functional 
fixedness”.

If, like 75% of us, you failed to come up with the answer, then you display 
this trait. When an object has one particular, very common use, we get so 
fixated with that use that we rarely think of using the object to do something 
else – even something for which it would be highly suitable. So in this case we 
are so used to thinking of a drawing-pin box as a container for drawing pins 
that we are unable to see it as a potential candle holder.

If you succeeded, then you are a particularly creative and flexible thinker 
who often manages to avoid the trap of functional fixedness.

Knowing what you now know, how many solutions can you find to the following 
problem (supposedly a genuine exam question): how is it possible to determine 
the height of a tall building with the aid of a barometer? Email your answer to
magazine@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/305948/> or if 
you’re reading the online version leave your answer in the comments – I’ll 
throw in a copy of my book for the most original.

For a fully referenced version of this article, go to benambridge.com 
<http://www.benambridge.com/>

Fancy some more quizzes? Order a copy of Psy-Q by Ben Ambridge (Profile Books, 
£8.99) or £6.99 from thebookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/305948/>
