
Edwina Hughes is talking menus. “There was boeuf bourguinon, herb-crusted pork 
escalope and MiddleEastern stuffed peppers,” she says, before pausing and 
adding another few delicious-sounding dishes to the list. She’s not recalling a 
good dinner party, though – she works in corporate responsibility forSodexo 
<http://uk.sodexo.com/home.html>, and is explaining a recent pilot scheme to 
get sustainable food on the menus at UK schools.

“Sustainable food is growing,” she explains. “Climate change is indisputably 
man-made, and we all have a role to play. The food we eat and the environment 
are linked, and the choices we make about what we eat are important.”


Sodexo is a large services organisation, which supplies food to schools and 
other institutions such as hospitals, business headquarters, universities and 
prisons. “We realised that this was a great opportunity to introduce food 
sustainability into schools, to influence the consumers of the future. It’s a 
great message – the food tastes amazing and it’s good for you and the 
environment.”


The company teamed up with WWF UK to tap into the charity’s extensive research 
into sustainable food 
<http://www.wwf.org.uk/about_wwf/press_centre/?unewsid=7720>. WWF’s recent 
LiveWell programme 
<http://www.wwf.org.uk/what_we_do/changing_the_way_we_live/food/livewellforlife/>
 was set up to encourage businesses and policy-makers to help people follow 
diets which are both healthy and sustainable.


Nick Hughes, WWF UK’s food sustainability advisor, explains: “Our LiveWell 
principles are simple. Eat less meat and more vegetables. Eat less processed 
foods and choose from a greater variety of whole grains.Buy foods which have 
been produced responsibly 
<http://www.wwf.org.uk/about_wwf/working_with_schools/green_ambassadors/plant2platecampaign.cfm>
, and – just as crucially – waste less. These six rules are the heart of our 
work with Sodexo.”


The Green and Lean pilot ran for six weeks in eight secondary independent 
schools, chosen for their enthusiasm for environmental issues. Some 20,000 
meals were served up from a menu of 10 dishes, each developed by Sodexo’s 
chefs, who then showed school chefs and catering managers how to make them. 
Ultimately, the company wants every one of its 80 independent schools to run a 
two-week cycle of sustainable meal options, which means developing a further 20 
meals.


While it might seem easy to “go sustainable” when cooking, producing 
sustainable meals in such volume isn’t as simple as it sounds, says Edwina.


“Sourcing the ingredients is key – developing sustainable supply chains for 
sustainable food options. At the same time, there has to be a demand for these 
options, so that it becomes viable for those suppliers to increase their 
production of sustainable ingredients – whether that’s meat, oil, vegetables, 
grains – whatever,” she reasons.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jgza%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jgza%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f7978679fbb9110566441c5fe541b771add2d38%2F0_80_2708_1625%2F2708.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Recipe%20for%20success%3A%20sustainable%20school%20meals%20don't%20have%20to%20be%20challenging&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jgza%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Recipe+for+success%3A+sustainable+school+meals+don%27t+have+to+be+challenging&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jgza%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f7978679fbb9110566441c5fe541b771add2d38%2F0_80_2708_1625%2F2708.jpg>
 Offering sustainable food is all about adjusting supplier relationships and 
getting them to buy into its ethos 
Nick agrees: “We want to encourage shifts in dietary patterns amongst 
consumers – in this case, schoolchildren. This will send a signal back down to 
the supply end of the chain to make producers realise that there is demand – 
and profit – in sustainable food.”


All this, and the food has to taste amazing and look good. If it doesn’t, both 
Edwina and Nick agree that no one will choose it over a traditional, 
“non-sustainable” option.


Take just one of the 10 dishes which were part of the pilot – beef lasagne. 
“Traditionally a meat-heavy dish,” says Edwina. “We needed to up the vegetable 
and cut the meat content, make sure the meat and dairy ingredients were 
sustainably produced and use wholegrain pasta. That, in supply terms, is a 
massive job.”


Long-term and bigger-scale, she says, offering sustainable food is all about 
adjusting lots of supplier relationships and getting them to buy into its ethos 
– and business sense. Sometimes it might mean buying less, but better quality, 
ingredients to stay in line with the sustainable criteria – that’s just one of 
the many challenges.


Another challenge is tweaking consumers’ perceptions about sustainable food. 
“It’s not about ditching meat,” stresses Edwina. “Yes, eating sustainably does 
mean eating less meat, but you’ll also be eating better meat,” she explains. 
Nick adds: “You don’t have to eat a meaty meal to have a delicious experience – 
we need to change the perception that the value of a meal is in the meat 
content, but also acknowledge that, for many people, meat is an important part 
of their diet.”


So, was the Green and Lean pilot a success? “Absolutely. The children I asked 
gave amazing feedback and had obviously enjoyed eating the food and learning 
about sustainability,” says Edwina.


She adds that Sodexo also benefited: “We also learned a lot about what we 
needed to improve on – signposting and celebrating the sustainable options. We 
also need to brief catering staff better so that the information is there, 
right next to the sustainable food options, when the children are choosing 
their food.”


“Shouting about sustainability is crucial,” says Nick. “It would be easy to 
make the changes to recipes without communicating those changes to the schools 
at all – by stealth, if you like. But it would be a missed opportunity. 
Sustainable food ties in with so much other environmental learning and the 
children are just so engaged with these issues. They’re enthused by anything 
which will help the planet.”


“Eating sustainably should become second-nature. It’s about building the 
awareness from a young age and encouraging positive behaviours – after all, 
these children will be shopping for their own families in 10 years’ time,” says 
Nick.


Content on this page has been provided and funded by WWF 
<http://www.wwf.org.uk/>. Find out more here 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
