
Fifteen years ago, world leaders committed to eight goals to drive global 
action on poverty. Themillennium development goals 
<http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/> (MDGs) expire in September and a new 
action plan will be adopted at the UN general assembly. Thesustainable 
development goals 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-united-nations>
 (SDGs) are more ambitious andcover a wider range of issues 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive>
, including a greater focus on climate change, human rights, migration and 
employment.

Related: Social media without grassroots action not enough for a winning 
campaign 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/feb/16/social-media-without-grassroots-action-not-enough-for-a-winning-campaign>

But with greater scope comes a more complex agreement – the MDGs comprise 
eight goals and 18 targets, while the draft SDGs contain 17 goals and 169 
targets (although the number of targets is expected to be tightened and 
reduced). Some have argued that17 is too many 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/sep/24/un-begins-talks-sdgs-battle-looms-over-goals>
, and that the SDGs risk becoming unwieldy and overly bureaucratic, while 
others have argued the goals offer a muchmore comprehensive 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/nov/26/implementing-sustainable-development-goals>
 set than those that came before them and are therefore more likely to succeed.


We want to know what you think about the number of proposed goals and targets. 
Do you think 17 goals are about right, or too many? Or do you think we should 
do away with goals and targets all together? Submit a response of 250 words or 
fewer, andwe’ll publish a selection of the best ones 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/series/students-speak>. Keep 
your response clear and concise, avoiding development or academic jargon. Email 
your response todevelopment@theguardian.com <mailto:development@theguardian.com>
 with “Students Speak 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/series/students-speak>” in the 
subject line. Please include your name, the country where you live, and the 
university or college you attend. Submissions close at 6pm GMT on 16 March.

