
Two or three times a month, Tom Giles says goodbye to his wife and three 
children at their home in Abingdon, and drives north, through Oxfordshire, to
Campsfield House immigration detention centre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/oct/19/fire-campsfield-house-immigration-removal-centre>
. This is Tory heartland — rich fields, manicured villages, 4x4s. Campsfield 
sits at the end of a long country lane, opposite Oxford airport’s private jets 
and training planes. On the constituency map it is perched at the end of a Tory 
promontory: David Cameron’s Witney constituency flows down one side, Boris 
Johnson’s former fiefdom of Henley down the other.

It is nearly 9am by the time Giles, a slight man with a gap between his teeth 
and a bright-eyed, youthful energy, presents himself at security. He places 
everything but a notebook and a pen in a locker, then is led through a series 
of locked doors to a small high-windowed room along a corridor lined with 
similarly small high-windowed rooms. He sits down at a desk, checks the 
handsets in front of him, finds a blank page in his notebook, and waits for his 
first client.

Over the next five hours, Giles sees a series of detainees for up to 30 
minutes each. The men often wear standard-issue blue tracksuits and flip-flops 
because they were apprehended in the street and served with deportation orders, 
or taken from their homes at dawn and not allowed to pack their clothes, or 
arrived at a port with nothing. Some of them came to the UK to study and 
overstayed, others have lived and worked here for years. Others, exhausted 
after arduous journeys from Syria, Eritrea, Somalia, Afghanistan, Libya or 
Iraq, have been here for a few days.

Related: The lawyer who takes the cases no one wants 
<http://www.theguardian.com/news/audio/2016/may/03/the-lawyer-who-takes-the-cases-no-one-wants>

Giles’s job, as a legal aid immigration solicitor, is to work out if a person 
has a legal right to stay in the UK, and if so, to try his hardest to make that 
possible – in a legal environment that is becoming more hostile by the day. As 
each prisoner explains his circumstances, Giles listens, asks questions. Often 
he has to pick up one of the handsets, gesturing to the man before him to do 
the same, and they speak through an interpreter. Giles says he will do what he 
can, he will do his best. Increasingly, he has to say that he is sorry, there 
is nothing he can do.

“It’s just sad,” Giles said after one of these sessions. “Very sad. On a 
human, compassionate level we can all see why he should be allowed to stay. But 
there’s also what’s legally possible, and the two are not the same.”

Spending time with Giles makes it clear that the space for what is “legally 
possible” has been aggressively and deliberately narrowed through a series of 
decisions all but invisible to most British citizens.

The space for what is legally possible has been aggressively and deliberately 
narrowed

When MPs voted, last October, to give the immigration bill 2015-16, currently 
going through parliament, a second reading, Alistair Carmichael, the Liberal 
Democrat spokesman, protested that there had already been seven immigration 
bills in the last eight years and 45,000 changes to the immigration rules since 
Theresa May became home secretary in 2010. Specialist lawyers such as Giles, 
who argue that even they can barely keep up, also point to the fact that in
2013, the coalition government cut the legal aid budget 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2013/apr/01/legal-aid-cuts> by hundreds of 
millions of pounds. At the same time it limited availability of financial help 
for immigration cases to judicial reviews, persons seeking asylum, victims of 
domestic violence or trafficking, and those in immigration detention centres 
seeking bail. This means that anyone applying to remain in this country, on any 
basis apart from asylum or domestic violence – be it length of residency, a job 
offer, investment, marriage or family – must be able to afford a lawyer (and 
the rapidly increasing visa application fees) or navigate a near-impenetrable 
system unaided.

Since the Immigration Act 1971 came into force, any migrant caught without the 
correct papers has been subject to removal from the UK. However, to those for 
whom it is politically expedient to be seen to be tough on foreigners, this is 
apparently not enough. The 2015-16 bill, the first since the Tories achieved 
their majority, received its third reading in the House of Lords on 12 April. 
The bill is striking for the range and ingenuity of its criminalisation of 
those who fall foul of the ever-shifting rules: working illegally or hiring 
illegal workers; renting accommodation while illegal or renting accommodation 
to someone who might be illegal; driving or having a bank account while illegal 
– all would carry the possibility of substantial fines or even prison 
sentences. The government would be given the power to seize the earnings of 
illegal workers under the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002. The bill would allow 
immigration officers to search homes and people and to seize payslips, 
timesheets and nationality documents. It would also allow police officers who 
stop vehicles to check immigration status, and proposes that employers who want 
to hire non-European migrants would have to pay an “immigration skills charge” 
to do so. More than one observer – Doreen Lawrence among them – has pointed out 
that some of the powers in the immigration bill, specifically right-to-rent and 
the right to ask motorists for immigration papers, are effectively permission 
to discriminate on the basis of colour.

In this already difficult arena, Giles specialises in defending some of the 
most difficult and unpopular cases of all: those subject to deportation, and 
foreign nationals imprisoned in British jails. And he is very good at it. 
Partly because he will take up cases others will not, and keeps fighting them 
even when repeatedly knocked back, a significant number of Giles’s cases have 
gone up to the highest courts in the country and entered the law books as 
having proved important points of principle, about rights of appeal, for 
instance, or who should, under the new dispensation, be allowed legal aid.

Related: Prisons inspector calls for time limit on immigration detention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/01/prisons-inspector-calls-for-time-limit-immigration-detention>

In a few months’ time Giles will go to the supreme court with a case that 
tests one of the most sweeping measures in the new bill: “deport first, appeal 
later”, which allows the government to deport people even if they are in the 
middle of a legal appeal. It is currently applied only to prisoners in the 
criminal justice system who also happen to be foreign (they may well be legally 
here), and since July 2014, have automatically been deported at the end of 
their sentences. The new bill reiterates a Tory manifesto pledge, that “deport 
first, appeal later” should extend much further and apply toall migrants, 
except for refugees.

Because this proposal was in the Tory manifesto, it was not removed from the 
bill by the Lords. The only way to fight it now is in the courts, which means 
that if Giles’s supreme court challenge is successful, the consequences would 
reach throughout the immigration system.

Giles is a partner at Turpin Miller, a legal aid firm in east Oxford. When we 
met at his office last summer, there was a heatwave and on the top floor it was 
hot – overwhelmingly, enervatingly hot. Open windows and fans made little 
difference. Already scrappy pot plants struggled not to collapse altogether. 
Giles sat among files – files on the floor, files in cardboard boxes, files in 
cabinets lining the walls. “It’s a fight with paper!” he said. “I actually did 
tidy up in your honour.”

Most of the files were opened after he met detainees at Campsfield, or after 
calls directly to the office, or, quite often, after meeting prisoners at HMP 
Huntercombe, a prison that houses only foreign offenders. Giles often gets the 
feeling no one comes to see them other than the Home Office. On visit after 
visit he sees how bravado battles with vulnerability, extreme tension with 
politeness, self-harm with hours in the gym. “A number of my clients have been 
or are on suicide watch. In my experience the numbers have increased,” Giles 
said.

In the past, he used to explain human rights appeals to clients as a set of 
scales, with the offence on one side and everything else – family and private 
life, length of residency, legal status, good behaviour – weighed up on the 
other. “But the scales just don’t exist anymore. Now there’s only one outcome: 
not just a decision to deport, but a pursuit of that to the bitter end.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbvb%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbvb%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb390c19366934a2fc34027bd505b7d27addce4a%2F0_7_2000_1302%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20lawyer%20who%20takes%20the%20cases%20no%20one%20wants%20%7C%20Aida%20Edemariam&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbvb%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+lawyer+who+takes+the+cases+no+one+wants+%7C+Aida+Edemariam&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbvb%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb390c19366934a2fc34027bd505b7d27addce4a%2F0_7_2000_1302%2F2000.jpg>
An aerial view of Campsfield House detention centre. Photograph: David 
Hartley/REX/Shutterstock 
Sitting opposite Giles was Jo Renshaw, also a partner in the firm, and head of 
immigration. As they worked, periods of silent form-filling and email-writing 
were punctuated by ringing mobiles, quickfire questions: “Does he live with his 
family?”; “How much do you have in your bank account?”; “Do they need the 
pregnancy scan?”. Little remains private, once the Home Office gets involved.

As Giles and Renshaw busied themselves, a paralegal entered the room. “Andrzej 
on the line – he’s under the impression he has a bail hearing on Friday.” 
Andrzej is one of Giles’s clients, who spent 30 months in prison for attempted 
robbery and was then served with a deportation order. While he challenged the 
order, he was being held at Campsfield detention centre.

Andrzej had arrived from Poland lawfully, with his wife and two – then three – 
children and had worked here lawfully. After his arrest, the family was moved 
into shared emergency social services accommodation, where his daughter was 
abused by another resident. Giles was challenging the decision to deport on the 
basis that Andrzej’s children were vulnerable and could not do without their 
father’s support, and his deportation had been deferred until the judicial 
review could be considered. But in order to be released from detention, Andrzej 
had to have a home address, at which point he ran into one of many kinks in the 
system.

The National Asylum Support Service (NASS) organises accommodation for asylum 
seekers and those applying for bail from an immigration detention centre, but 
because the pool is limited, Giles explained, it takes a very long time to 
process applications. For foreign nationals who have been to prison, it can 
take even longer. There is often little communication with the probation 
service, so when NASS does eventually suggest a possible address, it often ends 
up being rejected by probation because it is in a high crime area, or in a 
house occupied by other ex-offenders, or otherwise deemed unsuitable. “And that 
scenario can repeat itself two, three, four times over months, if not years, 
during which time that person remains detained,” said Giles.

Soon enough, Andrzej called directly. Giles tried to calm him, to explain that 
no, there was no bail hearing; yes, he had tried social services, intending to 
persuade them to support the argument against deportation, but they wouldn’t 
respond. “So what I would recommend is you send them a letter saying, ‘I want 
to be with my wife and children, I want to know what I can do. I want to 
understand what is going on, please can you provide a response urgently.’” He 
spelled it out. “U-R-G-E-N-T-L-Y.”

Giles speaks to all his clients in the same way, focused and supportive, but 
without flummery, or much softening of blows. Both Giles and Renshaw were clear 
that it would be wrong to give false encouragement. “These people are very 
vulnerable and marginalised,” said Renshaw. “They often have little idea of 
their rights. They are full of hope, a lot of the time, that everything can be 
worked out. That’s a lethal combination – they’re ripe for people to tell them 
what they want to hear, and relieve them of a lot of money for doing it.”

If Giles took a case on, he was very committed, Renshaw said. “Very smart, 
very forceful. You have to be – the Home Office is very combative. Most of us 
deal with them at arm’s length. But he has to talk to caseworkers, to people 
making decisions about detention and tagging – it would grind down anyone who’s 
not as tough as he is.”

As would the unhappiness immigration lawyers encounter nearly every day. Mary 
Bosworth, a professor of criminology at Oxford University, spent 18 months 
studying centres such as Campsfield, where people are detained for anything 
from a few days to years, generally with no idea of how long it will be. In her 
harrowing book, Inside Immigration Detention, she described visiting the legal 
aid corridor where Giles sees his clients just before renovations in 2013-14. 
The “stench … of sweat, fear and anxiety – was often overwhelming”, wrote 
Bosworth. The accommodation blocks were “standard prison wings, complete with 
suicide netting, metal doors, metal staircases, shower blocks with half-size 
doors enabling staff to see who is within.” Staff warned Bosworth not to 
believe men who wept because their children had been put into care. She 
described levels of distress so difficult to witness that “on a number of 
occasions I left the centre abruptly, having reached the limits of my capacity 
to soak up other people’s misery”.

I asked Giles how he coped with the human misery he encounters daily. “I 
think, over the years,” said Giles, “I have managed by not taking it on. Not 
engaging with the underlying – facts, if you like. The things that have 
happened to somebody, or may happen to somebody. I’ve tried to concentrate 
instead on what I’mdoing – what my role is. I’d much rather my client said, 
‘Tom has explained to me he’s going to do this, that it has this chance of 
success,’ than, ‘He’s a good guy and he’s always got time to chat.’ You know?”

Giles called another client. Peter arrived from Nigeria in the late 1980s and 
was given indefinite leave to remain – that is, permission to settle in 
Britain. He had four children, all British citizens. Fourteen years ago, when 
they were small, he was arrested for attempting to import class-A drugs; he 
turned informant and served a criminal sentence. Had Peter been a British 
citizen, he would have been allowed to go free after having served his time. 
But, because he was foreign, he was then detained while it was decided whether 
he would be deported. This detention lasted a further three years. Giles 
challenged the legitimacy of these three years of incarceration. The courts 
found in Peter’s favour, and moreover ruled two years of the detention to be 
unlawful. He was awarded damages. (Between 2011 and 2014, the Home Office paid 
out £15m in compensation for unlawful detention.)

The Home Office was not able to deport Peter. But it responded by giving him 
only six months’ leave to remain. He was technically allowed to work, but in 
practice this was near-impossible. Ever since, he has had to reapply to stay 
every six months, at the cost of a £649 fee to the Home Office and a payment to 
Turpin Miller each time.

The firm is increasingly defending people who have effectively been 
administrated into illegality

Last month, the fees rose by 25%, to £811 per person. For most visa 
applicants, this is now added to the new NHS surcharge of £200 for each adult 
and child, per year. Application for a standard two-and-a-half years’ leave to 
remain for a family of four now costs £5,244. Those who cannot find the money 
must leave the country when their current visa expires, unless they can claim 
they are destitute — the bar for proving which is extremely high. Fees are also 
waived for victims of domestic abuse – but only if the spouse is British. 
Often, Renshaw said, clients who had scrimped and saved their fees in the full 
trust that they were doing what the system required of them did not find out 
about rate rises until the last minute, meaning that they either had to leave 
the country immediately or become overstayers, and thus illegal. She is 
increasingly defending people who have effectively been administrated into 
illegality. (A Home office spokesperson, approached for comment, stated that 
“It is only right we recover the costs of running our immigration system by 
making sure that those who benefit directly from it contribute appropriately - 
so the expense to the UK taxpayer is less.”)

With no steady work, Peter was in such arrears that his credit card had been 
stopped and his bank account closed. Giles was applying for legal aid so that 
Peter could pay Turpin Miller to appeal on his behalf to remain in Britain for 
three clear years at least; the legal aid agency wanted proof of income, but 
having no bank account, Peter was finding it difficult to satisfy them. “The 
upshot is a form of terrorism,” said Giles. “We’re not just going to set up a 
system that makes it difficult for you to obtain the right to be here, we’re 
going to carry that message through every part of your life, remind you of it 
every day.”

Some weeks later Giles received an email from Peter, saying that he wouldn’t 
be able to send over his financial documents as requested, because he had 
destroyed them. “I strongly believe that the legal aid office works with the 
immigration department and I have come to the conclusion that any document 
submitted to them would be used as evidence against me in a charge of illegal 
employment. At home I do not open my door or blind as I worry that the 
authorities are watching and are coming for me. Please do not be offended that 
I am unable to provide the documents. Thank you sir.”

Giles, who is now 40, grew up in Stoke Newington, north London. His parents 
split up when he was small, and he and his brother were raised by his mother, 
who for 14 years was principal of Tower Hamlets College, and her new partner. 
It was a politically engaged household. They argued about issues at mealtimes 
and he was taken on marches against Thatcher and the nuclear bomb. There was a 
strong feeling, he says, “not too dissimilar to now, of a need to stand up 
against prejudice and discrimination”.

He thought about becoming a teacher before taking a conversion course and 
going into legal aid. “It’s a cliche, isn’t it – growing up in a lesbian 
household in the 80s, in Stoke Newington – what are you going to do? Join Ukip 
and end up an estate agent?” As a shy child who nevertheless “would not give a 
point up”, he could not imagine undertaking the public performances required of 
a barrister, and so trained as a solicitor. He came to Oxford because his wife 
had got a job at the council, and he admits he “stalked” Philip Turpin, one of 
the firm’s partners, until he was hired.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbvb%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbvb%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe55980a910f5c3f80519d689a88b0b25273efd5a%2F0_117_3589_2153%2F3589.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20lawyer%20who%20takes%20the%20cases%20no%20one%20wants%20%7C%20Aida%20Edemariam&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbvb%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+lawyer+who+takes+the+cases+no+one+wants+%7C+Aida+Edemariam&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbvb%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe55980a910f5c3f80519d689a88b0b25273efd5a%2F0_117_3589_2153%2F3589.jpg>
 Home Office policy is to deport foreign nationals convicted of a crime – 
whether they are in the UK legally or not. Photograph: Alamy 
Turpin Miller is effective and well-respected, and in 2012, at the Legal Aid 
Lawyer of the Year awards, it was named firm of the year. But less than a year 
later, legal aid was cut and the company lost about 70% of its legal aid work 
in immigration alone. In order to survive – and to fund flexible rates for 
clients who had previously qualified for aid – the firm switched to more 
private work, where the client, rather than the government, pays for 
representation.

Clients come to Turpin Miller through social services, children’s societies, 
women’s refuges or, for Giles, through detention centres and prisons. Though 
they have done as well as they can under the circumstances – Renshaw recently 
won legal aid lawyer of the year in the social and welfare category – the 
partners are acutely aware of how precarious their working lives, and by 
extension the lives of their clients, have become.

Last summer, in his first speech as secretary of state for justice, Michael 
Gove suggested pro bono work should begin to replace legal aid, asking 
solicitors and barristers “to look into their consciences and see what they can 
do to ensure there is more equitable access to justice”, and effectively 
suggesting that individual charity compensate for shortfalls in state funding. 
Giles was withering about this, pointing out that legal firms rich enough to 
have pro bono units tend not to deal with asylum and immigration. “Immigration 
is highly complicated work and any solicitor who does not specialise in it 
would probably be breaching professional rules to be undertaking it pro bono,” 
says Richard Miller, head of legal aid at the Law Society. “One of the rules is 
that no solicitor must do any work for with they’re not competent.”“We’re 
struggling to survive,” said Giles. “Every time we do a piece of work that 
doesn’t pay it is no exaggeration to say we’re jeopardising our future.”

When it cut legal aid, the government promised a safety net for those in 
danger of a breach of their human rights in the form of “exceptional case 
funding”. “You can apply directly [to the Legal Aid Agency],” it says, 
helpfully, on gov.uk. “You don’t have to name a solicitor.” The trouble is that 
the forms are 14 pages long, and include questions like: “Please describe why 
you consider there is an arguable breach of substantive obligation”. It can 
take an experienced lawyer up to six hours to do one application; if it is 
unsuccessful they do not get paid. It is possible to send a letter explaining 
why you cannot represent yourself, but to construct a strong argument, it would 
probably help to have a passing knowledge of case law.

In May 2013 Giles applied for exceptional case funding to represent a 
Lithuanian woman, Teresa Gudanaviciene. She was working lawfully in the UK when 
she wounded her violent, alcoholic partner with a knife, and received an 
18-month prison sentence. Her younger child was taken into care (the older one 
was an adult), and she was informed that at the end of her sentence she would 
be deported. Giles believed she could appeal against the decision on human 
rights grounds. He duly applied for exceptional case funding, and was rejected. 
He challenged the decision and eventually, in 2014, along with five other 
linked cases, the case reached the court of appeal, which found that the bar 
for legal aid provision was set unlawfully high. Gudanaviciene was given legal 
aid and her appeal against deportation was successful.

“That was really important,” said Renshaw. In 2013-14, before Gudanaviciene’s 
victory, 1,520 applications for exceptional case funding were made, 69% of 
which were for family or immigration cases: 69 – or 4.5% – were granted, of 
which only one or two were immigration cases. However, in the first quarter of 
2015, following Gudanaviciene’s victory, 132 applications were made for 
exceptional funding for immigration cases, and 51 were granted. “And this is 
the thing about Tom,” Renshaw told me. “A lot of us took one look at the forms 
and thought, ‘I don’t have time to do that for nothing!’ But Tom battled away – 
applying, reapplying and in the end taking them to court. That’s what he does; 
if he sees an issue that needs to be dealt with he will keep going.”

It is an obvious point, but worth repeating: legal aid is necessary because it 
aims to give everyone equal access to justice. “Legal aid ensured that for a 
relatively low cost the whole system worked,” said Renshaw, “and that is 
particularly true in Tom’s work”. But, she argues, if you get rid of the 
ability to put a case at all, because a client cannot pay to fight it, you skew 
the system. And if you then remove people from the UK before they can appeal a 
Home Office decision – well, “the whole point of an appeal is to call people to 
account. The first decision isn’t always right. And what happens when you 
undermine that right of appeal – either by removing legal aid or by requiring 
people to conduct their appeal from overseas – is that the quality of the first 
decision deteriorates, because there’s no scrutiny.”

The other issue illustrated by the Gudanaviciene case was the lengths to which 
the government would go to prove a point. If legal aid had been provided, and a 
barrister hired for her initial appeal, the whole thing would have cost £691. 
But because the government refused her legal aid, and kept refusing even though 
the challenge moved through to the high court and then the court of appeal, the 
case eventually involved 18 barristers, at a cost in excess of £600,000, not to 
mention an extra six months of detention for Gudanaviciene (at a cost, 
according to figures entered into parliamentary debate in late 2014, of £97 per 
day) and maintaining a child in care (between £131,000 and £135,000 per child 
per year, according to the National Audit Office).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbvb%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbvb%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb9b7e42ec50ae57e6b90f1f5d380f836f376826%2F0_0_3606_5399%2F3606.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20lawyer%20who%20takes%20the%20cases%20no%20one%20wants%20%7C%20Aida%20Edemariam&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbvb%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+lawyer+who+takes+the+cases+no+one+wants+%7C+Aida+Edemariam&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbvb%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb9b7e42ec50ae57e6b90f1f5d380f836f376826%2F0_0_3606_5399%2F3606.jpg>
 Tom Giles, in the offices of the Oxford legal firm Turpin Miller. Photograph: 
Felix Clay for the Guardian 
“At the hearing, the presenting officer said they were ready to concede,” said 
Giles, “but they could not get permission to concede, because, I suspect, the 
Home Office does not concede deportation cases. It is the Home Office that is 
dragging these things through the courts, with the costs to the public purse 
and [the emotional] cost to everyone. Discretion and common sense seem to have 
been taken out of the system.”

Giles’s suspicions were bolstered in mid-November, when the president of the 
upper tribunal, which considers appeals relating to asylum and immigration, 
published a decision saying that he had “the impression that the secretary of 
state [for the Home Office], as a matter of routine, applies for permission to 
appeal in every deportation appeal [resolved in favour of the appellant]”. 
Furthermore, he noted, the terms in which these Home Office applications were 
made were frequently generic, rather than engaging with the facts of the 
individual case and with the law, and that they were inundating tribunals and 
threatening to impede legitimate work. “If there is indeed a practice of this 
kind it must be disapproved,” he wrote. “To slavishly apply for permission to 
appeal to the upper tribunal in every deportation appeal resolved in favour of 
the appellant, if this be the practice, is not a proper or legitimate 
invocation of this tribunal’s jurisdiction.” (In response, a Home Office 
spokesperson told me that “any decision to appeal a judgment made by the courts 
is taken after careful consideration of the facts and when it is in the public 
interest to do so”.)

When, during prime Minister’s Questions in January, David Cameron referred to 
a “bunch of migrants”, or when he pledged, last summer, to halt the “swarm” 
attempting to make the crossing from Calais, his language was nothing new. 
Britain has been worrying about outsiders for a long time, while in fact, as 
Robert Winder has argued in his magisterial bookBloody Foreigners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/jun/10/bloody-foreigners-robert-winder-updated>
, rather impressively muddling along and largely accepting them.

In the last couple of decades it has become harder for non-EU migrants to 
arrive and, having arrived, to stay

But in the last couple of decades, it has become, for non-EU migrants, harder 
and harder to arrive and, having arrived, to stay. The world has changed, 
radically: cheaper international travel, digital communications, international 
terrorism and refugees fleeing wars have presented challenges previous 
governments have not had to face, or at least not on such a scale. Yet this 
does not excuse tactics that have paved the way for increasingly harsh policies.

“Britain has expended considerable effort over the past decade in marking out 
(some) foreign nationals as dangerous, unwelcome, and excludable,” writes Mary 
Bosworth. “Eliding different categories of foreigner, starting with the ‘bogus 
asylum seeker’, before moving to the terrorist and the foreign offender, 
various British governments have pitted these rhetorical figures against the 
British citizen, shoring up a narrative of national identity in a period of 
mass mobility.”

This process has accelerated in recent years, and it is increasingly possible, 
especially since the Tories achieved their majority, to detect what looks like 
a three-step process. Step 1: talk as tough as possible about migrants. Step 2: 
write legislation that is tough on migrants. Step 3: when it is challenged, 
claim that it is simply what the public wants. And in the meantime use every 
possible administrative and judicial muscle to remove migrants from the UK.

By the time Theresa May addressed the Conservative party conference last 
October, she felt comfortable claiming that the asylum system was so open to 
abuse that “it was just another way of getting here to work” – which meant it 
was “impossible to build a cohesive society … wages are forced down even 
further while some people are forced out of work altogether”.

In making this claim, May was undeterred by the fact that her own department’s 
research has found no “statistically significant displacement of UK natives 
from the labour market in periods when the economy is strong”.

One morning in late September, the main hall of the Royal Courts of Justice in 
London echoed with the crash of security belts as bags were searched at the 
entrance. At the centre, gazed down upon by portraits of men in ermine and 
wigs, were the cause lists, detailing the cases to be heard that day. Nearby 
was a stand on which was pasted a copy of the Magna Carta. It looked like a 
colour photocopy someone had taken in a rush, and completed a very English 
impression of beauty, vaulting power, and lashings of amateurishness.

In Court 68, appeals were being heard from lawyers for two offenders, Courtney 
Byndloss, a Jamaican national, and Kevin Kiarie, a Kenyan. Both were 
challenging decisions to deport them before they could appeal from within the 
UK. Kiarie, whose parents have indefinite leave to remain, and who has lived in 
England for 19 of his 23 years, was Giles’s client. Everyone in the small 
windowless court was aware of the importance of this case: if the two men were 
successful, the government’s policy of “deport first, appeal later” would be 
dealt a major blow, and many thousands of migrants, both offenders and the far 
greater number of non-offenders, would benefit.

The court of appeal is different to what courtroom dramas on TV lead one to 
expect. There is almost no concession to lay observers, theoretically welcome 
though they might be. Everyone is already familiar with the bare bones of the 
case, so bewigged barristers plunge directly into the finer points of case law. 
Behind them junior counsel, also in wigs, flap through thick folders, looking 
for page references and omissions. Behind the junior counsel sit a row of 
solicitors who, that morning, included Giles, whose bright blue shirt stood out 
against all the black suits and gowns. And at the front of the room sit the 
judges, who do not wear wigs. Far from being impassive adjudicators, the judges 
get stuck in, running proceedings in a tough and not always polite manner.

Richard Drabble QC, who has a slight stoop, a lovely smile and a tendency to 
mumble, argued for Kiarie: how could he appeal against deportation while in 
Kenya – a country he did not know – without access to British lawyers, 
witnesses, or supporting material such as probation records, or medical 
records? A mention of psychiatric papers caused a flurry of scorn from Lord 
Justices Richards, McCombe, who made full use of impressive salt-and-pepper 
eyebrows, and Elias, sceptical, old and tiny, almost Dickensian in his 
high-backed chair. Manjit Gill QC’s argument about the rights of Byndloss’s 
children produced a splutter of impatience from Richards: “If you have a 
speaking note, let’s get on with it!”

The atmosphere changed abruptly when Richard Keen, Baron Keen of Elie, former 
chair of the Scottish Conservative party, stood to speak. Keen, who is the 
advocate general for Scotland, had intervened at the last minute to argue for 
the home secretary. “What is being reviewed?” began Keen, who is a big man, 
sleek with confidence. “A decision of the secretary of state.” He took 
immediate and direct aim at the characters of Kiarie and his co-defendant, 
using the phrase “foreign national criminal” as often as possible. “Both have 
shown a disregard for the law of the UK, and therefore there is a public 
interest in removing them from the UK, and therefore policy reflects that 
public interest … and if that means removing them pending their appeal then so 
be it. That is the view of parliament.”

There was more of the same the next day when Keen, wearing a pink and white 
checked shirt under his QC’s silks, pointed out that some immigration appeals 
do already occur out of country, and if necessary an appellant can always be 
brought back to defend him or herself. (Although, as Baroness Helena Kennedy QC 
has pointed out during debates about the immigration bill, “only 13% of 
out-of-country appeals succeed, compared to an average of around four in 10 
made in country”.) Keen moved the appeals be refused.

In response, Drabble, whose mumble had completely disappeared, took direct aim 
at the likelihood of anyone ever being brought back, and at the general 
breakdown of due process. “You can’t proceed on the basis that the tribunal 
will somehow muddle through. That’s not an acceptable way to run a procedurally 
fair system.” Furthermore, “It is a major mistake of principle to allow the 
gravity of what is alleged against my client … to diminish procedural 
protection. Thatcannot be the right approach.”

Three weeks later, unusually swiftly where these things are concerned, 
Richards, McCombe and Elias found against Kiarie and Byndloss, arguing that it 
was perfectly possible to continue their appeals from abroad.

Renshaw thinks that judges are increasingly being forced into a corner by a 
home secretary intent on incorporating a “really hostile environment for 
illegal immigrants” (May’s own words) into legislation, meaning, as Renshaw put 
it, that “the judiciary in some ways have little choice – they are simply 
implementing the law.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbvb%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbvb%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0306fba61fa38b195655ac21d971304d0761ddd%2F0_150_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20lawyer%20who%20takes%20the%20cases%20no%20one%20wants%20%7C%20Aida%20Edemariam&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbvb%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+lawyer+who+takes+the+cases+no+one+wants+%7C+Aida+Edemariam&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbvb%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0306fba61fa38b195655ac21d971304d0761ddd%2F0_150_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 Graffiti at Campsfield House. In early March, Giles’s client Andrzej won his 
appeal against deportation, but he had already been removed. Photograph: Martin 
Argles for the Guardian 
There has been some pushback from the House of Lords. In their debates, many 
lords made clear their discomfort with the speed at which a constantly changing 
bill was being pushed through the government alone has made more than 300 
amendments, on top of amendments proposed and voted on by lords and MPs. They 
also criticised what they saw as unnecessary hardships being visited on 
migrants. They voted, among other things, to allow asylum seekers to work if 
their claims had not been processed within six months – currently asylum 
seekers live on £5 a day, and when they can finally work, the jobs they are 
allowed to do are severely restricted – and to require a court order to detain 
anyone for more than 28 days.

In early March, Giles’s client Andrzej won his appeal against deportation, but 
he had already been removed – a situation that will arise more and more when 
the “deport first, appeal later” measure in the immigration bill comes into 
general effect.

Peter, meanwhile, was granted legal aid — but the court of appeal refused his 
request for an extension of his visa. “It’s a bad ending,” said Giles, then 
corrected himself. “It’s definitely not an ending. We need to start again and 
challenge it again. I hope he can be strong enough to go through it all again.”

It is not an ending for Kiarie either, at least not yet: as soon as the court 
of appeal decision came through last autumn Giles applied for legal aid so that 
he could take the case further. This was granted, and the appeal should come 
before the supreme court at some point later this year.

Even Teresa Gudanaviciene had been forced to go another round with the Home 
Office. Having been given exceptional case funding, she and Giles fought the 
decision to deport her, and won their case in the first-tier tribunal. The Home 
Office refused to accept this decision and challenged it in the upper tribunal 
– which decided that there had in fact been no error of law and that she could 
stay. “I spoke to her yesterday,” said Giles, when he told me about it. What 
did she say? “She just said, ‘I don’t know what to say. Thank you.’”

Some names have been changed

• Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread 
<https://twitter.com/@gdnlongread>, or sign up to the long read weekly email 
here 
<http://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/jul/20/sign-up-to-the-long-read-email>.

• This article was amended on 14 April and 18 April 2016. An earlier version 
referred to Boris Johnson’s “Henley fiefdom”, and said that because a proposal 
was in the Tory manifesto, “it is not subject to amendment in the Commons or 
the Lords”; both points have now been clarified.
