
Is there a more unfashionable meal than the carvery? 1970s laughing stocks 
such as Arctic roll and chicken Kiev have been reinvented by chefs and 
rediscovered by food lovers, but the carvery resists any warm glow of 
nostalgia. It remains the butt of a joke, a restaurant experience that, in the 
way it seems to encapsulate the narrowness of small-town British life, has 
become a bleakly comic trope. Adrian Mole has found himself at Ye Olde Carvery 
in Frisby-on-the-Wreake confronted by “ye olde foode congealing behind the bar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/apr/14/2>”. Under hypnosis, Alan 
Partridge fantasised about whisking Ursula Andress away toHigh Wycombe’s Moat 
House Hotel 
<http://www.denofgeek.com/tv/alan-partridge/26772/alan-partridges-top-tv-moments>
: “You’ll love it. It’s got a 24-hour carvery.”

We all know why the carvery’s reputation is languishing in this way. Carveries 
are everywhere in Britain – the all-you-can-eat £6.99 roast is a staple of the 
British high street – but, ever since the then catering giant Lyons first 
introduced a carvery 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=hG2uCwAAQBAJ&pg=PA181&lpg=PA181&dq=%2B%22carvery%22+%2B%22regent+palace+hotel%22&source=bl&ots=6BwVE8ZqMm&sig=ThJWr01lx5SlxwBpfL5Esn7n-z4&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwj_vYfdoo7NAhWiJ8AKHViFBtIQ6AEIUDAI#v=onepage&q=%2B%22carvery%22%20%2B%22regent%20palace%20hotel%22&f=false>
 at its Regent Palace Hotel in the 50s, this has been a race to the bottom. A 
revolutionary self-service meal, the carvery was always more about cutting 
staff costs than delivering pleasure. Subsequently, pubs across the country 
have energetically worked that bottom line with cheap meats and sloppy cooking. 
Think carvery and the image that comes to mind is one of overcooked joints left 
to dry out under hot lamps alongside soggy veg, cold, greasy roast potatoes and 
Yorkshires as lifeless as Egyptian papyrus. And possibly a few years older.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kft6%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kft6%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F87a263ea5a80cdf8dbfee3fb27bf164f9534b357%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Call%20the%20carvery!%20Updating%20a%20British%20staple&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kft6%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Call+the+carvery%21+Updating+a+British+staple&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kft6%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F87a263ea5a80cdf8dbfee3fb27bf164f9534b357%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Carveries are often all-you-can-eat. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
Which is all a bit sad. Or certainly a missed opportunity. Who would not like 
the idea of being able to stuff yourself (unless you’re banned for eating too 
much <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/2001/jul/19/linusgregoriadis>) on every 
potential element of a Sunday roast, mixing and matching meats with abandon, 
even if it is just turkey, gammon and beef? Plus, there is nothing inherently 
flawed about such catering. Carveries are often bad because the core 
ingredients are poor, and then everything is (over)cooked in advance for 
convenience. But with a little more thought and care it would be easy to 
produce a superior carvery: occasionally, you do hear of pubs trying to ramp up 
standards.

Related: Is the Sunday roast over – or just getting posher? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/shortcuts/2016/feb/29/sunday-roast-wetherspooms-lunch-dinner-over-posher>

There are couple of Les Routiers-approved pubs 
<http://www.punchbowlinn.com/home/eat/aga-carvery/> in the Midlands that cook 
their carvery joints in (ooooh, get them!) an Aga and, curiously, the 
south-west and Cornwall particularly 
<http://www.thatsmycornwall.com/cornwalls-tastiest-roast-dinners-carveries/> 
seems to be a bit of a hotbed of next-level carvery action.The Norway Inn 
<http://www.norwayinn.co.uk/eat/> in Truro serves local venison, while the 
Lanhydrock Hotel <http://www.lanhydrockhotel.com/dine/>offers a choice of five 
meats, including Cornish pork and lamb alongside “imaginatively” cooked 
vegetables.

However, the most ambitious attempt to redefine our perception of the carvery 
(and its cousin, the hog roast) will occur in July, when Carve opens in central 
London 
<http://www.bighospitality.co.uk/Business/London-carvery-chain-to-open-30-sites-in-five-years>
. A fast-food operation attempting to tap into our interest in high-protein 
diets, it will serve a choice of “impeccably sourced”, freshly carved meats in 
£6.95 “carvepots”. Meats such as roasted bacon, eight-hour cooked salt beef and 
smoked pork leg will be sliced over healthy salads and slaws. Combinations will 
include jerk-roasted turkey with coconut rice, black-eyed peas and Scotch 
bonnet relish or short-horn beef with roast cherry tomatoes, spelt, parsley and 
capers. Those will initially be served as set meals, but the long-term plan is 
to allow customers to mix ‘n’ match meats and sides. Founder Daniel Bear says:

We can tell you the postcode of each and every joint, its husbandry, what it 
was fed on. Another point of difference is our insistence on sous-videing 
first, and other slow-roasting techniques which I’ve worked on with the chef,
Mark Broadbent <http://markbroadbent.tv/>. It’s all going to be served very 
quickly, too. At lunch, we can serve up to 800 customers, so it’s all about 
speed. We’ll be roasting off the meats and as soon as they come out of the oven 
our guys will be carving them. The speed we’ll be going through them means they 
won’t have that chance to dry out on a hotplate. And there aren’t any roast 
potatoes or big, dry Yorkshire puddings. It’s all about superfood bases, 
top-quality meat and, hopefully, propelling British carvery into the 21st 
century.

So forward-thinking is Carve that this carvery will even be serving tofu. 
Would you love to see carvery revitalised? And where can we already get a great 
one?
