
Genetics is a science almost without a history. There was Gregor Mendel 
<http://www.nature.com/scitable/topicpage/gregor-mendel-and-the-principles-of-inheritance-593>
, of course, but his work was ignored for decades. Nowadays, of course, its 
advances are hailed in daily press releases. Modern biology will cure cancer, 
fix damaged DNA and uncover hidden talents, if not today then tomorrow (or 
perhaps in a few decades). The double helix has become the icon of the 21st 
century.

My own link with its roots was with the Russian geneticist Theodosius 
Dobzhansky <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Theodosius_Dobzhansky>, born in 1900. 
He spent his early career looking for useful genes in the semi-wild horses of 
Central Asia, interspersed with studies of local ladybirds and butterflies. In 
1927 he left for the USA and, for the rest of his life, worked on fruit flies 
across the Americas. On the way he founded the modern science of evolutionary 
genetics.

Dobzhansky was a character out of Turgenev 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ivan_Turgenev>: passionate and ready to take 
offence, but with a deep interest in the arts and fluent in half a dozen 
languages (English, at least when it came to accent, not among them). He was 
proud of his distant kinship withDostoevsky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/fyodordostoevsky>, but was even more so of 
having been given, as a young man, a cigar by William Bateson – the Cambridge 
academic who in 1904 invented the word “genetics” – on the latter’s visit to St 
Petersburg.

Once at the site he shed 30 years, hopping joyfully across the rocks

In modern context he resembles Vladimir Nabokov’s character Pnin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/may/08/classics.vladimirnabokov>, hero 
of the eponymous novel, which features a Russian émigré and his series of 
tragi-comic rows with colleagues and officials that ends up with his exile from 
New York and a forced move to the far west. Just that happened to Dobzhansky, 
and he too broke several close friendships after blows to his scientific
amour-propre. Nabokov was a keen lepidopterist interested in butterfly hybrids, 
and the two may well have met.

I encountered Dobzhansky in 1975, on a field trip to the Anza-Borrego Desert 
in California. He had been ill and depressed, and on the drive I sat somewhat 
overawed as he talked not about genetics but of his quarrels with 
administrators and of how his own work had never fully been appreciated.

Once at the site, however, the warhorse heard the trumpets (or at least 
smelled the rotten bananas used as bait) and he shed 30 years, hopping joyfully 
across the rocks. He was impressed by my own simple trick of trapping the flies 
not with a small net but with a large plastic bag and said, loud enough for me 
to overhear: “That young man will become a great biologist.”

He was wrong about that, and about his own reputation, which is even stronger 
today than four decades ago. It was, alas, his last field trip – Theodosius 
Dobzhansky died six months later.

Steve Jones’s new book No Need for Geniuses (Little Brown, £25) is out on 6 
April. To order a copy for £20 visitbookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/383827/> 
