
Cities have a huge waste problem. Levels are expected to more than double 
<http://www.ibm.com/smarterplanet/global/files/us__en_us__cities__14_navigant_research.pdf>
 (pdf) over the next 20 years in low and middle income countries as the 
population increases towards an estimated 8.6 billion by 2030.

Ecube Labs is one of a handful of startups trying to tackle the issue through 
technology. Based inSouth Korea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-korea>
, the company produces solar-powered, smart waste bins which allow cities to 
monitor the levels of rubbish in each bin. The tech also compacts the waste. It 
has established some 2,500 smart waste networks at cities, campuses, amusement 
parks and restaurants worldwide, and expects to double the number by the end of 
the year.

Waste technology is not usually top of the list when it comes to smart city 
infrastructure; energy, transportation or water tend to get more attention. But 
the market isgrowing 
<http://www.ibm.com/smarterplanet/global/files/us__en_us__cities__14_navigant_research.pdf>
 (pdf), with smart urban waste solutions estimated to help process more than 
40% of all urban waste worldwide.

While most of the growing industry’s focus is on Europe and the US, Ecube Labs 
says it wants to prove that Latin America is full of potential and is piloting 
schemes inColombia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/colombia>. “When we talk 
to investors and even [the] media, they always have this misconception that our 
solutions are only for rich countries,” says Roger Kim, Ecube Labs’s executive 
director. “We tried to prove people wrong.”

Several Latin American cities such as Bogota, Buenos Aires, Mexico City and 
Santiago are already adopting digital tracking of waste collection trucks, says 
Juan Alfredo Rihm Silva, water and sanitation specialist at the 
Washington-based Inter-American Development Bank (IADB). “Latin America is 
becoming more environmentally aware and tech-savvier,” he says.


Colombia’s quasi-governmental organisation Interaseo, in charge of the 
country’s waste management, wanted to solve the problem of overflowing bins in 
busy areas where bigger bins couldn’t necessarily fit, Kim says.

In 2015 Ecube Labs equipped two cities, Ibague and Santa Marta, with smart 
waste networks using 130 of its Clean Cubes – sleekly designed bins fitted with 
compactors and fill sensors that report when the bin is ready to be picked up – 
as well as a Wi-Fi hotspot and an LED ad screen, all powered by a solar panel.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktgb%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktgb%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf3413ba23c9869ec28ef85407d10bb6bd460011%2F0_0_3264_2448%2Fmaster%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Internet%20of%20bins%3A%20smart%2C%20solar%20powered%20trashcans%20in%20Colombian%20cities&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktgb%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Internet+of+bins%3A+smart%2C+solar+powered+trashcans+in+Colombian+cities&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktgb%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf3413ba23c9869ec28ef85407d10bb6bd460011%2F0_0_3264_2448%2Fmaster%2F3264.jpg>
 The Clean Cube smart bin Photograph: Ecube Labs 
However, to scale in emerging markets such as Colombia, Ecube Labs understood 
it would have to bring the prices down. That meant finding a solution which 
didn’t involve replacing a city’s entire existing infrastructure with its 
$2,000-$3,000 (£1,400-£2,000) Clean Cube smart bins.

It adapted its technology to focus on a cheaper way of providing the most 
important element: the data. That culminated in the Clean Cap, a fist-sized 
sensor with a 10-year battery life that can be fastened to a city’s existing 
bins of all sizes. Debuted in late 2014, the Clean Cap has been distributed in 
Europe, the Middle East, Asia, North America and Mexico, and Ecube Labs aims to 
use it to give more options to Latin American cities.

Appeal of smart bins

Cities like the smart system because drivers don’t have to waste time checking 
on empty bins. This reduces the hours they work and can lower waste management 
operational costs by 80% percent, according to Ecube Labs.

The network can be accessed on an app by drivers or management in an office. 
On top of sensing how full the bins are, the software predicts when the bins 
will be full and provides recommendations for driver shift changes, route 
alterations, optimal bin sizes and other ways to enhance operations.


While rivals like US-based Bigbelly and Finnish startup Enevo also handle 
smart waste systems, Ecube Labs believes the customisability of both its 
hardware and software is its edge in a growing market. For example, Kim says, 
Interaseo chose the Clean Cube because it could fit the city’s existing bins. 
“If you want to solve the waste issue … you have to accommodate the city, you 
have to customise the solution,” Kim says.

But there is a limit to how much the smart waste industry can grow, which is 
the point when technology development outpaces market adoption.Waste 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/waste> management chiefs, Kim says, 
are typically resistant to investing in new methods.


Top-down decision-making process for financing waste management projects means 
people at the top must endorse it, says Kim. Meanwhile, the management often 
faces resistance from the collectors on the ground, who may fear for their jobs 
or simply refuse to take advice from a faceless app.


During training sessions in Korea, when asked to only collect the bins when 
they are 90% full or higher, collectors still collected when they were less 
than 50% filled, Kim said, adding that it took six months on average to 
convince workers to use the solution effectively.


Related: Why China's waste pickers are a better alternative to incineration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/may/26/why-chinas-waste-pickers-are-a-better-alternative-to-incineration>

“The problem with the top-to-bottom type of approach is that even if we prove 
the effectiveness of the solution ... the cities need [endorsement] from the 
collectors themselves,” Kim says.


This hasn’t stalled interest in Ecube Labs’s technology. The company has had 
expressions of interest from cities in Mexico, Chile and Brazil, where it is 
working on arranging pilot projects with the Clean Cap for mass market 
deployment.

While acknowledging the potential of smart waste solutions in the region, 
IADB’s Rihm Silva warns of possible negative social effects. “For example, in 
some cities in the region,informal recyclers 
<http://www.iadb.org/en/topics/solid-waste/bringing-informal-recyclers-into-the-formal-system,3837.html>
 work by extracting valuable recyclables straight from the street’s collection 
bins – sometimes even forcing themselves into the bins,” he says. “The addition 
of compaction technology to bins would have a social impact in this case, which 
would need to be considered and mitigated.”

Eric Woods, research director at Navigant Research, believes there is a strong 
desire in Latin America to address urban infrastructure and service issues. 
“There is a good potential [for smart waste systems] as Latin American cities 
adopt new technologies to address the long-term underinvestment in city 
infrastructure and services,” he says, adding that Ecube Labs’s 
easy-deployment, low-maintenance approach works well in Latin America, where 
there is even more need to be pragmatic and show quick wins.
