
The thought of the exam hall. The noise of the invigilator walking up and 
down. The deafening sound of the clock ticking. For some students, the pressure 
and stress of exams can be suffocating.

The students who are most likely to perform well under pressure have a very 
specific outlook 
<http://www.innerdrive.co.uk/Release_Your_Inner_Drive/performing-under-pressure/>
 and will have repeatedly practised nurturing this so it comes as second 
nature. But now that exams are here, the time for that has passed. So what is 
the best advice for those who are prone to panicking?

Take a deep breath

When under pressure, your brain becomes awash with hormones such as adrenaline 
andcortisol <http://hyper.ahajournals.org/content/33/6/1364.full>. In many 
cases, this makes people speed up, as they think they have less time left than 
they actually do.

Related: Six ways students can prepare for success on the day of an exam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/may/10/six-ways-students-can-prepare-for-success-on-the-day-of-an-exam>

Researchers have also discovered a vicious cycle between emotions and heart 
rate <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25869930>. The more stressed you are, 
the faster your heart beats. But a faster heart-rate is often interpreted as 
stress, which means a tough situation can quickly escalate. If you pause for a 
moment and take a deep breath, this helps everything slow down and break the 
cycle.

Read the question twice – without holding your pen

One of the most frequent mistakes made in an exam is misreading the question. 
Re-reading a question sounds so simple, but it’s amazing how easily this can 
lapse. For students who have low impulse control, try recommending they put 
down their pen when they read the question. This will help counteract the urge 
to rush and write down an answer immediately.

Think back to your revision: have you answered similar questions before? 

Even if a student hasn’t faced the exact same question before, remembering a 
successful thought process can help them get started. This is because it helps 
students be aware of their thought processes and select an effective way of 
thinking about a problem, rather than panicking. This concept of thinking about 
your thinking, known asmetacognition 
<http://www.innerdrive.co.uk/Release_Your_Inner_Drive/9-questions-to-help-develop-metacognition/>
, has been found to beone of the most effective strategies for improving 
self-awareness and self-regulation 
<https://educationendowmentfoundation.org.uk/evidence/teaching-learning-toolkit/meta-cognition-and-self-regulation/>
.

What would your teacher say?

Psychologists often talk about the Dunning-Kruger effect 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dunning%E2%80%93Kruger_effect>, which explains 
why novices often tend to overestimate their abilities and are less aware of 
their limitations. Teachers can circumvent this among students by asking them 
to place themselves in the shoes of someone older or wiser. Chances are that 
over the previous months teachers will have repeatedly given advice and 
suggestions on how best to go about answering a question. Asking “What would my 
teacher say?” should help students get on track.

Better to guess the answer than leave it blank

 Write nothing at all and you are guaranteed to get zero. Sport fans (as well 
as viewers of Broadwalk Empire) know this as “a shot to nothing 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MKFdvjr-MYg>”, as you have nothing to lose if 
it goes wrong. The only caveat here is at university, where some exams are 
negatively marked.

Stick to your exam strategy

It’s easy, when faced with a tricky question, to feel put off and demoralised. 
But having an exam strategy can help students stay focused.

Related: Secrets of the teenage brain: a psychologist's guide for teachers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/dec/09/teenage-brain-psychologist-guide-teachers-classroom>

Our brains crave certainty and control 
<https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/your-brain-work/200910/hunger-certainty>. 
When we feel unsure of what to do, or that we have no influence on the outcome, 
we tend to feel more stressed and anxious. By focusing on a pre-prepared game 
plan, students can wrestle back this feeling of certainty and control.

Don’t put too much pressure on yourself

 Some stress can help aid performance, but excessive pressure often stops 
people from thinking clearly. One sign that psychologists say is an indication 
that a person is under too much pressure isthinking in extremes 
<http://www.innerdrive.co.uk/Release_Your_Inner_Drive/challenging-unhelpful-beliefs/>
. This might include phrases such as “I have to get full marks” and “I must 
write at least four pages to answer this question”.


This all-or-nothing thinking (sometimes referred to as splitting 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Splitting_(psychology)>) isn’t helpful. Students 
should be encouraged to practise self-compassion and be kind to themselves in 
the exam. This can be done by using words and phrases such as “sometimes”, “I 
could” or “I might”. For example, “I might write four pages in answer to this 
question, but if I’m struggling and running out of time, it’s better to move 
on.”


Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
