
An independent investigation into the attack 
<http://www.msf.org.uk/kunduz-hospital-attack> on a Médecins Sans Frontières 
(MSF) hospital in Kunduz, Afghanistan, now looks likely, with theInternational 
Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission 
<http://www.ihffc.org/index.asp?Language=EN&page=home> (IHFFC) poised to 
conduct an enquiry.

“Until we understand what happened, how it happened, we cannot go back to 
Kunduz,” said MSF’s International President, Joanne Liu, at Chatham House on 
Tuesday. “We have been working on the understanding that people are respecting 
theGeneva conventions <http://www.theguardian.com/law/geneva-conventions> ... 
if somehow we decide that this is not respected anymore then that puts 
everything into a questionable state. What happened in Kunduz has a huge impact 
on the rest of the organisation, and the rest of the humanitarian community.”


Related: Kunduz hospital bombing latest in a long line of attacks on MSF staff 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/oct/05/kunduz-hospital-bombing-latest-long-line-attacks-msf-staff>

As the IHFFC awaits the agreement of the Afghanistan 
<http://www.theguardian.com/weather/afghanistan> and United States governments 
to proceed, we asked humanitarian organisations how, and if, the attack and 
subsequent investigation has changed the way they view frontline work, whether 
they will reassess operations in conflict areas, and if they are thinking 
differently about safety for their teams.


International Rescue Committee


“Our main concerns are armed opposition groups and actors who do not adhere to 
the conventions in place. That will be the challenge in the decade to come, 
especially in places like Syria,Central African Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/central-african-republic>, and northern 
Nigeria. The attack in Kunduz does give us pause to reflect on where we can 
safely operate and how close we should be to active conflicts.

We’re talking to these armed actors about what we do and how we’re different. 
We did this many decades ago when aid work started taking off, but I think 
there has been a steady deterioration and increasing lack of respect towards 
safeguarding aid workers. I think the NGO community needs to collectively make 
a stand for the protection of humanitarian workers.”Sanj Srikanthan, director 
of policy and practice

Related: Staying safe: aid workers and crime 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/mar/05/preventing-crime-aid-workers-humanitarians>

World Vision 

“There is always a risk to staff in areas of conflict. Where possible, the 
right type of coordination with involved forces is essential for staff safety 
and people’s ability to receive assistance. World Vision temporarily closed our 
programmes in Central African Republic during the escalation of violence in 
late September, but one of the consequences is that people dependent on 
assistance are unable to receive it as long as insecurity prevents access.

This is one of the hardest decisions we have to make as humanitarians – we 
know the families and children we will no longer be able to assist. We make 
that judgement call on a case-by-case basis, and it is reviewed frequently, but 
it is a difficult decision that keeps many people awake at night. Operating in 
such conflicts is becoming more common for us so we need to understand how to 
do that properly as that is where the biggest humanitarian needs often are.”
Johan Eldebo, senior humanitarian policy adviser

International Committee of the Red Cross

“We always remind parties involved in conflict – states and armed groups, for 
example – of their obligations to respect and follow International Humanitarian 
Law. The ICRC is not ready to accept any deliberate targeting of staff or 
medical facilities. We will always review safety and security arrangements in 
conflict zones, especially when incidents happen like the one in Kunduz. A 
couple of recent security incidents inYemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/yemen> caused the ICRC to temporarily 
suspend our operations and movements across the country. We maintained only the 
most urgent lifesaving interventions. This is the approach we always take after 
this kind of incident; reviews take place in light of the situation on the 
ground, the ability to do our work and talk with the relevant parties. All of 
that is considered together, and then we make the decisions.”Matthew Morris, UK 
spokesperson

Related: Safe from harm: how to reduce risks to personal safety in aid work 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/may/05/staying-safe-humanitarian-work>

Mercy Corps


“Our operations include security practices that are in line with local customs 
and that recognise changing dynamics. We are driven by our humanitarian mandate 
to help vulnerable people wherever they are, and we will continue to do this, 
but terrible incidents like the one in Kunduz are prompts to ensure 
humanitarians are ready and prepared to work in these environments. The safety 
and security of staff is paramount. The attack is also a reminder that all 
sides of a conflict respect and observe the rights of non-combatants and the 
space for humanitarians to serve communities in need. We call on the protection 
of civilians in accordance with the Geneva conventions.”Dee Goluba, director of 
field security

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
