
This piece is an extract from a written submission to the UK International 
Development Committee Global Humanitarian System inquiry

The number of people affected by humanitarian crises has more than doubled 
over the past decade. The frequency, scale, and severity of humanitarian crises 
are set to continue rising. Yet time and again, the traditional international 
humanitarian relief apparatus has been unable to respond adequately. Syria is 
only the latest example of this.

The aid sector is aware of deficiencies, but often frames the challenges it 
faces in terms that downplay its own responsibility. Needs are rising quickly, 
its leaders argue, and the scale of financing to respond to them is lagging 
behind. In reality, the problems facing the sector are much more fundamental. 
It has become a mammoth machinery that has, in many ways, lost track of what it 
stands for.

Irin reported in 2015 on focus groups 
<http://www.irinnews.org/analysis/2015/03/05/what-refugees-really-think-aid-agencies>
 conducted as part of the World Humanitarian Summit (WHS) process with refugees 
and other people affected by crises in the Middle East. The participants rated 
aid agencies in several categories and the results were quite damning:

Related: Don't blur the lines between development and humanitarian work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/12/dont-blur-the-lines-between-development-and-humanitarian-work>

 * Treating people with respect and dignity: 3.5/10

 * Being neutral and impartial: 4/10

 * Making people feel safe and protected from violence: 3.5/10

 * Meeting priority needs: 3/10

 * Helping people prepare for future crises: 2.5/10

 * Considering their opinions: 2.5/10 
In addition to feeling disempowered, communities affected by crises and local 
responders refer to abusive north-south relationships and attitudes thatborder 
on racist and colonial 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/mar/21/degan-ali-somali-woman-taking-on-the-humanitarian-system>
.

The core of the problem is that people affected by crises are no longer at the 
heart of humanitarian response. There are several reasons for this:
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j4hn%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j4hn%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2547d2a22b94b7a3251763a0ed9d1da5f193a4ad%2F0_107_4702_2822%2F4702.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20humanitarian%20system%3A%20'A%20mammoth%20machinery%20losing%20track%20of%20what%20it%20is%20for'&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j4hn%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+humanitarian+system%3A+%27A+mammoth+machinery+losing+track+of+what+it+is+for%27&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j4hn%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2547d2a22b94b7a3251763a0ed9d1da5f193a4ad%2F0_107_4702_2822%2F4702.jpg>
 Stephen O’Brien, centre, UN under-secretary-general for humanitarian affairs 
and emergency relief. visits a refugee camp in the south-east of Niger. 
Photograph: Boureima Hama/AFP/Getty Images 
First, the humanitarian system remains a largely foreign-driven endeavour, 
which, by definition, excludes affected communities. This results in a response 
that is expensive and inefficient; fails to build capacity, and thus 
sustainability; and is often out of touch with the cultures and societies it 
strives to serve. For these reasons, a push to localise aid has beenone of the 
clearest recommendations 
<http://www.irinnews.org/opinion/2015/08/05/editors-take-what-hope-reform> to 
emerge from the World Humanitarian Summit process, which some concrete 
proposals, such as theCharter4Change <https://charter4change.org/>, already 
gathering steam.

Second, if affected communities are to be at the heart of humanitarian action, 
they have to have power. The current architecture of the system does not give 
them much. Decision-making and funding flows are structured in a way that 
necessarily leaves engagement with local communities as an add-on rather than 
an integral part of the workflow. The business model doesn’t make sense.

Third, despite improvements in recent years, humanitarian response remains 
largely unaccountable for its actions. In any other sector, it could be 
considered a conflict of interest for the same body to be responsible for 
assessing needs, responding to them, and monitoring the quality of the 
response. Yet, in the humanitarian sector, this is normal practice. Meanwhile, 
aid agencies have improved their ability to garner feedback from the 
communities they serve, but they have yet to be able to meaningfully and 
systematically respond to it.

Fourth, the power and money of the humanitarian sector is concentrated among a 
few key actors who are reluctant to relinquish it. As the High-Level Panel on 
Humanitarian Financingput it 
<http://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/%5BHLP%20Report%5D%20Too%20important%20to%20fail%E2%80%94addressing%20the%20humanitarian%20financing%20gap.pdf>
: “Giving, receiving and channelling funds is concentrated in the hands of a 
few ‘giants’.” For example, the World Food Programme, which at 14,000 staff 
constitutes the world’sbiggest aid agency 
<https://fts.unocha.org/pageloader.aspx?page=emerg-globalOverview&Year=2015>, 
received 22% of allhumanitarian funding in 2015 
<http://newirin.irinnews.org/the-humanitarian-economy/>. WFP, the UN Refugee 
Agency (UNHCR) and UNICEF together handled nearly half of the $19bn (£13bn) in 
funding reported. Rather than recognise the richness, diversity and added value 
of a de-centralised, networked humanitarian response ecosystem, some of these 
actors continue to believe in a command and control structure that is 
increasingly recognised as being out of touch with reality.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j4hn%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j4hn%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c2310a155b6147a90ce1082aa83b470090fbaf9%2F0_40_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20humanitarian%20system%3A%20'A%20mammoth%20machinery%20losing%20track%20of%20what%20it%20is%20for'&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j4hn%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+humanitarian+system%3A+%27A+mammoth+machinery+losing+track+of+what+it+is+for%27&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j4hn%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c2310a155b6147a90ce1082aa83b470090fbaf9%2F0_40_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Workers unload a cargo plane carrying humanitarian aid from Saudi Arabia at 
the Baghdad International Airport in Iraq. Photograph: Karim Kadim/AP 
The landscape is changing whether the oligarchs like it or not: national 
governments, diaspora communities, volunteers and the private sector are 
playing increasingly important roles. And yet, as just one example, the global 
humanitarian co-ordination body, the Inter-Agency Standing Committee, excludes 
all of these groups.

The upcoming World Humanitarian Summit 

There have been hundreds, if not thousands, of proposals for change 
<http://www.irinnews.org/report/101867/bright-ideas-better-aid> floating around 
the World Humanitarian Summit process. The Secretariat did an excellent job of 
consulting a wide diversity of people, but by its own admission to Irin in a 
private interview, failed to then build consensus around a priority set of 
proposals.

The UN Secretary-General’s report for the WHS was described by donors and aid 
workers alike as a “menu” of options with something for everyone but a lack of 
clear prioritisation. It emphasises preventative, aspirational and normative 
options rather than the nitty-gritty “architectural” problems and opportunities.

 In recent months, the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, 
OCHA, has increasingly taken control of the WHS process from what was meant to 
be a quasi-independent secretariat. Many observers feel the five “core areas of 
responsibility” outlined in the secretary general’s report fail to sufficiently 
draw upon the extensive consultation process. One secretariat staff told Irin: 
“Now, it’s a bunch of people in New York writing the SG report, and who 
literally have taken over a lot of the process.”

Within this messy landscape, some proposals have begun floating to the top, 
and, more importantly, others have fallen by the wayside. Perhaps 
unsurprisingly, discussion about the key, structural problems have increasingly 
been pushed aside.

As one example, the summit will host seven high-level roundtables with world 
leaders to pledge commitments around political leadership to prevent and end 
conflicts, upholding the norms that safeguard humanity, a commitment to address 
forced displacement, catalysing action to achieve gender equality, natural 
disasters and climate change: managing risks and crises differently, from 
delivering aid to ending need and humanitarian financing. An eighth planned 
roundtable entitled “Building the future of humanitarian action: towards more 
effective, context-specific, and predictable responses” – meant to address the 
core architecture of the system – did not appear on the final list of 
roundtables, seemingly due to a “resistance”, as one secretariat member put it, 
from some IASC members to opening such a conversation.

Similarly, of the 15 special sessions, only one (People at the Centre) comes 
close to speaking to these structural issues. Instead, they focus instead on 
easier fixes, such as including people with disabilities in humanitarian action 
and providing education in emergencies.

Related: The world needs a humanitarian fund to assist long-term crises 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/apr/13/global-humanitarian-fund-respond-to-long-term-crises-population>

To what extent are improvements to humanitarian responses inhibited by the 
slow pace of reform within the UN system? It is not only a question of the slow 
pace of reform, but the willingness to reform in the first place. Irin has 
conducted several interviews with high-level aid officials on the topic of 
reform and found little evidence of real momentum for change, particularly 
among IASC members, who have vested interests, mostly financial, in the status 
quo.

For example, one might expect localisation to cause the World Food Programme 
to shrink its size and influence in favour of local actors. But in aninterview 
with Irin 
<http://www.irinnews.org/q-and/2015/08/05/can-un-aid-change-qa-top-officials>, 
Ertharin Cousin, executive director of the WFP, said she did not intend to 
shrink her workforce of 14,000.

An Irin interview in October 2015 with Stephen O’Brien, the incoming 
under-secretary-general and emergency relief co-ordinator, further reflected 
the limited appetite for substantive change. He said: “the UN doesn’t have to 
change”; that “the system isn’t broken, it’s simply broke”; and that the UN 
only has to “build on the fantastic track record” by finding “extra ways of 
delivering humanitarian action”. This does not suggest a recognition of the 
need for any fundamental, structural changes. While his tune has sincechanged 
<https://www.odi.org/events/4350-humanitarian-response-crisis>, O’Brien’s – and 
others’ – recognition of the need for fundamental, structural changes remains 
unclear.

It is not only UN agencies that have at times resisted reform. Some 
international NGOs are also worried about what the push to localise aid 
response means for their own existence. Donors, including the Department for 
International Development, have a vital role to play in walking the talk of 
reform.

Read the full submission of the UK International Development Committee Global 
Humanitarian System inquiry here 
<http://data.parliament.uk/writtenevidence/committeeevidence.svc/evidencedocument/international-development-committee/the-global-humanitarian-system/written/31694.html>
.

Heba Aly is managing editor of Irin <http://www.irinnews.org/>, the 
humanitarian news organisation
