
When did you last build a boat? Maybe that seems an outlandish concept – 
something forNoah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/feb/11/noahs-ark-round-ancient-british-museum-mesopotamian-clay-tablets-flood>
, forloftsmen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/jun/10/britains-last-few-shipbuilders-course-fiscal-storm>
, forbearded woodsmen <http://tylermilesray.com/the-woodsman-indie-portrait/>, 
not for you.

But go back 50 years, and you will find lots of normal people built boats. The 
Mirror dinghy <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mirror_(dinghy)> was a plywood DIY 
project conceived by the Daily Mirror newspaper in the 1960s, to bring sailing 
to the masses. Boat building was a family pastime, a fun thing for a Saturday, 
and achievable with little experience, basic equipment and materials.

Not only are they fun, but boats are useful. You can take advantage of 
Britain’s 3,541km of waterways 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2007/feb/10/saturday.boatingholidays.green1>.
Revolutionise your commute 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/video/2014/jul/14/canoe-to-work-alternative-commute-london-peter-kimpton-video>
.Escape a flood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2000/sep/14/internationalnews.archaeology>.

Even if the floods aren’t coming, retired engineer Jim Flood, creator of the 
Openboat project <https://sites.google.com/a/theopenboat.org/the-open-boat/>, 
has plans for you. Flood has designed a rowing boat you can make yourself from 
a sheet of plastazote (camping mat material) and four strips of softwood. The 
total cost is around £100 (a fibreglass model would set you back a couple of 
thousand). He has tested his design, checked it is water-worthy, and given away 
the instructions for freeon his website 
<https://sites.google.com/a/theopenboat.org/the-open-boat/> (alongside 
instructions for making a wooden rowing machine, a canoe, and a kayak).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEUo9nUU3aUA&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEUo9nUU3aUA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEUo9nUU3aUA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEUo9nUU3aUA&media=>
 How to build your own boat - part one. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEeqrqSwf3Pg&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEeqrqSwf3Pg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEeqrqSwf3Pg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEeqrqSwf3Pg&media=>
 How to build your own boat - part two. 
Flood’s motive runs deeper than just getting more Guardian readers into boats, 
though. After he retired, he trained as a rowing coach and discovered that 
rowing has a problem. It’s an incredibly expensive sport, and it costs a 
fortune to ship fibreglass rowing boats out to poorer countries with no rowing 
boat industry of their own. When the boats get damaged it costs a fortune to 
replace the parts. Often, damaged rowing boats in African or South American 
countries end up covered in patches, battered and abandoned. Young sportspeople 
in developing countries aren’t pursuing rowing in significant numbers – but why 
would they when the sport is so richly funded elsewhere? They don’t stand a 
chance.

The problem for rowing is that if poorer countries aren’t able to take part, 
the sport risks its place at theOlympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympics-general>.

For an engineer with a creative spirit, a problem is an opportunity. Flood 
already had experience as an innovator (“not an inventor. I’m not coming up 
with something new, I’m taking something and improving it.”) He’d had two ideas 
on the BBC science programmeTomorrow’s World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jul/25/tomorrows-world-bbc-maggie-philbin-science>
, including a rice-powered flag on a timer for Filipino lobster pots.

The answer to the rowing boat problem, thought Flood, was to make rowing boats 
widely available, and the best way to do that was by allowing people to build 
their own. So the plastazote model was born, using cheap, waterproof materials 
which are widely available around the world.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b6tj%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b6tj%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F31%2F1438357541341%2F676014a5-b081-4726-9503-df66d3519a0a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=If%20you%20do%20one%20thing%20this%20week%20%E2%80%A6%20build%20a%20boat&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b6tj%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=If+you+do+one+thing+this+week+%E2%80%A6+build+a+boat&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b6tj%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F31%2F1438357541341%2F676014a5-b081-4726-9503-df66d3519a0a-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Ahoy there ... one of Flood’s boats under construction Photograph: Jim Flood 
Flood is eager for rowers in developing countries to adopt the new plastazote 
boats; so that they can become as ferociously competitive at rowing as those in 
European countries, and so that everyone can enjoy rowing in the Olympics for 
decades to come.

It’s also a way for people to reconnect with making things. “I wanted 
something that families could make together and have fun with,” says Flood. 
“Not just going to the supermarket and buying a canoe off the shelf, but 
getting involved.

“People used to make canoes out of strips of canvas. Today, with shop-bought 
boats, there is very little you can do. You can’t tinker with the exotic 
material or design. We are losing our connection with technology.”

Anyone can help Flood’s mission by building a boat of their own. “The 
aspirations of people in developing countries is to want what we’ve got,” says 
Flood. “My additional aim is to get these boats made over here to show that 
British people are using these, Dutch people are using them, German people are 
using them. Then everyone will want one.”
