
Ask most people about housing today, and few will say they’re not worried. A 
private tenant concerned about the precarity; a family languishing on council 
housing waiting lists; an older homeowner worried their children won’t be able 
to afford to buy a home: few people think everything’s rosy when it comes to 
bricks and mortar.

But equally, few people have a clear idea of what the future of housing holds. 
Could it be a continuation of rocketing house prices and unprecedented levels 
of homelessness? A crash that lets many people on to the housing ladder, while 
leaving millions of others in negative equity?

Housing <https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing> charity Shelter has 
collaborated with Nationwide Building Society to produce a morphological 
analysis of four potential futures for the UK’s housing problem.

Related: London had a sub-prime housing problem. Now it has a super-prime 
crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/20/london-housing-crisis-sub-prime-problem-super-prime>

The charity had hoped to have campaigned itself out of existence by now, but 
the country is again facing a housing crisis. “It has been 50 years since 
Shelter was founded and, whilst the slums of the 60s are thankfully gone, a 
housing crisis is once again taking a huge toll on millions of ordinary 
families across the country. This is the tragic result of successive 
governments’ failure to address the root cause of our housing problems,” says 
Campbell Robb, chief executive of Shelter. “Things will only change when 
politicians start investing in homes that people on lower incomes can afford.”

Shelter’s analysis highlights a shift in values in the UK, from authority and 
hierarchy to autonomy and diversity. Can this shift impact housing policy? The 
charity explores this in its four visions for the future of housing.

1. Local and community led – but fragmented
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tf27%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tf27%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F406c779a2e182856f8af7b0aed4555f12e7a78f0%2F0_128_5616_3369%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rate-your-landlord%20or%20more%20prefabs%3F%20Four%20visions%20for%20the%20future%20of%20housing&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tf27%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rate-your-landlord+or+more+prefabs%3F+Four+visions+for+the+future+of+housing&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tf27%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F406c779a2e182856f8af7b0aed4555f12e7a78f0%2F0_128_5616_3369%2F5616.jpg>
 A resident of a New Cross housing co-operative, of the type envisaged in one 
of Shelter’s future visions. Photograph: Frank Baron for the Guardian 
In this scenario, responsibility for housing is locally devolved, and there’s 
an increase in community-led approaches, such as co-operatives, co-housing, and 
low-cost housing in exchange for care work.

But the localised nature of provision means that fragmentation is inevitable, 
with different areas having different levels of deprivation and need. 
Provision, including for the homeless, becomes increasingly uneven. Campaign 
groups find themselves spread thin, having to be both hyperlocal to connect to 
where the work is being done, while remaining national to press for consistency 
of standards and enforceable housing legislation.

2. Mass housebuilding – despite the skills shortage
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tf27%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tf27%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9017b1c9eb6d3586438baf0fcbde6ba59cecc649%2F0_72_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rate-your-landlord%20or%20more%20prefabs%3F%20Four%20visions%20for%20the%20future%20of%20housing&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tf27%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rate-your-landlord+or+more+prefabs%3F+Four+visions+for+the+future+of+housing&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tf27%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9017b1c9eb6d3586438baf0fcbde6ba59cecc649%2F0_72_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 One future scenario envisages a mass housebuilding programme, but innovative 
building is key to overcoming skills shortages. Photograph: Christopher 
Furlong/Getty Images 
Shelter’s second scenario foresees a mass housebuilding programme, while 
facing huge financial pressures due to land and building costs, and continuing 
skills shortages.

A rise in pre-fabricated homes and modular houses that can be adapted in terms 
of size will be more common to deal with changing needs, and a drive to build 
homes at lower costs. Homes being shipped along England’s roads will be a more 
common sight, because economic development takes longer than housebuilding, so 
homes that stand empty because there is no work nearby will be be moved closer 
to the work.

Despite pre-assembly, skills are in short supply, so quality sometimes 
suffersCampaigning increasingly focuses on minimum standards and keeping up the 
pressure on build rates. Campaigning is more national than local, and the 
housebuilding drive causes greater affiliation with party politics and interest 
in national parties, rather than local issues.

3. Renting rights – with fewer long term homes
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tf27%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tf27%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F851d269408d7c98418e3a54eabbb158cee209946%2F0_1_1603_962%2F1603.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rate-your-landlord%20or%20more%20prefabs%3F%20Four%20visions%20for%20the%20future%20of%20housing&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tf27%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rate-your-landlord+or+more+prefabs%3F+Four+visions+for+the+future+of+housing&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tf27%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F851d269408d7c98418e3a54eabbb158cee209946%2F0_1_1603_962%2F1603.jpg>
 Homes that lie empty would be compulsorily let by the council in one of 
Shelter’s visions for future housing. Photograph: Don McPhee for the Guardian 
In this scenario, private renting, rather than building, is the focus for 
public policy. Growing digital platforms amplify tenants’ concerns and allow 
them to rate landlords and circumvent the black market in unregulated 
landlords. The rights of tenants are more strongly enforced, but housing is 
seen as a transitive need, rather than a long-term home: workers are more 
likely to move often for work, and less likely to accumulate belongings and put 
down roots.

Politically, a greater shift occurs between those who live off finance and 
investments and those who do not, but Shelter says “productive capitalism” is 
rewarded. Homes that have been left empty by their owners for more than a year 
will be subject to compulsory lettings.

4. Little change – and an increasingly polarised society
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tf27%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tf27%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad52f9cbe3f1b8c3d91b1f3963fe2b26fe3f5430%2F0_57_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rate-your-landlord%20or%20more%20prefabs%3F%20Four%20visions%20for%20the%20future%20of%20housing&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tf27%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rate-your-landlord+or+more+prefabs%3F+Four+visions+for+the+future+of+housing&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tf27%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad52f9cbe3f1b8c3d91b1f3963fe2b26fe3f5430%2F0_57_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 The final scenario envisages extended help to buy schemes with little market 
changes. Photograph: Matt Cardy/Getty Images 
The final scenario sees little change in the government approach to housing. 
Government intervention in the market is about bolstering and pump-priming 
rather than regulating costs. Attitudes towards housing are more 
individualistic: people are more insular and worried about their safety, 
whether they are homeowners installing razor wire and CCTV around their 
properties, or the people facing homelessness and left with weak legal 
frameworks, and reliant on charities.

Campaigning for housing rights is more necessary than ever. With little social 
mobility and an increasingly polarised society, housing is seen as both a nest 
egg and social crutch. Those who have lucked out and gained a foothold on the 
housing ladder are keen to protect and pass on their wealth even as they 
struggle to afford mortgage repayments and worry their investments have been 
overvalued. Anyone with housing protects themselves, creating a more 
individualist world.

 * Shelter and Nationwide gave the Guardian exclusive access to their report. 
Join the Guardian Housing Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/housing/register/> to read more pieces like 
this. Follow us on Twitter (@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/GuardianHousingNetwork/?ref=hl> to keep up with the 
latest social housing news and views.
