
A few years back, Rosie Sykes' recipes graced these very pages. Some readers 
will remember that she was Weekend's Kitchen Doctor (a title later appropriated 
by lesser figures). Basically, the idea was that readers, faced with certain 
challenges in the kitchen, wrote in, laying out their problems - afraid of 
fish; veg-hating kids; dietary prohibitions; that kind of thing. Then, with 
great good humour and immaculate skill, Rosie would trek off to the household 
in question and rustle up a dazzling sequence of dishes, which would be scoffed 
down by the grateful reader and their families and friends. It was a cracking 
good column because Rosie was a cracking good cook.

Is a cracking good cook, I should say, because she never gave up the calling. 
She sees cooking as a way of making people happy. "And I like making people 
happy. My mum cooked every day, but she stopped when I was in my teens, and I 
sort of took over. Then my dad started asking for a spoon so he could clean his 
plate, and it all went from there."

She's been busy since she left these pages, but never more so than now, what 
with a pub kitchen to lash into shape and a book, The Kitchen Revolution (Ebury 
Press, Â£25), just out. She co-wrote The KR with Polly Russell and Zoe Heron, 
drawing on their experiences as working mothers and her own as the Kitchen 
Doctor. Hopefully the book will, she says, "help people organise themselves in 
the kitchen, and build their confidence about cooking".

She is "proud about staying more or less seasonal" in spite of the limited 
number of winter vegetables available in the UK. But seasonality is something 
she sets a good deal of store by. Respect for seasonal, and preferably local, 
ingredients was instilled into her by the two chefs she regards as her mentors: 
Joyce Molyneux, the goddess of the Carved Angel in Dartmouth, and Shaun Hill in 
his Merchant House days. "Joyce was the real reason I came into cooking," says 
Rosie. "I never felt she got the recognition she deserved. She was an amazing 
woman, but very shy. Shaun's just lovely, and a wonderful chef." The admiration 
is reciprocated - Hill tells me that Rosie's "a delight to have in the kitchen 
- she has a real passion for food".

Rosie has brought this passion for local and seasonal to her latest venture, 
the Olde Bell in Hurley, one of those home counties villages that reeks 
discreetly of money and rather less discreetly of tourism. The Olde Bell sits 
quietly near the heart of this genteel, Thames-side village, much as it has 
done since the year dot (or AD1135, according to a sign on the front). It has 
been brought into line with the 21st century in a respectful way, and has a 
vast garden at the back. Rosie doesn't own it, but her stamp is firmly on the 
menu, even though she has now handed over day-to-day cooking to Tony Arbano and 
Florence Fowler, both recently arrived from the much-lauded Anchor & Hope in 
London. The food has about it a distinctive gastronomic intelligence and 
literacy - it's Europhile in a very English way, combining deft technique and 
direct flavours to draw the best out of carefully chosen ingredients.

Some of Rosie's meat comes from Gabriel Machin of Henley (which is a relief, 
seeing as the other week I said here that it's one of my favourite places to 
shop), lamb and Gloucester Old Spot pork from Stockings Farm in Amersham. Bread 
comes from Brown Sugar in Stoke Row, which uses flour from a local mill that 
grinds the wheat from local farms. Kingcup Farm provides some of the veg - "The 
first time they sent me some Swiss chard, I wept - literally. It was so fresh 
and good" - while Steve Belcher, an old-fashioned greengrocer in Reading, fills 
in the fruit and veg she can't get on her doorstep.

It's the kind of grub that sends you away happy, which, of course, is Rosie 
Sykes' mission in life.
