
It appears that hostility towards the Daily Mail 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/dailymail> and all its works, including its 
editor-in-chief, is not confined to London-based liberals.

The former BBC Radio Scotland <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> 
presenter Derek Bateman, nodding to the Mail’s pro-unionist stance in the 
independence referendum, wrote this on his blog last week:

“I’m announcing today that I’ve been offered and have accepted a role writing 
for the Daily Mail. They’re looking for more diversity in their coverage and 
think I’ll provide balance.

It still involves matching the house style of course so I’ll be away for a few 
weeks at the Rothermere Conference and Re-education Centre in Portugal to learn 
the ropes. I’m also being fitted for a uniform, although I hear I might be the 
right size for Paul Dacre’s brown shirt.

I realise this will be a shock to regular readers but I will remain true to 
the principles of the Yes movement albeit with stylistic adjustments to include 
‘vile cybernats’, ‘evil leader’, ‘lunatic economics’, ‘immigrant crisis’ and 
‘let the bastards drown’. Otherwise I will stay loyal to the cause.

The editor said my picture by-line would have the strapline Swivel-eyed Bigot, 
but I think that was a joke...

I think my move is a sign that Scotland is moving on and that it’s time to go 
back to routinely denigrating our country and sneering at our people – in case 
the next generation gets ideas of adequacy.

When I get back from Europe – the place the immigrants come from – I’ll keep 
you posted.”

For the record, Bateman left the BBC in 2013. Before that, he enjoyed a 
lengthy newspaper career 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/profiles/33gGc9DwZfvfpjlZZ0LkrL2/derek-bateman>
, having had spells with the Scotsman, covering politics for the (Glasgow) 
Herald and working as a correspondent for the Observer.

Source: Derek Bateman <http://derekbateman.co.uk/> Hat tip: AllMediaScotland 
<http://www.allmediascotland.com/broadcasting/102470/your-noon-briefing-301/>
