
Mind your way

The practice of mindfulness is enjoying a moment in the sun. During our busy, 
increasingly tech-dominated day-to-day lives, it’s easy to forget the pleasure 
of living in the moment.

A few simple mindfulness techniques offer an ideal way to enhance your 
appreciation of the outdoors – concentrate on admiring a sunset, walking on a 
beach, or smelling a flower, and you may well savour the experience even more.

Related: How to build the perfect cheeseboard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/savour-the-moment/2016/jun/10/how-to-build-the-perfect-cheeseboard>

So step outside. Choose a calm environment where disruptions are minimal – 
perhaps a park in the early morning – or take the time to travel farther afield 
to somewhere more secluded. When you are ready, focus on your senses, listen to 
the call of the birds, feel the sun on your skin and touch the ground that you 
are sitting on.

Some researchers have found decreased levels of the stress hormone cortisol 
among practitioners of mindfulness, and while we’ve all known for years that 
getting outdoors does you good, researchers at Herriot Watt University recently 
proved it causes electrochemical changes in the brain that enhance wellbeing. 
That’s no surprise to Cambridge-based mindfulness instructor Dr Gareth Burr. 
“The thinking mind can sometimes complicate things,” he says. “It is great to 
forget busy ‘doing’ and get outside and invest in pure ‘being’. The Japanese 
have a name for it:shinrin-yoku, or ‘forest bathing’. Slowing down, and being 
at one with nature, can really feed your senses and have enormous benefits.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kgfe%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kgfe%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9be75a03f8ed4f398a8d6ae19ec6ba5b81eff6e%2F0_518_2377_2972%2F2377.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Get%20outside%20and%20savour%20the%20summer&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kgfe%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Get+outside+and+savour+the+summer&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kgfe%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9be75a03f8ed4f398a8d6ae19ec6ba5b81eff6e%2F0_518_2377_2972%2F2377.jpg>
 Nature will provide you with a constant supply of fresh ideas for drawing. 
Photograph: Mint Images 
Drawing

You may not previously have channelled your inner da Vinci – but sketching and 
drawing are great ways to reassess the world you see around you.

Nature will supply you with a constant supply of fresh ideas, colours and 
details – bringing a renewed energy to your artwork. So for a day of alfresco 
art, plan your route – perhaps there is a nature reserve or a park with a 
wildlife area near you that will provide good subjects. You should allow 
yourself at least a few hours when the light is steady.

Choose portable kit – a set of watercolour pencils, fibre-tip fineliners or a 
good range of pencils. Don’t forget a sharpener: blunt pencils are great for 
shading but you’ll need a sharper point for details.

Don’t skimp on the quality of your sketching paper, select a good grade that 
won’t curl up if it gets damp.

Once you’ve found your subject, do some thumbnail roughs to help you plan your 
composition, then get sketching. Practising art has been recognised as 
therapeutic for centuries – as well as being a great form of relaxation, it 
helps you develop observational skills, and improves hand-eye coordination; it 
is even said to improve connections between parts of the brain.

Feel fruity

In case you’ve forgotten that fruit and vegetables don’t actually grow in 
plastic containers, why not plan a day of picking your own? It’s a great way to 
reconnect with where your food actually comes from, and there are hundreds of 
pick-your-own farms in the UK.

Pickyourownfarms.org.uk <http://pickyourownfarms.org.uk/> will supply you with 
farm locations and inspiring ideas, but remember the availability of fruits 
varies according to the time of year, and can be affected by the weather – so 
it’s a good idea to phone ahead.

Pack sunscreen, plenty of fluids and disposable wipes, and wear clothes you 
can bear to see stained by juice or snagged by thorns. If you’re making a day 
of it, pack a picnic and consider choosing foods that will complement the 
juices and ciders produced by many of the farms.

Best of all, don’t be afraid to pick more than you can eat as there are plenty 
of ways to use up your fruit from making jam to drying, pickling or bottling it.

If you’d prefer to go foraging in the wild, August is the best month for 
blackberries. Rosehips, which make wonderful jam, thrive from September, which 
is also the best month for sloes – that can only mean one thing: homemade sloe 
gin, anyone?
