
Sure you don’t want a taste? It’s not my usual one, I’ve got raw pumpkin in 
today for a more autumnal flavour, plus some bark, that’s what so amazing about 
this nutrient extractor, you can eat all this rind and stuff your body couldn’t 
normally digest, because the machine breaks it down for you. Like, I’ve got a 
bag of kale in this one plus a banana, some cashew nuts, one mango, an avocado, 
strawberries, a mushroom, ginger, a tablespoon of yoghurt, coconut oil, 
beetroot, almond milk, prawns for vitamin B12, chia and hemp seeds, of course, 
half a kiwi fruit, peanut butter, one sardine and a whole pine cone.

Can you imagine how long it would take to eat all those nutrients if you had 
to put them on a plate and carve them up with a knife and fork – including all 
the skins and pips? – then chew them before swallowing? Twenty minutes, 
minimum. And I’ve got to that same point in around 30 seconds and it only comes 
to around 243.04 calories, give or take. If you don’t like the taste, no 
problem, drink it quickly and have a bucket handy. You can tell I’m a complete 
convert.

Well, I know some people like chewing, but these days I just find the whole 
idea of mastication quite eww. Bear in mind you’re just adding to the wear and 
tear on teeth. But this way I’ve consumed 423 grammes of pure superfood, I’m 
instantly healthier, and it’s taken only a matter of minutes. What’s not to 
love?

No, once you’ve sourced everything it doesn’t take a second to whizz it up in 
the goblet. The motor’s so big that stuff you can’t normally juice, like 
turnips and acorns, just magically disappear. Last weekend I made this 
incredible roast dinner smoothie – potatoes, beef, Yorkshire pudding, 
horseradish, plus chia seeds. There’s no bloating because the machine has 
already digested it for you. Honestly, once you’ve tried it you’ll never want 
to eat normally again.
