
Ireland’s second richest man has retreated from his battle with the media 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jun/01/irish-media-seek-right-to-report-on-denis-obriens-ties-with-ibrc>
 over claims made in the Irish parliament about his relationship with a 
bailed-out bank.

Lawyers for the telecoms and media tycoon Denis O’Brien told a court he never 
intended to gag a politician who used parliamentary privilege to suggest he had 
got preferential treatment from the former Anglo Irish Bank, now owned by the 
taxpayer.

Counsel for the Irish broadcaster, RTÉ , which was subject to an injunction 
preventing it from airing an item about his financial arrangements, described 
his position as a “spectacular climbdown”.

A high court judge told lawyers for O’Brien, RTÉ and the Irish Times 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/irish-times> that an earlier injunction he 
had granted the tycoon was never intended to trump parliamentary privilege, 
which allows media to report what is said in the Irish parliament.

“It’s clear to me that the court can’t make restrictions on the fair reporting 
of utterances in Dáil Éireann,” Justice Donald Binchy told a packed courtroom, 
referring to the Irish parliament’s lower house.

Within an hour of the hearing, RTÉ broadcast suggestions made by the 
independent TD (MP) Catherine Murphy that O’Brien secured a preferential 
interest rate of 1.25% on loans of about €500m (£360m) from the Irish Bank 
Resolution Corporation, the former Anglo Irish bank.

Murphy made her remarks in the Dáil last Thursday but RTÉ did not report them 
because of the injunction. The Irish Times and other media outlets were 
threatened with legal action by O’Brien if they reported what Murphy said. As 
in many countries that inherited the British legal system, Ireland’s courts 
have broad powers to issue injunctions preventing publication of news stories 
that may be libellous. Often details of the injunctions themselves must be kept 
secret, since publishing them would reveal the story itself.

Related: Irish media seek right to report on Denis O'Brien's ties with IBRC 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jun/01/irish-media-seek-right-to-report-on-denis-obriens-ties-with-ibrc>

Michael Cush, senior counsel acting for O’Brien, told Binchy that media 
outlets should be allowed to report Murphy’s comments. David Holland, 
representing RTÉ, said it was a “spectacular climbdown” by O’Brien.

Earlier on Tuesday, O’Brien hit back at his critics, saying he had never seen 
“such venom and hatred” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jun/02/irish-tycoon-denis-obrien-critics-anglo-irish-bank-injunction>
as in the past four days, during which politicians including the former 
attorney general criticised his perceived attempt to gag the media and 
parliamentarians.

Writing in the Irish Times, he said: “I have never experienced the level of 
abuse, venom and hatred resulting from taking a stand to protect privacy in 
relation to my financial affairs.”

Kevin Bakhurst, managing director for RTÉ news and current affairs, said the 
clarity provided by the judge was “an incredibly important message to send out 
to members of the Dáil and members of the press in Ireland”.

Murphy said the ruling vindicated  
<http://us5.campaign-archive2.com/?u=a0e3e2f17814c5b5feb9a1b04&id=8bd049e658> 
“the rights of elected representatives to raise matters of public concern” in 
the Dáil and said she would continue to pursue the issue surrounding the 
governance at IRBC through “the appropriate democratic channels available to 
me”.

O’Brien had argued that he was entitled to confidential banking as an Irish 
citizen. “I agree that Dáil privilege is an important component of our 
democracy; however, there is a parallel duty of care on the TDs and senators to 
use this privilege with integrity,” O’Brien wrote.
