
What is the Sunshine rule? 

The rule, or rather set of initiatives, will mean senior medical staff in 
England and Wales will have to declare gifts and hospitality received from 
pharmaceutical companies, or they could be dismissed and or prosecuted under the
Bribery Act <http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2010/23/contents>. If found 
guilty, they may face unlimited fines or imprisonment. NHS clinical 
commissioning groups (CCGs) and NHS hospital trusts will be responsible for 
maintaining registers that will document the pharma-related business interests 
of medics, rather like the UK parliament’sregister of MPs’ financial interests 
<https://www.parliament.uk/mps-lords-and-offices/standards-and-financial-interests/parliamentary-commissioner-for-standards/registers-of-interests/register-of-members-financial-interests/>
.

Why was it created? 

A Telegraph investigation revealed that many NHS workers were directly 
benefiting from hospitality, gifts and payments 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/nhs/12160260/NHS-officials-with-second-jobs-at-drug-firms.html>
 or even directly working for pharmaceutical companies. It discovered that more 
than 130 NHS officials involved in assessing which drugs are given to patients 
were also acting as paid consultants to pharmaceutical companies. Even members 
of the government panel responsible for NHS drug procurement, the 
Pharmaceutical Market Support Group, were revealed to be receiving paymentas 
consultants for large pharmaceutical companies. 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/nhs/12162032/Third-of-panel-overseeing-NHS-drugs-procurement-being-paid-by-pharmaceutical-firms.html>

Don’t they have something like this in the US already? 

Yes. US manufacturers of drugs, medical devices and other biological products 
are required under federal law –the Physicians Payments Sunshine Act 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2013/02/what-the-sunshine-act-means-for-health-care-transparency/272926/>
 – to disclose payments and items of value given to physicians and teaching 
hospitals. The legislation applies to a range of doctors, operating in areas 
from dentistry to chiropractors. But medical residents (junior doctors), nurse 
practitioners and office staff are not included.

Related: How does the pharmaceutical industry work with healthcare 
professionals? Event 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/mar/17/pharmaceutical-industry-work-healthcare-professionals-guardian-event>

When will it come into force?

This is difficult to establish. Different parts of the Sunshine rule will be 
coming into force at different times. As of 1 April 2016, there is a new clause 
in theNHS standard contract 
<https://www.england.nhs.uk/nhs-standard-contract/16-17/> around conflicts of 
interest and transparency on gifts and hospitality. NHS England said it is 
still consulting on whether or not to introduce strengthened statutory guidance 
for CCGs, which would set out how they should “reinforce their own internal 
arrangements so that conflicts of interest are managed effectively”.

NHS England <http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/england> is also 
setting up what it describes as a “task and finish group” to be chaired by Sir 
Malcolm Grant, which will “develop a set of rules on how conflicts should be 
identified and managed, to be adopted across the health system”.

How do healthcare professionals feel about it?

GPs are the most likely group of healthcare professionals to be affected by 
any rule changes, given their increased responsibilities for thecommissioning 
of primary care services 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/dec/11/can-gp-commissioners-improve-the-delivery-of-patient-care>
.

Prof Nigel Mathers, honorary secretary of the Royal College of General 
Practitioners <http://www.rcgp.org.uk/>, told the Guardian Healthcare 
Professionals Network: “Conflicts of interest (COIs) are inevitable but they 
are manageable. The important thing is that any COIs are declared and managed 
appropriately and transparently in order to maintain public confidence in 
healthcare professionals.”

He added that GPs are the most trusted healthcare professionals in the UK and 
that “as a college we trust our members to declare COIs without the need for 
introducing new legislation, but of course,GPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/gps> will abide by any laws that are 
passed”.

What does the pharmaceutical industry have to say about it all? 

The pharmaceutical industry has welcomed the Sunshine rule initiatives. The 
Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry 
<http://www.abpi.org.uk/Pages/default.aspx> (ABPI) represents companies 
supplying around 90% of all medicines used by the NHS and it’s happy to 
encourage what it describes as “a common ambition for greater transparency in 
our relationships”. It also points to efforts to promote openness about 
relationships between healthcare workers and the pharma industry, including the 
industry’s longstandingcode of practice 
<http://www.pmcpa.org.uk/thecode/Pages/default.aspx>. This code includes a 
range of activities from the appropriate use of direct mail to “the sponsorship 
of scientific and other meetings including payment of travel and accommodation 
expenses”.

And the Department of Health? 

Having tasked NHS England with addressing issues of transparency around 
relationships with NHS workers and medical businesses, the Department of Health 
felt it was inappropriate to comment on the progress being made on the Sunshine 
rule. It highlighted previous comments made by the health secretary,Jeremy Hunt 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-hunt>, in March outlining his hopes 
that new rules with stop extravagant hospitality and gifts from influencing 
commissioning in the NHS: “Further transparency in the way that decisions on 
how precious NHS resources are spent is welcome. These tough new rules will 
ensure every penny possible is directed to providing frontline patient care.”

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
