
Has Ken Livingstone lost the plot? Can he not see that what he said about 
Hitler and Zionism 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/28/jeremy-corbyn-denies-labour-crisis-over-antisemitism>
 was utterly barmy? Does he not realise that his remarks were an historical 
nonsense?

It is no wonder, except possibly to him and a lunatic Labour 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> fringe, that the national press of 
all political persuasions has turned on him.

The headlines, articles and editorials in Friday’s newspapers were unusually 
united in their condemnation of a politician whose clumsy attempts to quell 
allegations of antisemitism within Labour have had the opposite effect.

As the Guardian said: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/28/the-guardian-view-on-antisemitism-stay-vigilant-on-the-left-flank>
 “With singular crassness, instead of clearing the air yesterday, Mr 
Livingstone encouraged the accusation.”


Rather than helping his party leader, Jeremy Corbyn, he has sunk him into what 
the Daily Mirror called“a toxic swamp” 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/voice-mirror-labour-infighting-livingstone-7857287>
.

“Bizarrely”, said the Independent’s political editor, Andrew Grice 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/corbyn-s-leadership-has-heightened-labour-s-jewish-problem-only-he-can-bring-this-row-to-an-end-a7005836.html>
, Livingstone “leapt to the defence” of the suspended MP Naz Shah - for 
suggesting that Jews be transported to America - “when she was no longer 
defending herself.”

The Times viewed Livingstone’s “grotesque analogies” and “demagoguery” as 
symptomatic of Corbyn’s “calamitous leadership”. 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/comment/labours-sickness-rj5rnkk68>

For the Daily Telegraph, Livingstone’s “idiotic remarks” were a “gross 
inaccuracy” but“indicative of a philosophy that has been validated by Mr 
Corbyn’s election as leader of the Labour party.” 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion/2016/04/28/labour-mps-need-to-confront-jeremy-corbyn-over-anti-semitism/>

That view was echoed by the Daily Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-3564816/DAILY-MAIL-COMMENT-Labour-s-anti-semites-party-peril.html>
, which scorned Livingstone’s “absurd claim that Hitler was a Zionist” and 
thought Corbyn had failed to understand that it was “monstrously and 
deliberately offensive.”

Ditto the Daily Express 
<http://www.express.co.uk/comment/expresscomment/665472/Jeremy-Corbyn-refuses-tackle-Ken-Livingstone-Labour-anti-semitism-EU-trade-deal>
: “There is a poisonous bigotry within Labour and its leader is not taking the 
action necessary to get rid of it.”

And the Sun, dancing delightedly on Labour’s political grave with an editorial 
headlined “Red and buried” 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/sun_says/6500866/Sun-Says.html>, 
viewed Corbyn’s reaction to Livingstone’s “repugnant Hitler outburst” as 
pitiful.

This unity across the national newspaper board is very unusual indeed. Corbyn 
and his main media aide, Seumas Milne, should heed the message it sends.

Leaving aside the rightwing press reaction, they should note the reaction of 
papers generally favourable to Labour. The remarks by London’s former mayor 
have tainted both Corbyn and his party.

The Mirror, in accepting that “Corbyn doesn’t have a racist bone in his body”, 
said he must be aware that “the charge of antisemitism is undermining his 
position and tarnishing the party.”

The Guardian <http://www.theguardian.com/media/theguardian> believes that 
there is “an ill-advised temptation to shrug off” complaints about antisemitism 
on the left. It continued:

“Mr Corbyn is not an antisemite, and his enemies should not cheapen that 
charge by suggesting he is. There is, however, a question - put even by some 
sympathisers - as to whether there has been a selective hesitancy in condemning 
failings on the part of others. ..

He must now go beyond the routine denunciations and demonstrate that he - and 
his Labour party - is as instinctively attuned to this perennial virus as to 
every other form of racism.”

The Times <http://www.theguardian.com/media/thetimes> may be no friend of 
Labour but who can disagree with its argument that its “corroded state... is a 
catastrophe for the party and a colossal hindrance to its electoral prospects”?

And Labour should note this as well...

Party members would do well to read Robert Shrimsley’s heartfelt piece in the 
Financial Times 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/5e642d92-0c57-11e6-9456-444ab5211a2f.html#axzz476Xjoa4x>
. He told how he had been planning to vote for Sadiq Khan in the London mayoral 
election for “many good reasons.”

But, he wrote, “a vote for Mr Khan is a vote for Labour, and at the moment the 
Labour leadership has shown itself to be a party that is at best indifferent to 
antisemitism and at worst hostile to the Jewish community.”

His lengthy analysis concludes with this telling sentence:

“I, like many British Jews, now feel as I imagine the gay community must have 
done when Margaret Thatcher passed the homophobic section 28 — that one of the 
two main parties has turned against me.”
