
Sadiq Khan and other senior politicians have pleaded for a change of tone in 
theEU referendum <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> debate 
following the killing of the Labour MP Jo Cox, as dozens more weekend campaign 
events were called off.

Both sides indicated that they would take a more low-key and sombre approach 
to the final days of the campaign, which has been marked by vitriolic exchanges 
between activists on each side, particularly within the upper ranks of the 
Conservatives.

The Labour London mayor said the whole country “just needs to pause and 
reflect” and make sure the debate is not marred by the “climate of hatred, of 
poison, of negativity, of cynicism” that has characterised it so far.

Campaign events  
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/17/morning-briefing-eu-referendum-campaigning-suspended-jo-cox>
are likely to resume on Sunday and Monday with less than a week to go before 
voters are asked to make their biggest political decision in a generation.


Related: Britain is in the midst of a working-class revolt | John Harris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/17/britain-working-class-revolt-eu-referendum>

At the moment, the Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, is still scheduled to appear 
on the BBC’s Andrew Marr Show and the prime minister, David Cameron, on a 
special edition of Question Time.


Both leaders, and their counterparts on the leave side, will have to tread 
extremely carefully to avoid accusations that they are using Cox’s death to 
further their political aims.

Cameron and Corbyn have so far limited their political remarks to calls for 
democracy to be protected, but former Labour prime ministerGordon Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/17/jo-cox-legacy-end-downward-spiral-political-culture-tackling-prejudice-intolerance>
 became the first to make a link between to Cox’s commitment to a nation built 
on tolerance and a referendum campaign that has descended into exploitation of 
fears about immigrants.

Politicians have avoided drawing any conclusions publicly about the impact of 
the killing on the referendum outcome, but aides acknowledge it could affect 
the psychology of voters and are grappling with how best to proceed. There has 
been no suggestion of postponing the vote, because that would require new 
legislation.

Britain Stronger In Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, 
the official remain campaign, said it was scrapping all events on Saturday, 
including rallies and street stalls. “Volunteers may choose to continue 
door-to-door leafleting in their own local areas, but the campaign nationally 
will not be doing so,” said its director, Will Straw.

Labour’s own remain camp also said it was suspending all activity until 
Monday, with sources saying they were reviewing all campaign material to make 
sure there were no personal attacks or inappropriate language.

The leave campaign is still reviewing whether to campaign on Saturday, while 
Ukip called off a countrywide tour with its battlebus until Monday at least.

After months of bitter attacks 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/16/nigel-farage-defends-ukip-breaking-point-poster-queue-of-migrants>
 between the rival sides, a senior remain source said campaigning would be less 
aggressive than planned for its final week. “This will change the tone of the 
rest of the campaign, there is no question of that,” he said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yj78%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yj78%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0d0589476b4a1454575d1561b6e69f3dabd3fb1%2F2_0_2496_1497%2F2496.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sadiq%20Khan%20calls%20for%20more%20respectful%20tone%20in%20EU%20referendum%20debate&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yj78%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sadiq+Khan+calls+for+more+respectful+tone+in+EU+referendum+debate&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yj78%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0d0589476b4a1454575d1561b6e69f3dabd3fb1%2F2_0_2496_1497%2F2496.jpg>
 Jo Cox speaking in parliament. Photograph: PRU/AFP/Getty Images 
Some MPs also began to suggest that Cox might be honoured by a collective 
attempt to makepolitics less vitriolic 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/17/angela-merkel-urges-eu-referendum-campaigns-to-moderate-language>
.

Stephen Kinnock, the Labour MP for Aberavon and a friend of his counterpart 
for Batley and Spen, said there was a need to “change the tone forever and 
reflect on what Jo stood for her whole life”. Anna Turley, the Labour MP for 
Redcar, said it was time for a more respectful tone in political discourse.


Anna Soubry, a business minister, said it would be time to “reset the dial on 
political debate, comment and discourse” after the referendum.

Others, however, were concerned that political debate had become so toxic that 
it might take a long time to change. Mike Gapes, the Labour MP for Ilford who 
has been on the receiving end of abuse on social media, said: “Cameron and 
Corbyn have been showing leadership and maturity which is what is needed, but 
it’s got to be long term.

“And I’m worried we’re still not going to get that from some people. We’ve 
seen the Ukip poster that is similar to Nazi propaganda and this debate has 
been very aggressive, and I’m concerned that not everyone is going to be 
mature.”
