
David Cameron has said he has four days left to make a better case to keep 
Britain in the EU as many voters remain confused about the referendum that will 
decide the fate of his leadership.

The prime minister invoked the memory of Winston Churchill as he delivered an 
impassioned plea for Britain to be fighters, not quitters, when it comes to the 
EU.
Brexit explained: Changes agreed by Cameron 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/05/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=cameron_changes#>
During a special edition of the BBC’s Question Time, he urged voters to listen 
to him and economic experts 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/19/eu-referendum-nobel-prize-winning-economists-warn-of-long-term-brexit-damage>
 on the dangers of leaving the EU and argued that it would be “crazy” if people 
voted to leave in the belief that Turkey will join. The UK would not support 
Turkish accession in the next few years and it was unlikely to happen for 
decades, Cameron said.

With the polls neck and neck, Cameron acknowledged that people have been 
finding the debate “perhaps quite confusing” and that the remain campaign 
needed to do more to convince them.

“I’ve got four days to go,” he said. “I want to do better at getting this 
argument across.

“To me, it comes down to a simple point about the economy, but also what sort 
of country do we want to be? I want to be a country that does want to work with 
others. What I’ve learned in six years is that there is no problem in the world 
that isn’t better addressed with your allies, your friends and your neighbours.”


He insisted that the referendum was not a vote on his leadership and that 
people should notvote to leave in order to punish him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/28/voting-brexit-david-cameron-23-june-referendum-job>
, but it is widely expected that Cameronwould not stay for long in Downing 
Street 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/18/eu-referendum-britain-in-out> 
if there were an out vote.

Throughout the 45-minute session, Cameron was given a hard time by the 
audience over hisfailures to bring down immigration 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/04/david-cameron-eu-referendum-net-migration-target>
 as he promised. At one point, he was accused by an audience member of being a 
“21st-century Neville Chamberlain, waving a piece of paper in the air [and] 
saying to the public: ‘This is what I have, I have this prize, but a 
dictatorship in Europe can overrule it’”.

Related: EU referendum: our panel on the BBC's Question Time special 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/19/eu-referendum-panel-verdict-bbc-question-time-special>

The prime minister appeared shaken and emotional as he replied, referencing 
Chamberlain’s wartime successor – Winston Churchill, saying: “I don’t think 
Britain at the end is a quitter, I think we stay and we fight.

“At my office, I sit two yards away from the cabinet room where Winston 
Churchill decided in May 1940 to fight on against Hitler, the greatest decision 
that anyone has ever made in our country.

“Now he didn’t want to be alone; he wanted to be fighting with the French and 
the Poles, but he didn’t quit, he didn’t quit on Europe, he didn’t quit on 
European democracy, he didn’t quit on European freedom. We want to fight for 
those things today. You can’t fight if you are not in the room. Britain doesn’t 
quit, we fight, and that is how we win.”

The prime minister then sought to calm questions about immigration by hinting 
that he could seek future reform of free movement rules in Europe.

Cameron also made reference to Jo Cox, the Labour MP who was killed on 
Thursday, saying he wanted to make sure that the debate did not descend into 
“intolerance, hatred and division”. Over the past 24 hours, he has sought to 
frame a clear choice in the EU debate between a tolerant Britain of Cox and an 
intolerant Britain of the Ukip leader, Nigel Farage, that “divides rather than 
unites”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4mxjq%2Fsfb%23img-1&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4mxjq%2Fsfb%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F136f4fa04af0be35b64187884f27b60d123f14ee%2F149_36_1326_1324%2F1326.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Cameron%20says%20he%20must%20do%20more%20to%20make%20case%20for%20remaining%20in%20EU&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4mxjq%2Fstw%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David+Cameron+says+he+must+do+more+to+make+case+for+remaining+in+EU&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4mxjq%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F136f4fa04af0be35b64187884f27b60d123f14ee%2F149_36_1326_1324%2F1326.jpg>
 David Cameron referenced Sir Winston Churchill during his appearance on 
Question Time. Photograph: PA 
The campaign has now fully resumed after a two-day truce prompted by the death 
of Cox. Despite calls for a more respectful tone, hostilities flared up again 
between the two sides over the weekend.

Leave campaigners are furious that the remain camp has sought to emphasise the 
pro-EU views of Cox.

Andrew Murrison, a Conservative MP and former defence minister, said in a 
tweet that he later deleted: “Remain side spinning Jo Cox murder for partisan 
advantage in #EUReferendum shameful.”

On the other side, a number of senior pro-EU politicians have argued that 
rhetoric from the Brexit campaign has gone too far in whipping up 
anti-immigrant feeling. As MPs prepared to honour Cox in the House of Commons 
on Monday,Stephen Kinnock, Labour MP and one of her close friends, wrote in the 
Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/20/take-our-country-back-consequences-poison-politics>
: “The hatred that killed Jo, the poison that has seeped into our politics in 
recent years, with increasing venom in the past weeks and months, must end.

“There are those who say we must ‘take our country’ back, who castigate those 
on one side of an argument as an ‘elite’, in the pay of an establishment, in it 
for themselves and detached from the real world. Those people have to realise 
that their aggressive words and dangerous rhetoric have consequences. If you 
try to light a fuse, you can’t be surprised when it catches.”

Others have directed their criticism at Farage’s poster showing a snaking 
queue of non-white migrants 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/16/nigel-farage-defends-ukip-breaking-point-poster-queue-of-migrants>
, with the slogan “Breaking Point” and a plea to leave the EU.

The message of the poster also triggered a defection from leave to remain, as 
the former Conservative chairman Sayeeda Warsitold the Times that she could not 
continue 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/20/sayeeda-warsi-quits-leave-campaign-over-hateful-xenophobic-tactics>
 to support the campaign when it was spreading “hate and xenophobia”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4mxjq%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4mxjq%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d33fb954e37cf8ce7024792a1c33809aee00b6c%2F390_532_4875_2927%2F4875.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Cameron%20says%20he%20must%20do%20more%20to%20make%20case%20for%20remaining%20in%20EU&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4mxjq%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David+Cameron+says+he+must+do+more+to+make+case+for+remaining+in+EU&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4mxjq%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d33fb954e37cf8ce7024792a1c33809aee00b6c%2F390_532_4875_2927%2F4875.jpg>
 Sayeeda Warsi, former Conservative chairman, has defected from the leave 
campaign in protest recent rhetoric. Photograph: Sarah Lee for the Guardian 
The chancellor, George Osborne, said the poster was “disgusting and vile” with 
echoes of 1930s propaganda, while the former shadow home secretary Yvette 
Cooper called on Vote Leave to do more to condemn the poster and withdraw its 
own advert about the threat of millions of Turkish people potentially moving to 
the UK. Cameron described the former as “wrong”.

Farage was defiant in the face of the criticism, saying he was a “victim of 
hate” and claiming that the row might not have blown up were it not for the 
killing of Cox.

The Ukip leader also became the first politician to voice the opinion that 
Cox’s death may have cost the leave campaign some momentum after polls over the 
weekendsuggested that the campaigns are once again tied 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/18/eu-referendum-britain-voting-campaign-jo-cox>
.

As tensions ran high, Vote Leave appeared keen to tone down its rhetoric on 
immigration and took several opportunities to distance itself further from the 
Ukip poster. The justice secretary, Michael Gove, a leading Brexit campaigner, 
said the poster made him shudder, while the Labour MP John Mann said it was 
“unhelpful, inaccurate and irrelevant” and should be withdrawn.

At a rally in London, the former London mayor Boris Johnson spoke of his 
commitment to an amnesty for illegal immigrants 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/19/michael-gove-george-osborne-condemn-nigel-farage-anti-immigration-poster-eu>
 who entered the country more than 12 years ago in an apparent attempt to 
detoxify the campaign’s image.

Johnson’s words on immigration prompted a handful of boos and shouts of “No” 
from people in the crowd, but he said the amnesty would help those trapped and 
“unable to contribute to this economy, unable to pay taxes, unable to take 
proper part in society”.

Vote Leave also sought to highlight controversial remarks about immigration 
made by the remain camp, including Cameron’s reference to a “swarm” of migrants 
and thedescription by the foreign secretary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/aug/09/african-migrants-threaten-eu-standard-living-philip-hammond>
, Philip Hammond, of migrants as “marauding”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4mxjq%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4mxjq%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1fb026c450352f0372cd4eaef7f6595ed70f7fe3%2F10_0_3068_1842%2F3068.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Cameron%20says%20he%20must%20do%20more%20to%20make%20case%20for%20remaining%20in%20EU&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4mxjq%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David+Cameron+says+he+must+do+more+to+make+case+for+remaining+in+EU&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4mxjq%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1fb026c450352f0372cd4eaef7f6595ed70f7fe3%2F10_0_3068_1842%2F3068.jpg>
 Nigel Farage has defended the controversial poster. Photograph: Philip 
Toscano/PA 
Earlier, the Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, said he blamed “several years of 
endless newspaper headlines” for the anti-immigration feeling in large parts of 
the country and argued there could not be a limit on numbers because of EU free 
movement rules.


With the vote fast approaching, the leave campaign has little choice but to 
continue stressing its point that exiting the EU would allow the UK to take 
back control of its borders. Immigration is regarded as leave’s strongest suit, 
while remain will want to turn the emphasis of the final few days back on to 
the economy.

After the Question Time debate, Matthew Elliott, the chief executive of Vote 
Leave, said: “David Cameron repeatedly refused to say that he would veto Turkey 
joining the EU ... Cameron had no answers to people’s legitimate concerns on 
immigration tonight and failed to set out how he would meet his manifesto 
pledge to bring the numbers back down to the tens of thousands, while remaining 
in the EU. He had no answer on how we would fund the NHS to cope with higher 
levels of immigration.”

Vote Leave has focused heavily on immigration for several weeks, with a 
particular emphasis on the impact on the health service. That element of its 
campaign is now coming under attack from the British Medical Association, with 
the chair of its council, Dr Mark Porter, accusing leave campaigners of making 
“farcical and fatuous claims”.

Porter will use his keynote speech at the group’s annual representative 
meeting on Monday to argue that the NHS would not exist in the form it did 
without the support of tens of thousands of workers from overseas. He will say 
that the BMA has not told its members how to vote.

“Where none of us can be neutral, however, is in condemning the farcical and 
fatuous claims that have been a by-product of the political campaigns,” he is 
expected to say. “We have warned before about politicians playing games with 
the health service. Here we see game playing on a truly continental scale

“That promise of billions of pounds of extra NHS funding if we leave the 
European Union, it’s beyond irresponsible.”

He will add that that promise assumes the British economy will not be hit by 
Brexit and is therefore based on “fantasy figures”.
