
The British government’s progress on implementing the sustainable development 
goals 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-united-nations>
 (SDGs) in the UK has been insufficient, slow and disappointing, a group of MPs 
has warned.

The 17 goals were adopted by 193 countries at a landmark UN meeting in New York
 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/live/2015/sep/25/un-sustainable-development-summit-2015-goals-sdgs-united-nations-general-assembly-70th-session-new-york-live>
 last September, and replace themillennium development goals 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/millennium-development-goals> 
(MDGs).

Signatories committed themselves to tackling a wide range of issues from 
gender inequality and climate change to access to education and the promotion 
of peace.

Related: Sustainable development goals: changing the world in 17 steps – 
interactive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive>

As well as setting the international development agenda for the next 15 years, 
the SDGs – also known as the global goals – areintended to be universal and to 
apply as much to developed countries as developing ones 
<https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/post2015/transformingourworld>.


While the Commons International Development Committee 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/international-development-committee/>
 praised David Cameron, the prime minister, for showing commitment and 
leadership when the SDGs were being discussed, it is worried the government is 
not putting enough thought into their domestic implementation.

In a report 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/international-development-committee/publications/>
, the committee suggests that responsibility for implementing the goals at home 
could be taken away from theDepartment for International Development 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/department-for-international-development-dfid>
 (DfID) and made a cross-departmental concern.


“The government’s response to domestic implementation of the SDGs has so far 
been insufficient,” says the committee.

“We remain to be convinced that responsibility for domestic implementation 
should lie with the secretary of state for international development, who 
already faces a substantial challenge in working to support international 
implementation of the goals.”

The success of domestic implementation, it adds, will depend on strong 
leadership, a coherent plan and getting other government departments to engage 
with the process.

The report calls on every department to be assigned specific responsibilities, 
for theCabinet Office 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/cabinet-office/about> to ensure 
that all secretaries of state and government officials understand what the 
goals mean for their department’s policies and programming, and for the 
government to commit to producing a report on coherent policy for sustainable 
development every two years.

Stephen Twigg, the chair of the committee, said the government needs to 
remember the truly global aspirations of the SDGs.

“The goals require a cross-government approach,” he said. “This is not an 
agenda for developing countries alone, but for the whole world. It can only be 
achieved if all countries work to implement the agenda in its entirety.”


Related: Sustainable development goals: all you need to know 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-united-nations>

Michael Gidney, chief executive of the Fairtrade Foundation 
<http://www.fairtrade.org.uk/>, said that although the SDGs offer a “once in a 
generation opportunity to address the deep-rooted causes of poverty”, their 
potential could be jeopardised by a lack of coherence between different 
departments.


He added: “Too often, decisions on trade or agriculture made by the Department 
for Business, Innovation and Skills, or the Department for Environment, Food 
and Rural Affairs, can have unintended consequences for farming communities in 
poor countries, undermining efforts to support them by DfID.”


Christian Aid <http://www.christianaid.org.uk/>’s expert on the goals, Helen 
Dennis, said: “What the MPs are politely saying is that unless David Cameron 
knocks heads together, his government will fail to achieve the global goalshe 
helped create 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2012/oct/31/david-cameron-post-2015-aid-mdg>
.


“That would be a waste of the prime minister’s work and a tragedy for people 
in the UK and around the world. The goals are part of Cameron’s legacy but 
without a cross-government plan, he can’t be sure that legacy will last until 
2030.”

A DfID spokesperson said: “Britain played a key role in securing the global 
goals and the UK will publish a report setting out our contribution, across 
government, to implementing them. Tackling poverty globally is not just the 
right thing to do – it is firmly in our national interest.”
