
“If you believe, as I do, that merit is equally distributed between the 
genders then if you look at any institution, like a parliament, and you don’t 
see roughly half men and half women then, clearly, you don’t have the people of 
the greatest merit there.”

Gender <https://www.theguardian.com/world/gender> parity in global leadership 
is Julia Gillard’s ultimate aim. And the former Australian prime minister, now 
a figurehead in education, is clear that the way to achieve this is enabling 
girls and women to go to school. Gillard believes there’s momentum like never 
before on the issue.

“The world is talking about girls’ education and there is an impetus for 
change … The shooting of Malala, the kidnapping of girls by Boko Haram, and the
increased evidence 
<https://www.globalcitizen.org/en/content/educating-girls-is-the-key-to-ending-poverty/>
 of how transformative girls education is.”

Gillard’s development work began in 2014, six months after being ousted as 
prime minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/26/julia-gillard-australia-prime-minister-kevin-rudd>
, something that she found hard to cope with. “When you come out of politics 
you’ve got to spend some time grieving the life that’s been lost,” she says. 
“There aren’t too many elegant exits from politics.”

In my hardest days as prime minister the fact we were making a difference to 
education and opportunity sustained me
Julia Gillard 
But Gillard was not down for long. She soon realised that what had driven her 
so far in her political career – a “sense of purpose about education and 
opportunity” – could drive her in a development role. “In my hardest days as 
prime minister the fact we were making a difference to education and 
opportunity sustained me,” she says. Within a few months, shebecame chair 
<https://www.globalcitizen.org/en/content/julia-gillards-new-appointment-with-the-global-par/>
 of theGlobal Partnership for Education (GPE) 
<http://www.globalpartnership.org/> and fellow of influential US think-tank 
Brookings <http://www.brookings.edu/experts/gillardj>.

When we speak she’s just been appointed patron for international education 
non-profitCamfed <https://camfed.org/about/> (the campaign for girls’ 
education). She accepted the post after being impressed by how the UK-based NGO 
combines grassroots working with scale. “Education is about a far more 
localised service,” she says. “It’s got to be sensitive to culture and context.”

Despite the momentum she believes is gathering around the women’s education 
agenda, she notes significant challenges. Not least the growing demand for 
governments to divert aid budgets towards the accommodation of refugees in the 
Middle East and Europe, which Gillard admits, presents problems not only in 
terms of funding, but also to the wider global education agenda.

Related: Syria's peace talks need more women at the table 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/mar/08/syrias-peace-talks-need-more-women-at-the-table>

“Gordon Brown has made this very clear with his no lost generation work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/12/syria-refugee-children-lebanon-double-shift-schools>
 – the risks that we are seeing now for displaced children now losing access to 
education. The children most at risk in that situation are girls,” she says.

“There are so many refugees moving to Lebanon, and the government is doing its 
best (with international support) to offer education to Syrian children as well 
as to its own population. But the impact that’s had on standards in the 
Lebanese education system shows how pressing these challenges are.”

But as the prime minister responsible for reopening the much criticised Nauru 
asylum detention centre –where the on site school closed in March last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/mar/31/asylum-seeker-children-start-campaign-to-save-their-nauru-school-from-closure>
, critics feel her commitment to global education and equality has been 
inconsistent at best, fair weather at worst.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h8fd%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h8fd%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc7d91bd9fa8861fe3e4bf76d740a8e696945952%2F0_0_3840_2304%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Julia%20Gillard%3A%20'The%20world%20is%20talking%20about%20girls'%20education'&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h8fd%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Julia+Gillard%3A+%27The+world+is+talking+about+girls%27+education%27&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h8fd%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc7d91bd9fa8861fe3e4bf76d740a8e696945952%2F0_0_3840_2304%2F3840.jpg>
 Julia Gillard with Kevin Rudd who ousted her as prime minister in June 2013 
Photograph: Alan Porritt/AAP 
Clearly uncomfortable when pushed on the issue, Gillard becomes defensive, 
answering briefly before diverting to the Labor party press office for current 
Australian policy. “When I was in government we faced a very difficult set of 
circumstances with unauthorised boat arrivals,” she says. “But when families 
[arrived] we did make provision for them. We would make arrangements for their 
education. I’ve always believed in all circumstances kids have got a right to 
education and acted consistently in that.”

She’s far more willing to discuss the importance of lesbian, gay, bisexual and 
transgender rights, andher changing stance on gay marriage 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-australia-34070256>, which she voted against 
in Australia. “I thought there was a different way of achieving equality both 
for same sex couples and for heterosexual couples. I freely acknowledge now 
that the nature of the global debate has moved on.” Gillard is keen to add that 
she’d now vote yes in a referendum on the issue.

Related: Letter to my daughter: what is it like to be a girl in 2016? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/feb/03/letter-to-my-daughter-what-is-it-like-to-be-a-girl-in-2016>

Gillard became well-known beyond Australian politics when her parliamentary 
speech on misogyny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2012/oct/09/australia-pm-gillard-misogynist-video>
 went viral and the frustration she feels at gender inequality still drives a 
her to support and encourage female leadership.

“Perceptions of women leaders still have far too much of a focus on 
appearance, far too much a focus on family structures,” she says. “There’s a 
predisposition to think that women end up in leadership positions are 
necessarily unlikeable, are hardball and all of those sort of stereotypes.”

She avoids comparing her own experience to that of women she meets through her 
work with global girls’ education however.

“I’m conscious that compared to many of the women I meet I’ve led a 
tremendously privileged, indeed pandered, life,” she says. “I know what it’s 
like to experience some gender challenges, but the women I’ve just spoken to in 
Camfed have faced huge difficulties in their lives.”

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter. Join the conversation with the 
hashtag#SheMatters <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23SheMatters&src=typd>.
