
More than 40,000 people have signed a petition 
<https://secure.avaaz.org/en/brexit_daily_mail_loc/> calling for Daily Mail 
editor-in-chief Paul Dacre to be sacked over the newspaper’s coverage of 
migration and the EU referendum.

In a direct address to the paper’s owner Lord Rothermere, the petition calls 
Dacre the “Nigel Farage of newspapers”, saying he “has spun a steady stream of 
misinformation and fear, adding to a climate where rage and xenophobia 
flourish”. It also claims Dacre has “damaged the journalistic integrity of the
Daily Mail <http://www.theguardian.com/media/dailymail> by allowing front page 
stories to run based on untruths”.

Campaign group Avaaz, which started the petition on Tuesday, said a further 
9,000 people had also taken the option to send an email to Mail parent company 
DMGT.

Related: Daily Mail publishes correction to story about 'migrants from Europe' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/17/daily-mail-publishes-correction-story-migrants-from-europe>

The petition cites Thursday’s Mail front page which claimed that illegal 
immigrants found in a truck in east London had said they were from Europe. The 
story, which was based on inaccurate agency copy also picked up by the Sun,was 
corrected the following day on page 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/17/daily-mail-publishes-correction-story-migrants-from-europe>
.

Rothermere is thought to be significantly more pro-European than his 
newspapers and their readership.The Daily Mail backed Brexit on Wednesday 
morning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/21/daily-mail-backs-brexit-on-eve-referendum>
, butits sister title, the Mail on Sunday, declared its support for voting to 
remain in the EU on Sunday 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/19/mail-on-sunday-backs-remain-as-major-papers-declare-sides-in-eu-referendum>
.

Avaaz campaign director Iain Keith said: “The Daily Mail has spread lies and 
hate and a steady diet of Leave messaging for the duration of this referendum 
campaign, while offering virtually no space for the Remain perspective.


Related: Daily Mail backs Brexit in EU referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/21/daily-mail-backs-brexit-on-eve-referendum>

“Paul Dacre claims to be a champion for press freedom, but this betrays the 
principles of journalism to an ugly political agenda.Paul Dacre 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/pauldacre> is the Nigel Farage of newspapers 
and it’s time Lord Rothermere either reins him in or cuts him loose.”

Speaking to the Guardian at Cannes on Tuesday 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/21/mail-online-immigration-martin-clarke-daily-mail-eu-referendum>
, Mail Online chief Martin Clarke said the Daily Mail does not stoke fears over 
migration but merely reports existing concerns. In particular, he defended the 
story about migrants in the van, saying it it still involved people “in the 
back of a van illegally”.

The Daily Mail had not responded to a request for comment at the time of 
publication.
