
A survey by the National Union of Journalists 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/nationalunionofjournalists> (NUJ) at three 
newspapers owned by Ireland’s biggest media group, Independent News & Media 
(INM), has found that a number of their staff claim to have suffered from 
bullying.

More than one in five of the respondents to the survey - conducted at the 
Irish Independent <http://www.theguardian.com/media/irish-independent>, Sunday 
Independent and Dublin Herald - said they were “subjected to bullying at work.”

According to the report in the Irish Times, 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/business/media-and-marketing/journalists-at-inm-titles-cite-bullying-amongst-range-of-issues-survey-finds-1.2044350>
 which is the Irish Independent’s major rival, the survey also found that INM’s 
journalists felt there was a lack of support and consultation by their 
management.

The NUJ survey said 96% of respondents said they had to work over and above 
their normal eight-hour working day.

The union commented: “NUJ members are working more hours than they are 
contracted to do, which will inevitably impact on their health and private 
lives.”

The NUJ’s Irish secretary, Seamus Dooley, said he believed cost cutting was 
taking a toll on INM journalists “physically and mentally.”

And the NUJ’s general secretary, Michelle Stanistreet 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/michelle-stanistreet>, said: “The NUJ has a 
zero tolerance attitude towards the bullying of our members, whereever they 
work. We will not stand idly by while our members... are telling us that 
bullying is a serious problem.”

The Irish Times <http://www.theguardian.com/media/irish-times> reported that 
INM had declined to comment on the survey.


*Anne Harris, editor of the Sunday Independent, produced her final issue of 
the paper this weekend. 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/business/media-and-marketing/sunday-independent-editor-anne-harris-departs-after-final-edition-1.2045577>
 Her contract with INM has not been renewed. She joined the Sindo as features 
editor in 1985 and was deputy editor for 20 years, succeeding her late husband, 
Aengus Fanning, as editor in 2012.

Source: Irish Times 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/business/media-and-marketing/journalists-at-inm-titles-cite-bullying-amongst-range-of-issues-survey-finds-1.2044350>
