
You can’t have too much of a good thing, can you? And sex is definitely a good 
thing.Several studies show 
<http://spp.sagepub.com/content/early/2015/11/16/1948550615616462.abstract> 
that couples are likely to be satisfied with their relationship when they have 
more sex. But small kids, work worries or a new Scandinavian crime series 
can downgrade sex as the activity of choice. So wouldn’t it be nice to know 
exactly how much sex you need to have a happy relationship?

The solution

Well, according to a study in the journal Social Psychological and Personality 
Science 
<http://spp.sagepub.com/content/early/2015/11/16/1948550615616462.abstract>, 
the magic number is once a week. The study used data on sexual frequency and 
happiness from more than 30,000 Americans who took the General Social Survey  
<http://www3.norc.org/GSS+Website/>between 1989-2012. The survey found that 
couples were happier if they had more sex, but that more than once a week 
didn’t increase their happiness. The once-a-week rule held true regardless of 
age, sex, or length of relationship. The study found no link between happiness 
and how often someone had sex if they were single.

Amy Muise, the lead author, says that this is the first study to show 
a curvilinear relationship between sex and happiness – that the association 
levels off at once a week rather than being linear.

The take-home message, she says, is that the pressure is off – the average 
person doesn’t have to have sex as often as possible. “Sex,” she says, “does 
not have limitless benefits for wellbeing such that more is always better. 
Instead, it seems that only too little is bad.”

While other studies show that men report higher sexual desire than women, this 
research suggests that having sex more than once a week doesn’t make them any 
happier. The study did not look at quality of sex, but research suggests that 
couples feel mostly positive about their sexual experiences. Muise says 
positive feelings about sex last for at least the next day, so, strictly 
speaking, it is unlikely that daily sex is ever necessary.

The average amount of sex that couples have is, in fact, once a week, though 
this is not the optimum amount of sex if you are trying for a baby 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/12/will-having-sex-every-day-increase-my-fertility>
.

This new study shows only an association, not causation, but it follows a 
study publishedlast May in the Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 
<http://econpapers.repec.org/article/eeejeborg/v_3a116_3ay_3a2015_3ai_3ac_3ap_3a206-218.htm>
 that found couples who were having sex about once a week and were asked to 
double their amount of sex enjoyed it less and were slightly less happy than 
before. The authors concluded that asking couples to have more sex may not be 
the best idea – people have to want to initiate it for themselves, not for a 
research study. Muise’s study did not find that more sex made couples unhappy – 
only that having too little had that effect.
