
Does anyone really believe George Osborne’s warning that leaving the European 
Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> would plunge Britain into instant 
recession, result in 820,000 job losses and force up the price of foreign 
holidays?

Even a leading Remain campaigner, Scotland’s first minister Nicola Sturgeon, 
thought such “fear-based” predictionswere insulting to the intelligence of the 
electorate. 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/23/nicola-sturgeon-fear-based-remain-campaign-insults-voters>

Sturgeon’s statement was headlined in the Guardian, the Times and Metro. It 
was noticeable that the pro-European UnionDaily Mirror 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/daily-mirror> appeared sceptical enough to 
give Boris Johnson’s reaction - “These types of prophecies are not credible” - 
top billing in its news report.

And the Europhile Independent ran a piece that also questioned the claims: “
Five problems with the Treasury’s economic analysis of the impact of Brexit 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/business/news/eu-referendum-five-problems-with-the-treasury-s-economic-analysis-of-the-impact-of-brexit-a7043786.html>
”.

The pro-Brexit Daily Telegraph lamented that a “proudly impartial civil 
service” had produced a report that“could in no way be called open-minded.” 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion/2016/05/23/david-cameron-and-george-osborne-are-woefully-pessimistic-about/>

On its news page, the paper reported that the prime minister was facing 
threats of cabinet resignations and it quoted Johnson, who accused Cameron and 
Osborne of “scaremongering”.

It was not alone in revealing the depth of the split within the Conservative 
party. The Daily Mail’s splash, “Knives out for Cameron 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3605648/Knives-Cameron-Dozens-Tories-threaten-no-confidence-vote-PM-s-shabby-Brexit-scaremongering.html>
”, reported that “dozens of Tory MPs are threatening to topple David Cameron” 
following “the latest Brexit ‘dodgy’ dossier row.”

It said unnamed backbenchers were predicting a vote of no-confidence in their 
leader after the referendum vote. But it also quoted several named critics: 
former defence secretary Liam Fox, Commons leader Chris Grayling, former 
chancellors Lord Lawson and Lord Lamont, plus backbencher Bernard Jenkin.

It also mentioned the tweet by the Tory MP for Yeovil, Marcus Fysh, who called 
the Treasury analysis “specious bollocks” (though the paper used asterisks).

That tweet was seized on by the Sun, which ran a poster-style front page 
headlined “Never mind the b*!!**ks 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/politics/7170397/Tories-at-breaking-point-over-George-Osbornes-doomsday-Brexit-prediction-including-claims-of-almost-a-MILLION-job-losses.html>
”. It said a “furious Tory backlash” over Osborne’s “doomsday dossier on 
Brexit” had taken the party to “breaking point”, with two ministers threatening 
to quit.

But it was the Telegraph that carried news giving the greatest heart to the 
Remain campaign by leading its front page with the results of its opinion poll. 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/05/23/eu-referendum-poll-pensioners-tory-voters-and-men-are-deserting/>

The ORB survey put Remain on 55% and Leave on 42% among voters who say they 
will vote. Among all voters, the Remain campaign was favoured by 58%.

According to the poll, there has been “a collapse in support for Brexit”, with 
older voters, Conservative supporters and men moving into the Remain camp.

The paper carried an analysis of the poll result 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/05/23/sir-lynton-crosby-the-remain-campaign-is-strengthening-its-posit/>
 by Lynton Crosby, the Tory party strategist, in which he wrote that one of the 
largest shifts in voting intention has occurred among Tory voters.

In March, 60% were intending to vote Leave compared with 34% for Remain. Now 
the figures have moved to 57% as against 40%. Crosby concluded:

“The Remain campaign should view these advancements as affirmation that the 
focus and messaging of its campaign is working.

If Leave is to regain any lost ground, it must start paying attention to the 
numbers and capitalise on its strengths - its steadfast lead on immigration and 
the way uncontrolled immigration is seen more widely as a symbol of the 
country’s loss of control of its sovereignty toEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, coupled with the enthusiasm of 
their base.”

The Sun’s lengthy leading article 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/sun_says/6500866/Sun-Says.html> 
preferred to point to the decision by Cameron’s former aide, Steve Hilton, to 
back Brexit after saying “membership of the EU makes Britain literally 
ungovernable.”

It poured scorn on Osborne: “Either the chancellor’s forecasts are credible, 
in which case holding the vote is a monstrous act of negligence, or he doesn’t 
believe them himself and is in the business of whipping up hysteria. No prizes 
for guessing which we go for.”

For the Sun, “Remain’s tactics have been a dark mix of fiction and fear plus a 
vicious smearing of their opponents.”

I think that final sentence would win an award for irony.
