


Bristol is not without its problems. As in many UK cities, housing and 
inequality, and the link between the two, is a huge issue. To combat this, I 
was asked bythe new mayor, Marvin Rees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/07/bristol-chooses-labours-marvin-rees-as-new-mayor-over-george-ferguson>
, to be the housing lead for the city, focusing on solving problems of housing 
supply, affordability and homelessness.

The housing policy of Bristol’s new mayor did not start when the election 
results were announced. In the months running up to the ballot, Rees hosted 
three round tables with groups from the sector: builders, charities, housing 
associations, developers and housing campaigners. While each had their own 
particular issues, concerns, and offers, there was a consistent message: there 
is no shortage of land or finance, and certainly no lack of housing need. 
Everything inBristol <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/bristol> is rising: house 
prices, rents, homelessness, people living in temporary accommodation – and 
anger at a growing and largely ignored housing crisis. The only thing falling 
is the rate at which houses are being built.
Houses started and completed in Bristol 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/jun/2016-06-01T15:07:58/embed.html>
The people we spoke to saw the root problem as a local authority culture that 
stopped things happening. They spoke of an overbearing bureaucracy holding the 
city back and preventing many good council staff from doing the right thing, 
making them keep their heads down to avoid being picked out in the next 
restructure. There were silos that didn’t work to the same agendas. The council 
had lacked clear, sustained leadership for more than a decade. The creation of 
the mayor was supposed to correct this; however the focus of the first mayor, 
George Ferguson, was not on the day to day running of the council but on 
promoting the city across the world and building his legacy in the shape of a 
new arena.

We see many stories about the death of social housing but if you think nothing 
can be done, ​why stand for election?

It is easy to produce a catalogue of problems, and the new mayor and cabinet 
have been receiving a series of briefings describing both the problems and the 
lack of resources to deal with them. This is inevitable after six years of 
austerity, service cuts, redundancies and restructures, all of which have 
destroyed both morale and provision. I have seen the devastating impact of the 
government-imposed rent cut on the housing revenue account, which will be 
compounded by universal credit, forced sales of higher value homes and the 
effective removal of affordable housing from the planning regulations.

This is not the whole story. Rees has been greeted by a huge wave of goodwill 
and optimism from the vast majority of Bristolians. His decision to appoint a 
rainbow cabinet despite his overwhelming support and the first Labour majority 
in 13 years has raised some eyebrows, but has shown he is serious about an 
inclusive approach to politics.

We have taken quick action to tackle our inheritance. Eighty hectares of land 
were removed from the marketplace, and auctions of council houses deemed too 
expensive to repair have been halted. We intend to use our assets more 
creatively, establishing our own development arm to provide a range of housing 
for sale, rent and shared ownership. Rather than leave homes empty, we want to 
work with charities to refurbish properties that can then be used to provide 
specialist provision, or returned to council management.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jqqh%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jqqh%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9897df6e71843005198d70cf05c94fa392cdc5c4%2F0_55_2584_1550%2F2584.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20new%20mayor%20for%20Bristol%20is%20a%20chance%20to%20finally%20tackle%20its%20housing%20crisis&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jqqh%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A+new+mayor+for+Bristol+is+a+chance+to+finally+tackle+its+housing+crisis&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jqqh%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9897df6e71843005198d70cf05c94fa392cdc5c4%2F0_55_2584_1550%2F2584.jpg>
 Everything in Bristol is rising: house prices, rents, homelessness, people 
living in temporary accommodation. Photograph: Ben Cawthra/Rex Features 
It is also the role of the new leadership to join up the dots across council 
departments and across the city beyond the council. Bristol has a real problem 
with homelessness, with more than 300 households in temporary accommodation at 
a net cost to the council tax payer of £800,000 a year; at the same time 550 
council homes are empty, losing rent of £2m and £700,000 in council tax. If we 
invest some of the “lost rent” in employing people to bring more homes back to 
use we can improve peoples’ lives, reduce the use and cost of temporary 
accommodation, and provide a net benefit to the council’s finances. Obvious you 
may say, but it’s not been tackled for years.

We see many stories about the death of social housing. These are challenging 
times and becoming more so. But if you think nothing can be done, why stand for 
election? The challenge is not to develop a perfect suite of excuses but to 
work with others to make a meaningful positive difference. Hopefully in 
Bristol, we can achieve that.

Join the Guardian Housing Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/housing/register/> to read more pieces like 
this. Follow us on Twitter (@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/GuardianHousingNetwork/?ref=hl> to keep up with the 
latest social housing news and views.
