
Four years ago, Londoners ranked housing as the fourth most important 
political issue <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-london-35936907> facing 
the capital, behind terrorism, immigration and health. Ahead of the 2016 
mayoral elections, housing was bumped up: 56% of people polled said it was the 
most pressing concern in London.

Nearly everyone now accepts that we are in the midst of a housing crisis. As a 
result, theLondon <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> mayoral campaign 
became the housing campaign – each of the main candidates was keen to relay 
their housing policies, from building to rent regulation and landlord 
licensing, above all other policies. It was clear that a candidate without a 
solution to the millions of Londoners in precarious housing, struggling to buy, 
or trapped in a house with a poor landlord, stood no chance of winning.

Renting, social housing and owner occupation were all high up on nearly every 
candidate’s agenda, with the need to protect renters from rapacious estate 
agents fees and build more to meet demand emphasised over and over again.

Related: Sadiq Khan: 'As mayor I'll give first dibs on housing to Londoners' 
<http://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/apr/07/sadiq-khan-housing-mayor-london-labour-business>

As Boris Johnson ends his tenure in City Hall, Sadiq Khan takes the baton. His 
promise tostart a letting agent from City Hall 
<http://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/apr/07/sadiq-khan-housing-mayor-london-labour-business>
 is ambitious, and his focus on affordability will please many. But obstacles 
remain; in particular, high land-values in London, and the people sitting in 
Westminster just across the river from City Hall. Few people predicted a 
Conservative majority in 2015 and even fewer could have foreseen thecalamitous 
housing bill 
<http://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/apr/29/ideological-housing-bill-public-accounts-commitee>
. Pre-election campaigning focused on the cost of living and the economy, 
rather than the fact that increasing numbers of people either couldn’t house 
themselves at all, or felt they were trapped in substandard housing with no 
realistic chance of moving.

Goldsmith’s campaign lost its way, not just because of racist and dirty 
dog-whistle tactics, but also because he and the Conservatives have no 
convincing answer to the crisis. Goldsmith’s solution to the housing problem in 
London was the model favoured by Create Streets, an arm of the rightwing 
thinktank Policy Exchange, thatproposes “estate regeneration” 
<http://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/apr/07/zac-goldsmith-candidate-estate-regeneration-london-mayor>
 – invariably a codeword for social cleansing in London council estates. Many 
people, from theHeygate and Aylesbury estate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/feb/18/six-arrested-as-police-help-in-evictions-from-london-estate>
 orWest Hendon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2015/nov/04/jasmin-parsons-and-the-troubled-tale-of-the-west-hendon-estate>
 and Woodberry Down, have been forced from their homes under the mantle of 
regeneration, essentially priced out of homes they have lived in for decades, 
to make way for wealthier occupants.

To solve the housing crisis in London 
<http://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/london>, Khan will have to tackle 
the problem of rents but also defend and develop social housing, without which, 
London’s social mix is threatened with extinction. A city cannot exist purely 
for the very wealthy: transport, health and basic infrastructure are staffed by 
people on low- to middle-incomes and will collapse if workers can’t live in the 
city in which they are employed.

Related: Zac Goldsmith: 'I'm the only candidate talking up estate regeneration'
 
<http://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/apr/07/zac-goldsmith-candidate-estate-regeneration-london-mayor>

But Khan’s challenge has two complicating factors: while working under a 
Conservative government intent on hastening the demise of social housing as we 
know it, trying to fight back against central government policies will continue 
to be difficult. EvenBoris Johnson complained 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/apr/25/boris-johnson-kosovo-style-cleansing-poor>
 about the effects of the coalition’s housing policy on the capital. But money 
also talks, and Khan has beencriticised before 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/mayor/revealed-labour-mayoral-hopefuls-accepting-tens-of-thousands-in-donations-from-property-tycoons-a2919631.html>
 foraccepting donations from property developers and estate agents 
<http://www.theyworkforyou.com/mp/11878/sadiq_khan/tooting#register> while also 
decrying the hold developers have over the capital 
<http://www.sadiqkhan.org.uk/developers_are_the_real_threat>. Few people give 
gifts, let alone money, without expecting some kind of return on investment.

Overturning a Conservative majority in the mayoral election has shown how 
seriously voters now take housing. Khan is in a strong position to try to force 
the government to take housing security, demand and affordability more 
seriously. But he has an uphill struggle between now and 2020, when the mayoral 
election will coincide with the next general election. With some bold and 
inventive decisions, he could make a real difference, but he’ll have to decide 
whether to side with residents or developers.

Join the Guardian Housing Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/housing/register/> to read more pieces like 
this. Follow us on Twitter (@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/GuardianHousingNetwork/?ref=hl> to keep up with the 
latest social housing news and views.
