
The French economy minister, Emmanuel Macron, has warned that if the UK leaves 
the EU, it risks isolating itself as a tiny trading post on the edge ofEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, akin to the Channel island 
Guernsey.

Macron, who recently founded his own political movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/07/frances-emmanuel-macron-launches-political-movement>
 and is tipped as a possible French presidential contender, toldLe Monde 
<http://www.lemonde.fr>: “If I was British, I would vote resolutely ‘remain’ 
because it’s in the UK’s interest. Leaving the EU would mean the 
‘Guernseyfication’ of the UK, which would then be a little country on the world 
scale. It would isolate itself and become a trading post and arbitration place 
at Europe’s border.”

Related: EU elites are scared of Brexit, Le Pen tells Austrian far-right rally 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/17/marine-le-pen-france-national-front-brexit-austria-far-right-rally>

In the interview days before the UK’s referendum on whether to stay or leave 
the EU, Macron was asked what status Britain would have after a Brexit. He said 
that within a week of a vote to leave, the European council would collectively 
send “a very firm message and timetable” on the consequences of Brexit. “In the 
interests of the EU, we can’t leave any margin of ambiguity or let too much 
time go by,” he said.

“You’re either in or you’re out,. The day after an exit, there would be no 
more financial passport for British establishments. The European council should 
give the British an ultimatum on their intentions and the French president will 
be very clear in that respect.

“If the UK wants a commercial access treaty to the European market, the 
British must contribute to the European budget like the Norwegians and the 
Swiss do. If London doesn’t want that, then it must be a total exit.”


Macron has previously said he felt the British referendum marked the end of an 
era for a bloc that had lost its political direction and needed to rethink and 
reorganise.

He said the rest of the EU had a “double challenge” the day after any UK 
referendum result. First, it had to avoid the “contamination of Brexit” 
affecting other countries such as Denmark, the Netherlands, Poland or Hungary 
asking for their own special status. Then there had to be a new dynamic for an 
improved “positive project” for Europe so no doubt could set in among member 
states.

He said even if remain won, France would immediately launch initiatives. He 
said thespecial deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/19/camerons-eu-deal-what-he-wanted-and-what-he-got>
 negotiated in February by David Cameron was “an exceptional status that should 
not be extended to others”.

Macron said: “To avoid the trap of Europe fragmenting on the economy, security 
and identity, we have to return to the original promises of the European 
project: peace, prosperity and freedom. We should have a real, adult, 
democratic debate about the Europe we want.”

Earlier, Macron told RTL radio that, although people should have a voice on 
the future of Europe, he felt the 23 June referendum was “dangerous” and that 
Britain had “taken the rest of theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> hostage”.

Related: Merkel urges EU in/out campaigns to moderate language after Jo Cox 
death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/17/angela-merkel-urges-eu-referendum-campaigns-to-moderate-language>

But he said the referendum would mark a new phase of the EU defining its 
political and social purpose. “It’s the end of an ultra-liberal Europe that has 
lost its political direction … The European project cannot only be a system of 
abolishing rules.” He said that, at the heart of the British debate, was a 
drive to correct the effect of ultra-liberal economic policies “that they [the 
British] pushed us into”.

Macron, 38, an outspoken former banker, regularly polls higher than the 
unpopular French president,François Hollande 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/francois-hollande>. He is thought to harbour 
presidential ambitions but has not yet said whether or not he will run in next 
year’s presidential election.

In Le Monde, he condemned the murder of the British MP Jo Cox as a “crime 
against democratic debate”.
