
The three men fighting to become the first elected mayor of Greater Manchester 
are engaged in a battle over who can be more female-friendly, followingcriticism
 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/23/local-government-blokey-andy-burnham-mayoralty-women>
 that the all-male shortlist for the Labour nomination fails to represent the 
electorate.

Ivan Lewis 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/18/ivan-lewis-announces-greater-manchester-mayoral-bid>
, the MP for Bury South, announced plans on Friday for a “women’s commission”. 
This body would investigate low pay, the gender pay gap and work-life balance 
including childcare and women as carers, he said. On average, women earn 5% 
less than men in Greater Manchester and female graduates in Manchester on 
average earn £6,500 less than men, he claimed.

Related: Where are the women? The ‘pale, male’ council leaders driving the 
northern powerhouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/03/where-women-council-leaders-northern-powerhouse-english-regions>

The idea followed an announcement by one of his rivals, the shadow home 
secretary,Andy Burnham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/18/andy-burnham-to-stand-for-mayor-of-greater-manchester>
, that he would seek to have gender parity on the Greater Manchester combined 
authority.

Currently only one of the 10 council leaders who make up the combined 
authority is a woman.

Burnham, who has represented the Greater Manchester 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/greater-manchester> parliamentary seat of Leigh 
in Wigan since 2001, suggested each council should in future nominate two 
councillors, one male, one female, to be part of the authority.

He said 
<http://www.manchestereveningnews.co.uk/news/greater-manchester-news/mayoral-hopeful-andy-burnham-demands-11397442>
 he had appointed the Worsley and Eccles South MP, Barbara Keeley, to conduct a 
review into how to improve women’s representation in Greater Manchester.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k9x3%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k9x3%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F68757bc5b728124e3bbd0429b0ca02a48d85f2cf%2F0_27_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Labour's%20leading%20men%20in%20Manchester%20mayor%20race%20add%20feminine%20touch&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k9x3%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Labour%27s+leading+men+in+Manchester+mayor+race+add+feminine+touch&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k9x3%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F68757bc5b728124e3bbd0429b0ca02a48d85f2cf%2F0_27_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Ivan Lewis revealed plans for a women’s commission to investigate low pay, the 
gender pay gap and work-life balance issues in Greater Manchester. Photograph: 
Rex Shutterstock 
Lewis’s women’s commission would be chaired by the former Bolton West Labour 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> MP Julie Hilling, who lost her 
seat the Conservatives last year, and Akilah Akinola, the chief executive of a 
learning disability charity.

Related: Liverpool mayor attacks 'ignorant, insensitive' Andy Burnham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/01/liverpools-mayor-ignorant-insensitive-andy-burnham>

 Lewis said: “The fact we only have one woman council leader and currently no 
woman candidate for the Labour mayoral nomination despite there being many 
excellent women councillors provides strong evidence that there are fundamental 
issues to address. The commission will include political representation in its 
remit but I will also take immediate action by ensuring that at least 50% of 
councillors driving change at a Greater Manchester level will be women. To be 
taken seriously on the equality agenda politicians must lead by example.”

Not to be outdone, Lewis and Burnham’s rival Tony Lloyd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/11/labour-tony-lloyd-greater-manchester-mayoral-bid-devolution>
, the interim mayor of Greater Manchester and current police and crime 
commissioner, said he had already asked council leaders to appoint female 
deputies.


He said: “If elected in 2017 I will ensure at least 50% of all deputies will 
be women, massively changing the makeup of the combined authority and the 
voices there. I will also make one of them an equalities deputy who will take a 
view at how policies impact on women across our work on health, jobs and the 
costs of childcare, housing, training and skills.

“I will fight to end gender pay gap across Greater Manchester starting with a 
campaign to put pressure on local businesses to pay a living wage and conduct 
equal pay reviews.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k9x3%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k9x3%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8cbfd8d7f14e762c7730b8d0b2459278665a3e2d%2F0_216_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Labour's%20leading%20men%20in%20Manchester%20mayor%20race%20add%20feminine%20touch&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k9x3%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Labour%27s+leading+men+in+Manchester+mayor+race+add+feminine+touch&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k9x3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8cbfd8d7f14e762c7730b8d0b2459278665a3e2d%2F0_216_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Lewis and Burnham’s rival, Tony Lloyd, said he had already asked council 
leaders to appoint female deputies. Photograph: Andrew Yates/Reuters 
Many Labour members across Greater Manchester are unhappy that there is almost 
certainly going to be an all-male shortlist for the party nomination.

Kieran Quinn, the leader of Tameside council and chair of the Greater 
Manchester Labour party, said: “I think to have a shortlist of three 
middle-aged white men, no matter how talented, does not reflect the diversity 
of Greater Manchester, and that is a great pity. Half of Greater Manchester 
residents are not male, and more than 10% are not white, and so for Labour it 
seems a missed opportunity.”

He said he had spoken to various potential female candidates but that, so far, 
none were planning to stand. “They all agreed that this is a massive job. They 
know the successful candidate, once elected, will have one of Europe’s biggest 
personal political mandates, with the power to shape this great city region for 
the next decade and beyond. It beggars belief that with such a prize up for 
grabs there isn’t a single Labour woman in the whole of Greater Manchester 
willing to throw her hat in the ring.”
