
As Ban Ki-moon prepares to step down as UN secretary general at the end of the 
year, his potential successors are making their ambitions known. The list of 
declared candidates so far includes the head of the UN Development Programme,
Helen Clarke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/05/helen-clark-former-new-zealand-prime-minister-confirms-bid-for-united-nations-top-job>
, the former UN high commissioner for refugees,António Guterres 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-un-secretarygeneral-portugal-idUSKCN0W22LZ>, 
and the head of Unesco,Irina Bokova 
<http://www.unesco.org/new/en/unesco/about-us/who-we-are/director-general/biography/>
.

It is expected to be the most transparent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/30/un-general-secretary-candidates-compete-public-first-time>
 leadership transition in the UN’s 70-year history, with candidatesstating 
their case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/12/candidates-for-un-top-job-given-public-hearing>
 at the general assembly for the first time. Previous appointments to the top 
job were shrouded in secrecy and made largely by the five permanent members of 
the security council: the UK, US, France, Russia and China.

Related: Happy 70th birthday, United Nations. Time for a relaunch | Mark 
Rice-Oxley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/08/united-nations-70th-birthday-time-for-relaunch-tarnished-brand>

Ban’s successor will face challenges including the growing number of 
humanitarian crises, the implementation of thesustainable development goals 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-united-nations>
 and possiblyreform of the UN itself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/23/un-security-council-must-be-revamped-or-risk-irrelevance-kofi-annan-warns>
.


If you were the head of the UN, what would be your priority? Would you focus 
on the organisation’s role as a peacemaker, and attempt to endconflicts 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/conflict-and-development> in 
South Sudan, Burundi, Syria and elsewhere? Would you promote the role ofwomen 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/series/womens-rights-and-gender-equality-in-focus>
 in society? Perhaps you would concentrate oninternal reform 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2015/sep/23/un-security-council-failing-70-years>
, or developing the world’spoorest countries 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/least-developed-countries> and 
driving through thesustainable development 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/sustainable-development-goals> 
agenda?

Submit a response of 250 words or fewer, telling us what your first act in 
office would be, andwe’ll publish the best ones 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/series/students-speak>. Keep 
your response clear and concise, avoiding development or academic jargon. Email 
your response todevelopment@theguardian.com <mailto:development@theguardian.com>
 with “Students Speak 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/series/students-speak>” in the 
subject line. Please include your name, the country in which you live, and the 
university or college you attend. Submissions close at 6pm BST on 6 May.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fhow-did-the-un-get-so-big-rachel-weisz-video&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fhow-did-the-un-get-so-big-rachel-weisz-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20did%20the%20UN%20get%20so%20big%2C%20asks%20Rachel%20Weisz%20%E2%80%93%20video%20animation&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fhow-did-the-un-get-so-big-rachel-weisz-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+did+the+UN+get+so+big%2C+asks+Rachel+Weisz+%E2%80%93+video+animation&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fhow-did-the-un-get-so-big-rachel-weisz-video&media=>
How did the UN get so big? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2015/sep/08/how-did-the-un-get-so-big-rachel-weisz-video>
 Actor Rachel Weisz looks back at its history 