
October is here, and there are lots of nice things that go along with that. 
Relief from late summer’s muggy heat. Clean, crisp, brisk air. The pleasure of 
a warm sweater and a hot drink on a chilly day (whiskey-based, now, the drink, 
and maybe with cloves).

Super-blue skies, super-white clouds, the brilliantly contrasting palette of 
fiery color that the trees will soon take as the chlorophyll in their leaves 
closes up shop for the winter. A turn inward, both physically, as cozying up on 
a couch starts to sound better than sitting on a stoop, and mentally, as the 
books we read and the movies we watch get a little deeper and more reflective. 
Roasting! Baking! Corduroys!

Related: Starbucks' toasted graham latte makes infantilized fools of us all 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/sep/24/starbucks-toasted-graham-latte-review>

But there are some not-so-nice things attendant to the seasonal change, too. 

For example: the plentiful harvest of orange food.

Pumpkins, sweet potatoes, carrots, butternut squash – they can all go to hell 
as far as I’m concerned. They’re a waste of space. (Oranges are exempt from my 
disdain. Oranges are delicious. There is nothing fresher tasting than 
fresh-squeezed orange juice, and orange makes for a betterpairing with chocolate
 
<http://www.wegmans.com/webapp/wcs/stores/servlet/ProductDisplay?productId=627727&storeId=10052&langId=-1>
 than any other flavor in the world. And if you have not read John McPhee’s 
1966 bookOranges <http://us.macmillan.com/oranges/johnmcphee>, please do. It’s 
one of the best non-fiction books I’ve ever read.)

A lot of people seem to jump on the orange bandwagon, however. The astounding 
success ofStarbucks’ 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/sep/24/starbucks-toasted-graham-latte-review>
 pumpkin spice latte, and the preponderance of pumpkin spice everything else 
that has come in its wake, attests to that. A lot of people are stupid. Or let 
me rephrase that more diplomatically: a lot of people’s taste buds work 
differently from mine.

To my taste, pumpkin, sweet potato, carrots, butternut squash and other foods 
of their ilk suffer from the problem of muddling.

Are these things sweet or savory? It seems to me that they don’t know the 
answer to this themselves. They don’t know what they want to be. A dessert? A 
side dish? The featured flavor in an entrée?

I know what I want them to be: nothing. Their sweetness distracts from a good 
savory dish; I’ll never understand why so many chefs ruin a perfectly good 
ravioli by stuffing it with pumpkin this time of year. I can’t believe how many 
people enjoy sweet potato fries, those over-starchy confusion sticks.

These are vegetables, is what it comes down to, in character if not taxonomy 
(pumpkins and squash are fruits, technically). They are healthy, high inbeta 
carotene <http:// 
http://www.healthaliciousness.com/articles/natural-food-sources-of-beta-carotene.php>
 (that’s what gives them their orange color) and, worst of all, boring.

No matter how many spices you add to your pumpkin pie (cinnamon, ginger, 
nutmeg, allspice,cloves 
<http://www.bettycrocker.com/how-to/tipslibrary/baking-tips/how-to-make-pumpkin-pie-spice>
), however thick and fluffy the marshmallows atop your sweet potato pie, 
however decadent the cream-cheese frosting disguising your carrot cake, they 
will remain as such: boring.

And things are about to get even worse.

Check the cover of this month’s Food Network magazine 
<http://www.foodnetwork.com/magazine.html>, for example. Halloween cannot get 
more horrific than this: Chocolate-covered carrot cake. Let that sink in for a 
minute. Chocolate. Covered. Carrot. Cake. OK? Has it sunk in? Good, now I’m 
scraping it into a garbage can where it belongs.

Oh, and on the subject of Halloween, here is another exception that proves the 
rule (the rule being that orange food sucks): the middle section of a piece of 
candy corn. Candy corn is another rare example of orange food that is 
delicious. There are35 million pounds of candy corn 
<http://www.bhg.com/halloween/recipes/the-history-of-candy-corn/> produced 
annually in this country.

 Come the end of this month, I am planning on eating most of it.

Rating for orange food: 2 stars

Rating system: from best to worst


5 stars: Mets win the World Series!

4 stars: Laser Floyd

3 stars: Lukewarm tea

2 stars: Going to see a movie, tickets sold out 

1 star: Mosquito bite on bottom of foot
