
On Monday, David Cameron has made a speech about the need for comprehensive 
prison reform, including a particular mention of the detention of pregnant 
women and mothers with young babies. Speaking at the Policy Exchange think tank 
in Westminster,he said 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/prison-reform-prime-ministers-speech>:

A sad but true fact is that last year there were 100 babies in our country 
living in a prison. Yes, actually inside the prison. In the prison’s 
mother-and-baby unit, to be precise. When we know the importance of the early 
years for child development, how can we possibly justify having babies behind 
bars?

Under the new reforms, the government would consider alternative forms of 
dealing with offenders, including satellite-tagging technology and 
“problem-solving courts” which would order offenders into treatment programmes 
for issues such as drug addiction.

Cameron was right to raise the issue of the catastrophic state of the prison 
system (he’s the first prime minister for 20 years to do so in a speech solely 
focusing on prisons), and right to recommend reform. The current system is not 
working, as the statistics show: 46% of all prisoners and 60% of those with 
short sentences reoffend within a year. The situation is equally dire for 
prisoners’ wellbeing: there are, on average, 600 incidents of self-harm in 
prisons every week. But the problem demands a more comprehensive solution than 
Cameron suggests, particularly with regard to women.

More than 9,000 women were received into prison last year 
<http://www.prisonreformtrust.org.uk/Portals/0/Documents/sentencing_mothers.pdf>
, the majority for non-violent offences. An estimated 17,240 children, 
including many under five years old, are separated from their mothers by 
imprisonment. Only 5% of children with a mother in prison are able to stay in 
the family home, and only 9% are cared for by their fathers. In 2011-2012, 
according to the Prison Reform Trust, just 8.7% of women were able to find 
employment on release, compared with 27.3% of men.

According to the London-based charity Women in Prison 
<http://www.womeninprison.org.uk/research/key-facts.php>, 46% of women in 
prison report having suffered domestic violence, and 53% report having 
experienced emotional, physical or sexual abuse during childhood (compared with 
27% of men). Despite making up only 5% of the prison population, women in 
prison account for 28% of the self-harm incidents. Women in custody are five 
times more likely to have a mental-health concern than women in the general 
population and 46% say they have attempted suicide at some time in their life. 
Many vulnerable women end up in prison because they have been coerced into 
committing crimes by male partners or family members;in 2013 
<http://www.prisonreformtrust.org.uk/Portals/0/Documents/Prisonthefacts.pdf>, 
48% of women said they committed their crime in order to support the drug habit 
of someone else.

The problem doesn’t end when women enter prison – former inmates have 
described abuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2009/jul/18/female-inmate-prison-sexual-abuse>
 and a recent report by national charity the Howard League for Penal Reform 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-26324570> found that female prisoners had been 
coerced into sex and pressured into abusive relationships with staff.

It is already clear that sustainable, properly funded alternatives to custody 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/08/the-guardian-view-on-david-camerons-prisons-speech-it-wont-work-without-sentencing-reform>
 are a vital part of making any prison-reform plan work. This is especially 
true for prisoners with complex needs, including those who have experienced 
domestic or sexual abuse, and single mothers. But this is where Cameron’s 
passionate support of reform could fall short in the light offunding cuts to 
specialist services for supporting female offenders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/08/cameron-prisoner-numbers-sentencing>
 andcuts to domestic and sexual violence services 
<http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/autumn-statement-george-osbornes-cuts-will-condemn-women-violence-white-ribbon-day-1530395>
.

There is evidence that the financial cost of such services would be 
negligible. According to the Prison Reform Trust, if alternatives to prison 
were to achieve an additional reduction of just 6% in reoffending by women, the 
state wouldrecoup the investment required in just one year 
<http://www.prisonreformtrust.org.uk/Portals/0/Documents/Prison%20the%20facts%20May%202014.pdf>
.

If we want to resolve the gargantuan problem of the failing prison service, a 
wider view needs to be taken and it must include real, well-funded action on 
violence against women; not only responsive measures, but preventative ones, 
too. It is also vital to take into account the experiences of all women. The 
charityWomen for Refugee Women <http://www.refugeewomen.co.uk/campaign/> has 
been campaigning against the detention of refugee women, including those who 
are pregnant, for some time.

Natasha Walter, director of the charity, says: 

Detaining pregnant women is ineffective: in 2014, 99 pregnant women were held 
in Yarl’s Wood detention centre – despite government policy that these women 
should only be detained in exceptional circumstances – but only nine of these 
women were actually removed from the UK. 90% were released to continue with 
their cases in the community, so their detention served no purpose at all.

In January 2016, a review of the welfare of vulnerable detainees, commissioned 
by the Home Office and undertaken by the former prisons and probation ombudsman 
Stephen Shaw, recommended that there should be an absolute ban on the use of 
immigration detention for pregnant women.

Urgent attention is also due to the plight of transgender women serving 
sentences in UK prisons, an issue not raised in Cameron’s speech; particularly 
after the tragic deaths ofJoanne Latham and Vicky Thompson within a single month
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/dec/01/second-trans-prisoner-joanne-latham-apparently-takes-own-life-in-male-jail>
 in 2015. Areview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/dec/08/rules-transgender-prisoners-male-female-jails-justice-review>
 of the care and management of transgender offenders is currently underway.

These issues affect some of the most voiceless members of our society. Cameron 
should be commended for broaching the subject of prison reform. But for female 
prisoners in particular, there is a lot more that needs to be said.
