
Sick days home from school will never be the same.

Campbell’s Soup company is changing the recipe for a few of their most beloved 
soups 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/10/business/campbell-rethinks-its-recipe-as-consumer-tastes-change.html?ref=topics>
. No more potassium chloride, no more monosodium glutamate, no more disodium of 
any kind (inosinateor guanylate!). Goodbye, maltodextrin, corn starch and 
“flavoring” (soybean oil and soy lecithin.) Goodbye, also, for some reason, 
celery.

We’re left with a mere 20 ingredients listed on the can (10 fewer than 
before). Dramatic changes made in the hopes of making our national panacea 
more, actually, healthy.

It’s pretty amazing and, at base level, undeniably good news.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4e4kp%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4e4kp%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61ca9b9fc3b2ff619135f6d4419678024dabf01b%2F0_0_1504_2000%2F1504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Campbell%E2%80%99s%20Soup%20is%20breaking%20my%20heart%20with%20its%20new%20chicken%20noodle%20recipe&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4e4kp%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Campbell%E2%80%99s+Soup+is+breaking+my+heart+with+its+new+chicken+noodle+recipe&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4e4kp%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61ca9b9fc3b2ff619135f6d4419678024dabf01b%2F0_0_1504_2000%2F1504.jpg>
 Andy Warhol’s Big Torn Campbell’s Soup Can (Pepper Pot) from 1962. Photograph: 
AP 
Having grown up in America over the past half-century, I never expected to see 
the “seismic shift” towards dietary health-consciousness that isapparently 
<http://mobile.nytimes.com/2015/11/08/opinion/a-seismic-shift-in-how-people-eat.html?referer=&_r=0>
 taking place. I grew up on TV dinners, powdered Kool-Aid mix and McDonald’s. 
My mom used to stop at the drive-thru on the way to dropping me off at 
kindergarten every day to ensure that I started my morning with the “healthy 
protein” of an Egg McMuffin sandwich. Every day. 

To be honest, the food was so bad I don’t know how I am still alive. (My 
kindergarten teacher burned my hand with the cigarette she was smoking during 
class once, too. Hahaha. The 1970s ruled.)

So I am impressed with us, American consumers and the corporations that react 
to our demands. We’re smarter and more far-sighted than I thought we were. (Who 
knows, maybe if enough of us voluntarilyextinguish ourselves <http:// 
http://www.theawl.com/2015/11/options> there will be an inhabitable planet left 
for thecoywolves 
<http://www.nj.com/bergen/index.ssf/2015/11/meet_the_coywolf_new_jerseys_apex_predator.html>
 in a hundred years.)

“We’re closing the gap between the kitchen and our plants,” Campbell’s chief 
executive, Denise M Morrison,told 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/10/business/campbell-rethinks-its-recipe-as-consumer-tastes-change.html?ref=topics>
 the New York Times’ Stephanie Strom. “Before, when we talked about our 
business, we talked about how many cases we shipped. Today, we’re talking about 
our food.”

I have a problem, though, with this. I realize it’s irrational, but I don’t 
want Campbell’s and McDonald’s to make their food healthier. I don’t want them 
to change their recipes. Much of the appeal of iconic food brands is nostalgic. 
My taste buds, like my olfactory sensors, are closely connected to my memories. 
If I am going to open a can of Campbell’s chicken noodle soup, I want it to 
taste exactly like it used to on those days when I tricked my mom into letting 
me stay home from school by pretending to be sick.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4e4kp%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4e4kp%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd5f01b10db2bc639e81f6fd5e793a2d8654a3cb%2F0_104_3692_2216%2F3692.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Campbell%E2%80%99s%20Soup%20is%20breaking%20my%20heart%20with%20its%20new%20chicken%20noodle%20recipe&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4e4kp%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Campbell%E2%80%99s+Soup+is+breaking+my+heart+with+its+new+chicken+noodle+recipe&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4e4kp%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd5f01b10db2bc639e81f6fd5e793a2d8654a3cb%2F0_104_3692_2216%2F3692.jpg>
 Campbell’s chicken noodle soup shares a shelf with New England clam chowder at 
the supermarket. Photograph: Rick Wilking/Reuters 
When I go to McDonald’s (a couple times a year still, on road trips), I don’t 
order a salad. And I want the fries to be just as deliciously salty and greasy 
as they were when I was a kid. I am knowingly eating less-healthy food.

With this in mind, I am hereby advocating a completely unrealistic business 
proposal for the purveyors of iconic American mass-market food.

Campbell’s (and McDonald’s and Kool-Aid, etc), I would ask that your leave 
your less-than-entirely-healthy food products the way they are. Let them exist 
for people like me who want to consciously go on an unhealthy splurge from time 
to time. And, as the public’s taste shifts toward smarter, healthier options – 
smaller operations, local, regional companies – let your market share shrink.

Focus on the alternative: T-shirts.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4e4kp%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4e4kp%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e844ecce8c53df6ab07dcacccfb3dd6410ca463%2F0_185_5760_3458%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Campbell%E2%80%99s%20Soup%20is%20breaking%20my%20heart%20with%20its%20new%20chicken%20noodle%20recipe&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4e4kp%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Campbell%E2%80%99s+Soup+is+breaking+my+heart+with+its+new+chicken+noodle+recipe&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4e4kp%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e844ecce8c53df6ab07dcacccfb3dd6410ca463%2F0_185_5760_3458%2F5760.jpg>
 Andy Warhol’s Campbell’s Soup cans. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the 
Guardian 
Certainly, Campbell’s Soup <http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/soup> owes 
as much to the designer of the wonderful labels affixed to its cans (since 
1898!) as it does to its soup chefs. That great carnelian red, the gorgeous 
lines of that cursive script – it was no mistake when Andy Warhol chose those 
iconic cans to make iconic postmodern art from (in 1962!).

I’m sure millions of people would love to wear the Campbell’s logo across 
their chest. So fun, so retro-chic, so American. So how about it, Ms Morrison? 
Will you shift your company’s primary focus to selling T-shirts emblazoned with 
that terrific label? You could make posters and mouse pads and stuff, too. Oh! 
Coffee mugs! To drink your soup from! In fact I’m sure you already do, so just 
make more of them!

And if the T-shirt business doesn’t generate enough revenue to support your 
flagging soup brand, well, some things are better left in the past. To be 
honest, the soup was never really that good in the first place. It just tasted 
that way since we were eating while we got to stay home and watch TV in our 
pyjamas all day.

Correction, 10 November 2015 at 16:03: An earlier version of this article 
stated that the soup with an updated recipe was the Campbell’s Condensed 
Chicken Noodle soup; it is instead the Frozen Shaped Pasta with Chicken in 
Chicken Broth soup, as well as its Star Wars branded soups
