
The Italian prime minister, Matteo Renzi, has made an emotional appeal to the 
British people not to make “the wrong choice” in theEU referendum 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> on Thursday, saying a 
decision to leave would exchange “autonomy for isolation, pride for weakness 
and identity for self-harm”.

As campaigning enters the final stretch, many EU leaders are refraining from 
pleading publicly with the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/20/ireland-fearful-neighbour-leaving-eu-northern-ireland>
 to vote to stay, fearful of making a counterproductive intervention in a 
bitterly fought contest that looks likely togo down to the wire 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/18/eu-referendum-britain-voting-campaign-jo-cox>
.

Related: Don’t vote remain for us Europeans – do it for yourselves | Matteo 
Renzi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/22/vote-remain-europeans-brexit-referendum-britain-leave-union>

However, writing in the Guardian, Renzi urged Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/22/vote-remain-europeans-brexit-referendum-britain-leave-union>
 to be true to its character andreject an isolationism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/20/the-guardian-view-on-the-eu-referendum-keep-connected-and-inclusive-not-angry-and-isolated>
 that could see the country become a “Britain less great”. The UK, he said, is 
not a country that walks alone.

“[It] would not be a disaster, a tragedy or the end of the world for you in 
the UK chose to leave the EU. It would be worse, because it would be the wrong 
choice,” Renzi wrote, adding that to leave would not be in keeping with 
Britain’s tradition of refusing to shirk a challenge.

Senior politicians on both sides of the close-fought referendum battle will be 
criss-crossing Britain in a final, hectic day of campaigning, with the result 
of the historic vote still too close to call.David Cameron 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron>, who will be travelling the 
country on a battle bus, is expected to appear with senior figures from other 
parties and from beyond politics, as the Britain Stronger In Europe campaign 
seeks to underline the breadth of its support from across the ideological 
spectrum.
Referendum explained: Guardian view 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/05/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=guardian_leader>
Meanwhile, Vote Leave campaigner Boris Johnson 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris>, who has staked his future career 
on backing Brexit, will tour Britain by helicopter, meeting supporters at a 
series of stops throughout the country – though campaign sources suggested bad 
weather could yet put a stop to the plan.

The centre-left Italian prime minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/31/matteo-renzi-italy-leader-europe-elections>
, a prominent but not uncritical Europhile, invited Britain to use the strength 
of a mandate provided by a remain vote to demand a more effective EU, “one that 
works better, and better recognises the individual character of the markets of 
its constituent countries?”

The evident anger towards Brussels that has been on display during the 
referendum campaign can be transformed into a force to change the EU, some of 
Renzi’s aides believe. He insisted that “the union is a tool – one that can be 
improved upon – to turn our individual weaknesses into a common strength.” At 
present, Renzi conceded, the EU simultaneously tries to do too much and too 
little.

The Italian prime minister, who has had battles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/21/italy-reforms-europe-not-working-generation>
 with the European commission, said “there is no super state in Brussels, no 
pedantic grocer who measures cucumbers and lives on arcane and exacting 
acronyms that obscure reality. Can London really fear this caricature of 
Brussels?” The British peoplewill not be persuaded 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/29/cameron-dismisses-claims-project-fear-eu-remain-negative>
 to make the choice to remain in the EU by curses, threats or hatred, Renzi 
said. Instead, he appealed to the British willingness to confront difficulties.

“If there’s one thing the British have never done when faced with a challenge 
that concerns their future, their very identity, it is to make the wrong 
choice,” he said. A less great Britain would be the opposite of what those that 
want an EU exit desire, he suggested. Although Renzi has previously said there 
will be no chance of an EU return if the UK votes to leave, he stressed that 
the former must adapt and learn the lessons of the referendum.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fleave-and-remain-clash-in-bbcs-great-debate-video-highlights&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fleave-and-remain-clash-in-bbcs-great-debate-video-highlights&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Leave%20and%20Remain%20clash%20in%20BBC's%20Great%20Debate%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fleave-and-remain-clash-in-bbcs-great-debate-video-highlights>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Leave+and+Remain+clash+in+BBC%27s+Great+Debate+%E2%80%93+video+highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fleave-and-remain-clash-in-bbcs-great-debate-video-highlights&media=>
Leave and Remain clash in BBC’s Great Debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/jun/22/leave-and-remain-clash-in-bbcs-great-debate-video-highlights>
The EU is facing huge challenges, Renzi said, and it needs the distinctive UK 
contribution. On the political front, he wrote, there are various kinds of 
populism “that aim to break down and corrode the bonds of our communities”.

Renzi suffered a political reverse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/19/rome-likely-to-have-elected-its-first-female-mayor>
 this weekend when his Democratic party (PD) lost control of Rome and Turin to 
Beppe Grillo’s populist Five Star Movement. Renzi is pressing constitutional 
change in Italy that he has said must pass, or he will resign as prime minister.

Ultimately, he said, he does not want the UK to remain in the EU for the sake 
of its European partners, but for Britain. “Don’t do it for us. We’re just 
happy to be in the union with you. Do it, rather, for yourselves, for what you 
stand for: both the history of a nation that has always looked beyond itself, 
and a future as a platform for innovation and a capacity for transformation 
which we all envy and admire.”

Renzi’s call for the EU to respond to the fractious referendum campaign by 
reforming itself was echoed by the German finance minister, Wolfgang Schäuble. 
He told a conference in Berlin that he hoped that Britain would vote to remain 
in the bloc, but that whatever the result, “we won’t be able to go on as we 
have done, otherwise people will say ‘they haven’t understood’.”
