
Britain’s EU referendum <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> 
next Thursday is a momentous decision that could have huge implications for the 
country – and the continent – for years to come.

The choice we must make looks simple enough, but it masks a difficult and 
complex decision that entails weighing an imperfect status quo against an 
unknowable alternative future.

Obviously the wilful half-truths, wild extrapolations and baseless assurances 
both sides have been peddling have not helped. Here are five key questions, on 
five fundamental issues, worth considering before polling day.

1) Bureaucracy and democracy: 

Claim:The European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> is 
bureaucratic, unaccountable and undemocratic.

But: “Democratic” can be defined in different ways. The EU looks less 
democratic than most countries, for example. But some might also say a country 
with a hereditary monarchy, an unelected upper house and aparliamentary 
majority based on 35% of the popular vote 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/vote_2005/constituencies/default.stm> 
is not very democratic either.

(“Bureaucratic” is also a relative term: the EU has 55,000 civil servants 
<http://europa.eu/about-eu/facts-figures/administration/index_en.htm>; the UK 
440,000. 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/publicsectorpersonnel/bulletins/civilservicestatistics/2015-10-08#civil-service-workforce>
)

But in any case the EU is not a country, so it may not be fair to compare it 
to one. At the same time, however, it is a lot more than just another 
international organisation, and is hard to compare to other administrations or 
bodies – including Whitehall or Westminster.

Brussels works like this 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/09/what-is-the-european-union>: 
the (unelected) commission, headed by 28 commissioners appointed by the member 
states, proposes laws, in areas where national governments allow them to. To 
come into force, these must then be approved by majorities in both the council 
of ministers, made up of (mostly elected) EU ministers, and parliament 
(elected).

This certainly constitutes some measure of democratic oversight, although 
there are legitimate questions about whether it is enough. The accountability 
of the commission is clearly also a concern.

Many member states have recognised the problem, though, and want change, so 
this might improve.

Question for voters: The EU is different, and differently democratic. Does 
this make it undemocratic and unaccountable beyond reform – and if so, would 
that justify leaving?

 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fhow-would-brexit-affect-you-eu-referendum-video-explainer&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fhow-would-brexit-affect-you-eu-referendum-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20would%20Brexit%20affect%20you%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fhow-would-brexit-affect-you-eu-referendum-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+would+Brexit+affect+you%3F+%E2%80%93+video+explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fhow-would-brexit-affect-you-eu-referendum-video-explainer&media=>
How would Brexit affect you? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jun/07/how-would-brexit-affect-you-eu-referendum-video-explainer>
2) The economic cost of membership – and of leaving:

Claim: The costs of membership are too high, Britain does not get enough in 
return, and we can negotiate new trade deals and prosper if we leave.

But: First, the UK does not send £350m a week to Brussels 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/reality-check/2016/may/23/does-the-eu-really-cost-the-uk-350m-a-week>
, as claimed by the leave campaign. The actual net cost, taking into account 
the UK’s rebate (which cannot be changed without the UK’s agreement) and the EU 
money that is spent here (on farmers, poorer regions and research), is more 
like £140m a week.


That’s still a lot of money. But in exchange, we are part of the single 
market, which greatly facilitates Britain’s trade with the rest of Europe:
getting on for half its total trade 
<http://researchbriefings.files.parliament.uk/documents/SN06091/SN06091.pdf>. 
Almost all economists think membership of the single market has been, and 
remains, a very good thing for Britain.

Since the UK joined the EU in 1973, its GDP per head has more than doubled. 
That may not all be due to EU membership, of course, but it would be hard to 
argue that EU membership has hindered the British economy.

There is nearly unanimous agreement among expert national and international 
bodies including theInternational Monetary Fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/13/imf-warns-stock-market-crash-house-price-fall-eu-referendum-brexit>
, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), Bank of 
England, Treasury, Confederation of British Industry, Institute of Fiscal 
Studies, London School of Economics, plusmost economists 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/28/economists-reject-brexit-boost-cameron>
, that leaving the EU and its single market would result in short-term economic 
losses and a probable longer-term slowdown.

How big those losses and that slowdown would be is, of course, unknowable – 
but the consensus that they would happen is striking.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y9nk%2Fsfb%23img-1&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y9nk%2Fsfb%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc0ae3d0a0d8b9ffb59126d7abf0f234e73e562c%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20five%20questions%20to%20answer%20before%20you%20vote&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y9nk%2Fstw%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EU+referendum%3A+five+questions+to+answer+before+you+vote&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y9nk%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc0ae3d0a0d8b9ffb59126d7abf0f234e73e562c%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 The National Football Museum in Manchester is one of the British projects to 
have received EU funding. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
Once out, negotiating a privileged trade deal with the EU could prove hard, 
particularly since it now seems likely that a vote to leave the EU would also be
a vote to leave the single market 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/10/no-single-market-access-for-uk-after-brexit-wolfgang-schauble-says>
.

The talks would be tough. Britain would be negotiating from a weak position 
both economically and politically: we need their trade more than they need 
ours, and the UK could expect few favours from an EU intent, among other 
things, ondissuading other members from leaving 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/10/brexit-domino-effect-europe-eu-referendum-uk>
.

Negotiating national deals with the rest of the world would also take time, 
because the global trend is demonstrably towards bigger, over-arching, 
bloc-to-bloc trade agreements rather than individual treaties.

Question: We do, indeed, pay a lot of money into the EU coffers. In economic 
terms, is it worth it – and if, as nearly all experts predict, leaving will 
come at a price, is that price worth paying?


3) Immigration

Claim: Britain cannot control immigration while it remains in the EU, public 
services are under strain, and high immigration has driven down wages for 
British workers.

But: Under EU free movement laws, Britain has limited control over immigration 
from other EU countries (just as other EU countries have only limited control 
over immigration from Britain).

There are about 3 million EU citizens living in Britain, and more than a 
million British citizens living in the rest of the EU.Net migration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/26/net-migration-to-uk-nears-peak-fewer-britons-emigrate>
 of EU citizens into the UK last year was 184,000; non-EU net migration was 
188,000.

Most economists say the overall impact of EU immigration into Britain is 
positive, as it has been with successive waves of immigrants since the 17th 
century. The OECD saysimmigration has accounted for half of UK GDP growth since 
2005 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/27/brexit-cost-uk-households-2200-by-2020-eu-oecd>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y9nk%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y9nk%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb888e8ff1ccf5136842364cd942135f1f86d65b5%2F0_185_3839_2304%2F3839.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20five%20questions%20to%20answer%20before%20you%20vote&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y9nk%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EU+referendum%3A+five+questions+to+answer+before+you+vote&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y9nk%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb888e8ff1ccf5136842364cd942135f1f86d65b5%2F0_185_3839_2304%2F3839.jpg>
 Immigration enforcement vans. Photograph: Alamy 
The best evidence available shows that current immigrants contribute more in 
taxes than they cost in welfare or public services 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/nov/05/eu-migrants-uk-gains-20bn-ucl-study>
. Solid evidence also suggests EU immigration hasnot depressed UK wages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/11/eu-migrants-had-no-negative-effect-on-uk-wages-says-lse>
 or cost British workers’ jobs.

Britain has the fourth lowest unemployment rate in the EU 
<http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/Unemployment_statistics>
, and never in history havemore British people been in work 
<http://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/employmentandemployeetypes/bulletins/uklabourmarket/latest>
 (albeit many in jobs less secure than they would like). And while it plainly 
increases demand on public services such as schools, housing and healthcare, EU 
immigration also boosts the amount of money available to pay for them.

This is not, of course, to deny the real issues many people in Britain have 
with large-scale EU immigration in certain hotspots. But the effects of 
globalisation, along with underinvestment and poor management of immigration, 
are arguably more at fault than immigration itself.

Moreover, leaving the EU may not reduce EU immigration. If Britain remains 
part of the single market, it will have to accept some freedom of movement. And 
even if it doesn’t, theproblems governments have reducing non-EU immigration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/26/net-migration-britain-new-high-ons-immigration>
 strongly suggest EU immigration will not disappear.

Question: Britain has both a high level of immigration and a thriving economy. 
Assuming that leaving the EU would allow it to significantly reduce EU 
immigration, which is by no means certain, is a Brexit the right answer to 
real, but mainly local, problems?

4) Security and defence

Claim: Being part of the EU exposes Britain to greater danger from terrorists 
and foreign criminals, 75 million Turks are coming, andEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> is planning a European army.

But: Britain is not a part of the Schengen passport-free area, so it has 
retained its own border controls. People with EU passports or national ID cards 
need to show them at UK border control to enter the country.

Britain is, though, a member of the Schengen Information System, meaning it 
exchanges information with countries that are part of Schengen. It has also 
opted in to other European collective security arrangements such as the 
European arrest warrant, European criminal records system and Europol.

It is hard to see how leaving the EU would reduce the threat: the UK Border 
Agency has every right to refuse entry to convicted EU criminals 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/reality-check/2016/mar/29/eu-dangerous-criminals-allowed-free-entry-uk-vote-leave-claims>
 if it deems them a serious risk, and has turned away 6,000 EU nationals since 
2010. Responsibility for Britain’s borders lies with the UK Border Agency, not 
with freedom of movement rules.

(Turkey, which has featured heavily in the security debate, will not be a 
member of the EU soon 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/22/vote-leave-turkey-warning-ignorance-european-realities>
: it has been “joining” since 1987, and has completed only one of the 35 tests 
it needs to pass in order to show it is fit to do so. And when the time comes, 
existing members states – including the UK, if it still is one – have a veto.)

As for the European army, it is true that Europe has a common defence policy, 
but it remains firmly in the hands of European governments, not the EU 
executive. One or two federalists may dream of a European army, but they have 
no backing among member states andthere are no plans to create one 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/27/is-there-a-secret-plan-to-create-an-eu-army>
.

Question: Would leaving the EU really help Britain maintain domestic security, 
and what evidence is there that an EU army is on the way?
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Feu-referendum-lies-myths-and-half-truths-video-explainer&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Feu-referendum-lies-myths-and-half-truths-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20lies%2C%20myths%20and%20half-truths%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Feu-referendum-lies-myths-and-half-truths-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EU+referendum%3A+lies%2C+myths+and+half-truths+%E2%80%93+video+explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Feu-referendum-lies-myths-and-half-truths-video-explainer&media=>
EU referendum: lies, myths and half-truths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jun/15/eu-referendum-lies-myths-and-half-truths-video-explainer>
5) Regulations, laws – and sovereignty

Claim: EU membership subjects Britain to a huge amount of costly and 
unnecessary regulation, too many British laws are made in Brussels, and by 
“taking back control” on leaving the EU, Britain would regain sovereignty.

But: For all Britain’s complaints of over-regulation, the OECD says the UK has 
theleast regulated labour market and second least regulated product market in 
Europe 
<http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21674698-there-growing-risk-britain-will-leave-european-union-it-needs-be-countered>
. That suggests that many EU regulations would need to be replaced by UK 
regulations – because they are necessary.

Calculating the percentage of British laws “made in Brussels” is complicated 
<https://fullfact.org/europe/uk-law-what-proportion-influenced-eu/>. Over the 
past decade or so, only about 13% of UK acts of parliament and statutory 
instruments implemented EU laws. Include EU regulations – which become law 
automatically – and the proportion jumps to more than 50%.

It is fair, though, to say that a great many EU regulations do not affect the 
UK despite theoretically being law here and that in many important areas, of 
social policy in particular – including social security, healthcare, education 
and criminal law – the EU has little or no direct say.

Furthermore, EU voting records show that since 1999 
<https://fullfact.org/europe/eu-facts-behind-claims-uk-influence/>, the British 
government has voted no to proposed legislation 57 times, abstained 70 times, 
and voted yes 2,474 times.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y9nk%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y9nk%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Facc7c9ea97dd0aca1da1e7b0f5f698cdc32b5a20%2F0_66_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20five%20questions%20to%20answer%20before%20you%20vote&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y9nk%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EU+referendum%3A+five+questions+to+answer+before+you+vote&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y9nk%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Facc7c9ea97dd0aca1da1e7b0f5f698cdc32b5a20%2F0_66_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 Members of the European parliament take part in a voting session. Photograph: 
Frederick Florin/AFP/Getty Images 
That means the UK has been on “the losing side” in Brussels on just 2% of 
occasions in 17 years. It is hard to escape the conclusion that almost always, 
Britain agrees with legislation Brussels proposes.

And yet. For many of those who want to leave the EU, the only real issue – the 
one for which they would be prepared to pay a high economic price – is 
sovereignty. The UK, they say, must take back control.

But it is unclear what this would actually mean. At a global level, 
sovereignty today means less than it once did 
<http://www.chathamhouse.org/sites/files/chathamhouse/publications/research/2016-05-09-britain-eu-sovereignty-myth-niblett-final.pdf>
: globalisation, the mobility of international capital, the power of 
multinationals, means that economically and fiscally, it is hard for countries 
to do much radically different.

Britain’s sovereignty is already pooled, in many areas, in the form of 14,000 
treaties signed with international organisations including the United Nations, 
Nato and the World Trade Organisation. In the face of global problems – 
south-north migration, climate change, Islamist terror – that is no bad thing.

Paradoxically, within the EU Britain has retained significant aspects of 
sovereignty: it controls tax and spending, because it is not part of the 
eurozone; it maintains border controls because it is not part of Schengen. And 
it will not have to surrender any more power because it is excluded from ever 
closer union.

Rather than an abdication of power, therefore, it could reasonably be argued 
that EU membership, for Britain,is actually a pretty effective exercise of power
 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/fece7238-1071-11e6-91da-096d89bd2173.html#axzz4BjalGVML>
. The notion that in a globalised world, Britain could somehow enhance its 
standing on the world stage by standing alone seems fanciful.

Question: The evidence suggests Britain is not excessively regulated or 
dictated to by Brussels: mostly, it gets what it wants. Since power in the 
modern world is relative and often shared, how much real extra sovereignty 
would it gain from leaving the EU?
