
A job for life is a thing of the past, for people of all ages – robots could 
replace you, or your whole industry could move overseas. The recent crises in 
the steel industries ofTeesside <http://gu.com/p/4cnbk/stw> and Port Talbot 
<http://gu.com/p/4j7cy/stw> proved just how frightening this can be, not just 
for individual families, but entire regions.

Related: Snobbery is outdated – universities have to train students for jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/mar/31/snobbery-is-outdated-universities-have-to-train-students-for-jobs>

We aspire to be a knowledge economy working at the top of the production 
chain. The government has lifted student number caps to create more university 
places. For those who prefer a work-based route to higher skills, there are new 
degree apprenticeships.

This is great. It’s essential that young people get the best possible 
preparation for adult life and the opportunity to embark on interesting and 
satisfying careers. But thenumber of 18-year-olds in the UK population is 
falling 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/jan/30/dont-misread-the-ucas-figures-things-arent-so-rosy-for-universities>
, and the Office for National Statistics predicts thatmore than a third of the 
UK workforce will be over 50 by 2020 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Internet%20Downloads/POST-PN-391%20(1).pdf>, 
so we also need to consider those already in the workplace.

Politicians are beginning to take notice. Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn has 
called for a National Education Service 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/12/what-does-jeremy-corbyn-think> 
for learners at every stage of life, and the current government is considering 
whether the time is right tolook again at “lifetime learning” support 
<http://wonkhe.com/the-wire/government-announce-review-of-lifetime-learning-support/>
 in itsmost recent budget 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/508193/HMT_Budget_2016_Web_Accessible.pdf>
.

As part of this support, politicians have promised that – in addition to the 
loans already available for further and higher education – it will introduce 
loans for level 3 to 6 training in further education, part-time second degrees 
in science, technology, engineering and maths (Stem) subjects, and postgraduate 
taught masters courses.


So why not introduce lifetime learning accounts for everyone? As with further 
and higher education loans, the money could go straight from the government to 
a reputable provider – preventing fraud – and would be repaid by the student 
once they were earning above a certain income, increasing affordability.

Related: Budget 2016 at a glance: the key points 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/16/budget-2016-at-a-glance-key-points>

Sadly, the last attempt to provide support to learners in this way ended in 
disaster. The Labour government’s1997 manifesto 
<http://www.politicsresources.net/area/uk/man/lab97.htm> promised “individual 
learning accounts” – a fairly small amount of public money, supplemented by an 
individual’s own savings, that could be used to pay for training, for example, 
by women returning to the workforce.

Although the basic idea made sense, money was lost to fraud 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/education/1960469.stm>, the government was accused 
of incompetence and the whole policy became toxic. New“skills accounts” were 
introduced 
<http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/+/www.direct.gov.uk/en/EducationAndLearning/AdultLearning/GetLearning/DG_172908>
 in 2008-09, but provided little more than careers information for graduates.

If so many past initiatives have failed, why bother introducing new ones? 
There are several potential benefits, not least making the system simpler by 
putting financial support for further and higher education in one place.

These accounts could also provide a convenient vehicle for new or exceptional 
funding. When a major company goes under, the government usually provides 
support to retrain people who have lost their jobs. Instead of providing money 
to the bureaucracy, an entitlement could go directly into the workers’ 
accounts, making it easier for them to control their route into a new job.

The policy of passing more of the cost of university degrees to students has 
led to a rigid funding structure. There is little incentive for universities to 
compress three-year degrees into two years, as they would only be able to 
charge £18,000 instead of £27,000. Similarly, the accountability measures for 
retention – which penalise universities whose students drop out before 
completing a whole degree – make it unappealing for universities to break their 
courses into modules that people could take at different times or in different 
places in a way that suits them.

It’s unlikely that the government will change the system in one fell swoop – 
and probably inadvisable that it should. But little by little, new 
flexibilities could be introduced. Loans could have an affordable cap, and 
could be drawn down throughout students’ lives as required. Those who are 
uncomfortable with carrying a lot of debt could draw money in modules, paying 
each one off before moving on to the next.


Related: Hand it over, higher ed: why colleges deserve universities' funding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/nov/03/hand-it-over-higher-ed-why-colleges-deserve-universities-funding>

There would have to be a more collaborative mindset, with universities and 
colleges actively encouraged to work together to create clear progression 
routes. This could work for both parties: universities could help students to 
convert their further study into degrees and colleges would be able to help 
people with professional degrees access appropriate professional development.


These measures would make it possible for us all to learn throughout our lives 
and be more resilient to the ups and downs of the modern labour market. Let’s 
recognise that jobs are no longer for life and education is not just for the 
young.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
