
Every morning, many of the young women in a village in Dindigul district, in 
the southern Indian state of Tamil Nadu, head to work in the cotton mills, part 
of the textile industry in this state that provides vital jobs in poorer 
communities.

The girls often work double shifts in unventilated factories, breathing in 
dust up to 16 hours a day. Often their meagre salary is paid directly to the 
head of their family or goes straight into dowry schemes thatlure girls to 
bonded labour 
<http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/world/breaking-caste/in-parts-of-india-dowry-schemes-are-used-to-lure-girls-to-bonded-labour/article6781476/>
. Some girls, many of them underage, never see a rupee of it.

Related: How can India end this tide of violence against women? | KumKum 
Dasgupta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2014/dec/10/india-gender-violence-women-activism>

Girls are forced into the factories because of poverty. But there is another 
factor: their fathers’ addiction to alcohol.

As one of the village’s self-identified alcoholics says: “I have girls working 
in the factories so therefore I am able to drink.”

 When girls pay for the household expenses it leaves their fathers free to 
spend their earnings elsewhere. “I cannot handle all the responsibilities of 
being married, as a casual labourer. I know it’s escapism. But I pay for my own 
drinks,” says another father.

 Revenue from liquor, and from the annual licences bars need to sell it, are a 
major source ofrevenue 
<http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/tp-national/tp-tamilnadu/tasmac-expects-revenue-to-go-up/article8420195.ece>
 for the state, which has a love-hate relationship with prohibition. Alcohol is 
a major issue in thestate’s elections 
<http://www.thehindu.com/elections/tamilnadu2016/tamil-nadu-prohibition-politics/article8460791.ece>
 this month; it has also figured in recent elections in other states,such as 
Bihar 
<http://patnadaily.com/index.php/news/11665-prohibition-the-will-of-the-people-of-bihar-nith.html>
, where prohibition was introduced last month.

Several opposition political parties, including Pattali Makkal Katchi and 
Marumalarchi Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam, demand total prohibition. Jayalalithaa 
Jayaram, chief minister of Tamil Nadu, who brought alcohol sale under the 
control of the state in 2002, has declared that her party – All India Anna 
Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam – will introduce phased prohibition. When Indian 
political parties advocate prohibition, they often useprotecting women and 
girls as their justification 
<http://patnadaily.com/index.php/news/11665-prohibition-the-will-of-the-people-of-bihar-nith.html>
.

“The streets are not safe for girls after 6pm,” says another of the village’s 
alcoholics. “When I have not drunk a lot, I can recognise that this is a young 
girl, somebody’s sister or a mother. But when I have drunk enough I cannot stop 
myself. I have no idea what I am doing.”

But prohibition is unlikely to solve the structural economic exploitation 
girls face at work and home. Some of the girls working in the mill are 
underage. The constitution prohibits children from working in a hazardous 
environment. Children aged 14 to 18 are allowed to work, but only for limited 
hours and not during night shifts; many of the local girls work far longer than 
is legal. Many women say they worked both double and night shifts as 
adolescents.

NGOs have started support groups to provide girls with opportunities to meet, 
as well as get information about their labour rights and sexual and 
reproductive health. The latter is particularly challenging. Families only 
allow the girls to meet when chaperoned. Parents and girls fear sexual 
harassment by alcoholic men. But girls also say their parents are afraid they 
will “talk about boys before they have been married off to one”.

 The vast majority of girls who accept work in the mills are Dalits 
<http://idsn.org/caste-discrimination/>, who face widespread discrimination at 
school 
<http://www.unicef.org/education/files/SouthAsia_OOSCI_Study__Executive_Summary_26Jan_14Final.pdf>
 (pdf); this leads to high levels of early drop-out.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tq7q%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tq7q%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d742be04683a470674de58a1d1030ec4da38d79%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Banning%20alcohol%20to%20protect%20girls%3F%20India%20is%20missing%20the%20mark%20%7C%20Pauline%20Oosterhoff&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tq7q%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Banning+alcohol+to+protect+girls%3F+India+is+missing+the+mark+%7C+Pauline+Oosterhoff&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tq7q%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d742be04683a470674de58a1d1030ec4da38d79%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Craftswomen prepare floral decorations to sell at a market in Chennai, Tamil 
Nadu. Photograph: Gianluca Colla/NG/Getty Images 
In another village plastered with election posters in nearby Virudhunagar 
district, a group of more than 50 girls declare that they want to stay in 
school rather than work in the mills. Often girls are taken out of education 
against their will when families face economic hardship. Their brothers are 
able to keep studying, often supported by loans the girls’ earnings are used to 
repay. Many girls see no way out except marriage. Marriage, however, requires a 
dowry – cash and jewellery for the in-laws. Dowry has been illegal in India for 
decades, butbonded labour schemes such as Sumangali Thittam 
<https://www.change.org/p/tamilnadu-the-chief-minister-stop-slavery-sumangali-thittam-tamilnadu-mills-2-lakhs-girls-exploiting>
 brazenly promise bonuses to pay for dowries.

 Politicians running for elections could be campaigning for workers’ rights 
and protections in the mills, and for ending caste- and gender-based 
discrimination. They could propose measures to improve public transport, or 
implement policies to keep lower-caste children in school and end dowry 
payments, or introduce financial literacy at schools for girls. They could 
propose schemes to help working children open their own bank accounts.

But girls are too young to vote. Instead, politicians advocate prohibiting 
alcohol – a measure that is likely to pass and unlikely to work. And the 
exploitation of young women will go on.
