
“We have so much time and so little to do. Wait a minute. Strike that, reverse 
it.”


I remember watching Willy Wonka and the Chocolate Factory 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0067992/> as a kid. Wide-eyed, I stared at the 
screen and loved the zany, unpredictable Willy Wonka played perfectly by Gene 
Wilder. Scattered through the film like carrot seed on fresh tilled earth are 
many droll comments and witty observation. They’re easy to miss. Roald Dahl 
liked to hide his character’s insights in throwaway comments; subtle asides 
heard only by a few.

This is one of my favourites.

Mr Wonka brings up an important point about that most precious of things: 
time. It’s been around forever and yet there’s never enough of it. According to 
theTUC <https://www.tuc.org.uk/workplace-issues/work-life-balance>, “Workers in 
the UK currently work the longest hours in Europe, take the shortest lunch 
breaks and enjoy the fewest public holidays.” We all feel the pressures of the 
hectic pace of modern life. Findings like this do little to alleviate our fears 
that things are getting worse.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jtv7%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jtv7%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff321dd055aa5e4c4928f4c2484af7bbd8ba95faa%2F0_38_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20radishes%20teach%20us%20about%20time%20in%20the%20garden&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jtv7%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What+radishes+teach+us+about+time+in+the+garden&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jtv7%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff321dd055aa5e4c4928f4c2484af7bbd8ba95faa%2F0_38_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 Tom Smart: ‘I stared at the screen and loved the zany, unpredictable Willy 
Wonka played perfectly by Gene Wilder’. Photograph: Everett Collection/Rex 
Feature 
All this brings me, of course, to radishes. This spring, I had a corner of a 
raised vegetable bed which was bare. I was going to plant out courgettes in the 
space, but given the cold start to the year, my planting has been weeks behind. 
I was eager to begin cropping something, anything, so I picked up a packet of 
radishes. The variety was ‘Sparkler’ and the back of the packet announced it 
was “perfect for children”. Radishes have long been touted as a good vegetable 
for kids as it crops, according to the seed company, “in as little as six 
weeks!”. That’s correct, radishes grow so quickly they deserve an exclamation 
mark. I pinched the seeds from my palm and sprinkled them onto the soil. I 
waited for them to germinate. The smile on my face was just like the toddler’s 
on the back of the packet.

The radish seeds did not disappoint. In days the little seedlings were raised 
like flagpoles above the soil. I have watched them grow vigorously over the 
last few weeks, and their little red roots are starting to swell. Soon, they 
will be ready for cropping. They are very fast plants. Fast, that is, for a 
gardener.

Today, with our frantic lives and schedules, very few people would consider 
six weeks to be fast. In fact, many would say the exact opposite. In an age of 
immediate gratification, six weeks for many would be a hair-whitening long time 
to wait. Non-gardeners are often surprised at how long it takes to produce 
decent crops. Six weeks to grow such a tiny little taproot? Really? Wait until 
they discover that asparagus crowns don’t really start producing properly until 
their third year.

With less spare time, people have become increasingly impatient. Nowadays, 
when we purchase something online we are surprised if the item does not arrive 
the next day. Waiting in any form irks us, whether we physically have to stand 
there or are growling behind the wheel of a car. If we send a message and we 
fail to get a reply straight away, we begin to wonder if there’s been some 
mistake, or we’re being ignored. Time now even has a value. Or, as Benjamin 
Franklin said pithily, time is money.

But there’s one place which does not conform to modern expectations of time: 
the garden.

That is one of the things I love about gardens: they operate on a different 
timescale to humans, one which allows us to really witness the world. As we 
humans run about in frantic madness, gardens grow steadily, reassuringly 
slowly. It is in that slow, steady growth that we can appreciate things. We can 
take time to notice small details - the purple veins on a geranium flower or 
the swelling buds of a rose. Even if a hibiscus flower only lasts a day, it’s 
still longer than most moments of bliss.

Plants live their lives in patient steps, changing slowly but steadily, and I 
find that immensely soothing. While the modern world seems to rush about, 
tearing and pulling itself apart, gardens are a fixed point. They mature at a 
pace we can truly observe and appreciate.Gardens 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gardens> change at a rate the human 
mind can understand. Their measured movement connect us both to the future and 
the past. You can take a child back to a park from your own youth to find that, 
while that beech tree you used to climb is taller, little has dramatically 
altered.

We need our gardens to slow us down, to be a refuge from the chaotic pace of 
life. We need our gardens now more than ever. So please, Mr Wonka, let’s not 
strike that or reverse it. We all could use more time and less to do, 
especially in our gardens.
