
You might never have heard of Antic but, chances are, if you live in London, 
you have drunk in an Antic pub. The chain has 45 venues in the capital – the 
latest of which,John the Unicorn <http://johntheunicorn.com/>, opened on 
Peckham’s Rye Lane in late February. Rye Lane isn’t necessarily somewhere you’d 
expect premium craft ales with a snack of “beef dripping focaccia with yeasted 
butter”, but John the Unicorn is carving out a niche among the grocers, phone 
shops and beauty salons of the famous southeast London high street. Its 
existence here is a marker of just how ubiquitous the Antic brand has become.

It’s a particularly scruffy marker, however. With its big blue lettering and 
cracked tiles the outside looks like a fish and chip shop that hasn’t been 
touched since the 1970s. Inside, the decor is similarly threadbare. It could be 
described it as “granny chic”. “All the pieces of furniture that we use, people 
relate to them,” says Dunia Goymer, Antic’s head of design, who is showing me 
around. “Because they’ll say: ‘Oh my goodness, my grandmother had that in her 
house.’”

The more you look, the more you recognise all kinds of objects familiar from 
somewhere else, such as a row of scuffed-up science lab tables crying out to 
have “I woz ere” etched into them with a compass point. The wooden chairs are 
the sturdy, unfussy kind you’d sit on in church, while the back room is a 
firmament of hanging lights covered in glass lampshades. It’s a hotch-potch, 
but it is oddly homely.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kvk6%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kvk6%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a8a8016b06d26951426d6fd2a7429d326bc3c1b%2F0_419_3222_1934%2F3222.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gran%20designs%3A%20the%20London%20pub%20chain%20spearheading%20the%20'granny%20chic'%20trend&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kvk6%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gran+designs%3A+the+London+pub+chain+spearheading+the+%27granny+chic%27+trend&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kvk6%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a8a8016b06d26951426d6fd2a7429d326bc3c1b%2F0_419_3222_1934%2F3222.jpg>
 Scruffiness incarnate: John the Unicorn is part of the Antic chain, which has 
45 venues in London. Photograph: Ewan Munro 
That’s the Antic effect. The company thrives through its unashamed appeal to 
customers of the 30s, professional, bearded sort, and locates its offerings in 
the up-and-coming areas where they can afford to buy a home. Sussing out which 
areas these are – or oftenwill be – is the job of Antic’s founder, Anthony 
Thomas. He worked in property before opening theEast Dulwich Tavern 
<http://eastdulwichtavern.com/> in 1999, followed by 44 more sites across 
London. A dozen more are in the pipeline, including pubs in Lewisham, Sutton 
and Newham.

You might think: 'Is that horrible or is it lovely? I’m not sure…'

The formula for success sounds simple: find a building with character, strip 
it back to its bones, fill it with chintzy clutter and watch the hipsters roll 
in. But it takes an eye to piece together a coherent aesthetic from second-hand 
items. It’s also vital that every pub feels different – independent, even – so 
that you can sip pale ale under photographs of Winston Churchill in theEffra 
Social <http://effrasocial.com/> in Brixton, or admire the bunting in Hackney’s 
Clapton Hart <http://claptonhart.com/>, and not realise that the delightfully 
twee establishment you’re patronising is owned by an aggressively expanding 
business.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kvk6%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kvk6%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F802539b3e62bd13865b67b0105c4fcc565a4271c%2F99_12_1247_748%2F1247.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gran%20designs%3A%20the%20London%20pub%20chain%20spearheading%20the%20'granny%20chic'%20trend&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kvk6%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gran+designs%3A+the+London+pub+chain+spearheading+the+%27granny+chic%27+trend&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kvk6%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F802539b3e62bd13865b67b0105c4fcc565a4271c%2F99_12_1247_748%2F1247.jpg>
 ‘Find a building with character, strip it back to its bones, fill it with 
chintzy clutter and watch the hipsters roll in’: the retro velvet seating at 
John the Unicorn. Photograph: Tiffany Mumford 
Much of Goymer’s hard work goes into finding the knick-knacks. Where does she 
get all the stuff from? “I’m always on eBay,” she says. “We trawl markets and 
second-hand shops… skips sometimes. Rather than end up in landfill these 
objects adorn our pubs.”

In John the Unicorn there are fragments of geodes stitched to the fringes of 
curtains, a squadron of vintage toy planes and a borderline-creepy collection 
of resin moulds for making children’s shoes. Goymer says her job is “about 
taking risks.” “You might think: ’Is that horrible or is that lovely? I’m not 
sure.’”

The risks don’t always pay off. In 2014, Antic opened a pub in a former job 
centre in Deptford – and named it Job Centre. Local people who had campaigned 
to keep the original job centre open were angry. Managing director Max Alderman 
argues the backlash against gentrification is hypocritical: “It’s only from 
people who were at the vanguard of gentrification in the first place,” he says. 
“Fundamentally what we try to deliver is a good local pub at the end of your 
street.”

It can also rescue a few beautiful old boozers: Antic’s interest in the 
Elephant and Castle pub in SE1 <http://elephantandcastlepub.co.uk/contact/>, 
for example, has saved it from being turned into an estate agents. It’s a 
concrete monster – a great big carpark of a pub. “Yes, it’s carpark chic,” says 
Goymer. “Maybe that’s where I should be going with it.”
