
“Walking into a gallery that’s an echoey white room can be an intimidating 
experience,” says Debra Finn. “I don’t think it’s the best way to see new art.” 
And she speaks from experience. The home she shares with husband Mark and their 
children Lorcan, 12, and Ariana, 9, is a converted watermill full of unexpected 
nooks, with creaky stairs and comfy sofas. But several times a year, the stuff 
of family life – abandoned PE kit bags, chewed dog toys – gets tidied away and 
the house opens as a gallery.

“The atmosphere is very easygoing,” says Debra. “It’s our home, so if someone 
isn’t taken by a painting, they can drift off to another room or chat to us 
about the house – it’s not all about the art. But, if they do like a piece, 
it’s easier for them to see how it works in a real home instead of in a blank 
white space.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y4j8%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y4j8%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F345a199abc8fac1e892559d19b5be42e63d5bca5%2F0_0_3917_5222%2F3917.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20fine%20art%20of%20living%20in%20a%20gallery%20home&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y4j8%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+fine+art+of+living+in+a+gallery+home&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y4j8%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F345a199abc8fac1e892559d19b5be42e63d5bca5%2F0_0_3917_5222%2F3917.jpg>
 Wall art: a lightbox by Felicia Strehmel. Photograph: Rachael Smith 
It’s easier for visitors to see how pieces work in a real home instead of a 
white gallery space

The couple moved here from south London, where Debra co-founded the art and 
design galleryCavaliero Finn <http://cavalierofinn.com/> in 2004 with artist 
Juliana Cavaliero. “At the gallery we only represent art that we genuinely love 
and would have in our own homes, so at-home exhibitions seemed the logical next 
step,” says Debra.

The roster includes creative knitter Melanie Porter, ceramicists Sophie Cook 
and Rhian Malin, and painters Gill Rocca and Tony Beaver – many of whom were 
talent-spotted at the start of their careers (Cavaliero Finn championed 
ceramicist Ali Miller long before Benedict Cumberbatch sipped from her 
porcelain tea cups inSherlock). These days, designer-makers such as the Galvin 
Brothers tend to approach Debra and Juliana – because what better place to 
display creations that are part artwork, part furniture than in a home setting?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y4j8%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y4j8%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Facf3bed533945f5cda2360404da47216399949bd%2F0_204_8019_4814%2F8019.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20fine%20art%20of%20living%20in%20a%20gallery%20home&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y4j8%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+fine+art+of+living+in+a+gallery+home&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y4j8%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Facf3bed533945f5cda2360404da47216399949bd%2F0_204_8019_4814%2F8019.jpg>
 Corner of quiet: the living room with painting by Catherine Knight. 
Photograph: Rachael Smith 
The Caveliero half of the gallery has stayed put in Herne Hill, but nine years 
ago Debra and Mark succumbed to the itch to move out. “Mark grew up in rural 
Ireland and we wanted the kids to have a similar upbringing,” she explains. The 
watermill’s setting is “properly rural”, at the end of a rutted, high-hedged 
lane. On show days, art aficionados traverse its twists and turns, praying they 
don’t meet a tractor coming the other way. “One driver arrived slightly shaken 
and needed hot, sweet tea,” says Debra. “He feared for his shiny paintwork.”

The house’s architecture is a mellow version of rustic: yes, there are stone 
walls, chunky beams, flagstones and woodburners, but the contemporary art 
ensures there’s no hint of olde worlde here. The exposed mill workings add 
industrial grit, although Debra drapes the wheels in garlands of LED lights: 
“It’s not just decorative – it’s to stop visitors stumbling into them after a 
few glasses of wine,” she says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y4j8%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y4j8%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81d1b986846469cec1c016f93d9c75127452e3e7%2F0_0_5431_7241%2F5431.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20fine%20art%20of%20living%20in%20a%20gallery%20home&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y4j8%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+fine+art+of+living+in+a+gallery+home&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y4j8%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81d1b986846469cec1c016f93d9c75127452e3e7%2F0_0_5431_7241%2F5431.jpg>
 Debra Finn, with a chair by Sam Edkins. Photograph: Rachael Smith 
Gothic shutters, a find from nearby Glastonbury Reclamation 
<http://www.glastonburyreclamation.co.uk/>, add to the air of unexpected 
pleasures: delicate ceramics by Mizuyo Yamashita nestle on a table under the 
staircase and painter Catherine Knight’s landscape casts a subtle mood over the 
living room.

Debra and Mark arrived well before the Hauser & Wirth gallery 
<http://www.hauserwirthsomerset.com/> opened its Somerset outpost in 2014, but 
they do feel the ripples of what Debra calls “the Bruton effect”. “There are 
more creative people here than ever, producing work that is on a par with art 
in London and other cities,” Debra says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y4j8%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y4j8%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a3ea48439f8d1189524c68b877cb53d227ab226%2F1287_596_6140_3684%2F6140.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20fine%20art%20of%20living%20in%20a%20gallery%20home&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y4j8%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+fine+art+of+living+in+a+gallery+home&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y4j8%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a3ea48439f8d1189524c68b877cb53d227ab226%2F1287_596_6140_3684%2F6140.jpg>
 The mill’s honey-coloured exterior. Photograph: Rachael Smith 
Not that it’s all arty types: “At a recent party, the conversation turned to 
extracting bulls’ semen – nothing about house prices or schools. We’re 
definitely not in south London any more.”

Yet this outpost of contemporary art amid arable land is not completely off 
the beaten track. “At our last show, a Japanese collector turned up on foot,” 
says Debra. “She was determined to see a particular artist, so got a train from 
London and then a local bus to the end of the lane. She knocked on the door, 
beaming with pleasure that she’d found us. That was when I knew that this idea 
was going to work.”

For more information, go to cavalierofinn.com <http://cavalierofinn.com/>
