
The lady holding my foot put on a surgical mask, donned some protective 
glasses and cranked up what looked like a small, electric sanding device. In a 
couple of minutes time, she would be splattered in blood, my toes sprayed 
across Carnaby Street, while I screamed for mercy.

Or maybe not. “You’ll have to let me know if it tickles,” she said, rather 
un-ominously.

I had been sent for a pedicure, you see, because apparently they’re becoming 
quite the thing on the growing male beauty scene. It’s all basketball’s fault. 
In 2014, NBA legendLeBron James <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lebron-james>
 postedpictures of him mid-pedi on Instagram 
<http://www.esquire.com/style/grooming/a35652/nba-players-getting-nails-done/> 
with the caption: “Have to take care of your dogs Men! It’s part of our life 
blood!”

Kobe Bryant 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3525964/Spot-baller-Hilarious-photobomb-shows-LA-Lakers-star-Kobe-Bryant-caught-enjoying-pedicure.html>
,Michael Jordan <http://articles.latimes.com/2004/may/27/sports/sp-briefing27> 
andShaquille O’Neal <http://www.tmz.com/2015/05/29/shaq-nastiest-pedicure-ever/>
 are other hoop-shooters who like to get their cuticles oiled, whileDavid 
Beckham <https://www.theguardian.com/football/david-beckham> – who else? – 
represents footballers who love a “mani-pedi”. If you’ve been closely following 
the Balmain 2016 spring/summer collection – if not, what do you even do with 
your free time? – you’ll know thatexposing your toes has hit the catwalk 
<http://assets.vogue.com/photos/55c650bf08298d8be2157342/master/w_400/_MON0017.jpg>
, too. Clearly, someone needed to investigate this phenomenon, and that someone 
had to be me.

So I ventured to Cowshed <http://www.cowshedonline.com/>, where a woman called 
Gosia made me a green tea, placed a big, fluffy cushion on my lap and got me to 
lower my feet – exhausted from a whole morning’s music journalism – into a 
bucket of warm water. Beyond the fact that I was going to be miles better at 
basketball in an hour’s time, I didn’t know what to expect.

“Will you be wanting colour?” she asked. Sensing my panic, she swiftly assured 
me that most men opt for a simple tidy-up instead. “The ones who want colour 
normally go for black,” she noted.

Gosia began clipping and filing away, occasionally reaching for a long, pokey 
thing to get under the nails. There were numerous oils and creams, but no pain 
and precious little drama: even the miniature sanding device proved to be 
harmless – a light cloud of dry skin was all that emerged. While she finished 
off the session with a foot rub and a nail buff, Gosia told me that most of the 
men who come for a pedicure do so in tandem with their partners; it’s often a 
pre-holiday treat.

That made sense. My feet definitely looked smoother and shinier, and the whole 
thing was as relaxing as a situation can be when a stranger is playing around 
with your feet. But, for £55, I think you would have to be quite committed to 
“being pampered” to make it a regular occurrence. And, as I put on my shoes 
again, I wondered who would actually see the results. For all our striving for 
gender equality, there is one law that must surely endure for ever: that men 
should never get their feet out in public. Unless, of course, it’s for a 
national newspaper providing a vital public service.
