
Stephen Kinnock <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/stephen-kinnock>, the 
ambitious Labour backbencher who has taken a prominent role in the campaign to 
save the Port Talbot steelworks, has said the shadow business secretary, Angela 
Eagle, would make a great Labour leader.

In an interview with the House, a magazine published for MPs and their staff 
at the House of Commons, Kinnock, the MP for Aberavon, warns that Labour must 
take “remedial action” ifMay’s local election 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/22/labour-warned-to-expect-losses-in-may-local-elections>
 results don’t “go the right way” – and tips Eagle as a potential successor to 
the current leader, Jeremy Corbyn.

“As a party, from top to bottom, from the leadership right through to our 
grassroots, we have to be judged by our results and, you know, if results are 
not going the right way you have to examine why that is and take remedial 
action on it because that’s what we’re elected to do,” he said.

“Success breeds success and failure breeds failure, so there’s absolutely no 
doubt that if we win big and do really well moving into 5 May and 23 June, then 
there’s no doubt your leadership is strengthened, your party is strengthened, 
there’s wind in our sails and you move forward from there. But if the results 
aren’t going the right way then clearly that’s a different situation 
altogether.”

Eagle – who delighted backbenchers with a punchy performance when she stood in 
for Corbyn at prime minister’s questions in December 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/09/george-osborne-angela-eagle-pmqs-who-won-battle-deputies>
 – is seen by some in the party as a dark-horse candidate if Corbyn were to 
face a challenge.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Fangela-eagle-george-osborne-pmqs-europe-tony-blair-brexit-video&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Fangela-eagle-george-osborne-pmqs-europe-tony-blair-brexit-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Angela%20Eagle%20takes%20on%20George%20Osborne%20in%20lively%20PMQs%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Fangela-eagle-george-osborne-pmqs-europe-tony-blair-brexit-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Angela+Eagle+takes+on+George+Osborne+in+lively+PMQs+%E2%80%93+video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Fangela-eagle-george-osborne-pmqs-europe-tony-blair-brexit-video&media=>
Angela Eagle takes on George Osborne in lively PMQs – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2015/dec/09/angela-eagle-george-osborne-pmqs-europe-tony-blair-brexit-video>
Kinnock said he had been impressed by her while they worked on pushing the 
government to provide more aid to the ailing British steel sector. 
“‘Impressive’ is absolutely the right word,” he said. “I see her as being 
somebody that’s going to be absolutely critical for the future of theLabour 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party.

“I think too many years have gone by where we haven’t had a woman leader. One 
thing I would say is that I think it would be fantastic and Angela would be a 
very, very strong candidate for that. You would have to ask her yourself in 
terms of what her plans and ambitions are but I am absolutely of the view that 
she has the capability to do the job.”

The son of former Labour leader Neil, Kinnock added that he would like to see 
his frontbench colleagues take a more “forensic” approach to holding the 
government to account.

“I think it’s important that we have a forensic approach in the chamber. Maybe 
I’m just a bit of a traditionalist on these things, but I like an approach 
whereby we interrogate the government over the despatch box, pick their 
arguments to pieces, not in a shouty or shrill way, but in a way which actually 
exposes the weaknesses at the heart of their arguments. I think we could be 
doing a bit more of that.”

Related: Sajid Javid is ill-prepared to save UK steel | Angela Eagle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/11/sajid-javid-worst-prepared-to-save-uk-steel>

There is mounting speculation among Labour MPs that a poor showing in May’s 
local elections could prompt a leadership challenge, to be held once June’sEU 
referendum <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> is over – but 
those sceptical about Corbyn’s leadership have so far failed to unite around a 
single candidate.

Senior party figures are far from united about what would mark “success” on 5 
May. Corbyn’s election campaign co-ordinator, Jon Trickett, has pointed out 
that 2012, the last time these council seats were contested,was a high water 
mark for the party 
<http://labourlist.org/2016/04/jon-trickett-lets-use-may-5-as-a-springboard-to-a-commons-majority/>
 which is unlikely to be repeated; others, including Alison McGovern, chair of 
Progress, have saidlosing even a single council would be a “betrayal” 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/21/loss-of-a-single-council-would-be-betrayal-of-people-says-labour-mp>
.
