
LinkedIn is leading the pack when it comes to professional networking, with 
433 million users and the likes of Richard Branson, Bill Gates and Arianna 
Huffington all contributing to the site. Rather than just making contacts and 
sharing CVs, the site has evolved as a place where entrepreneurs can offer and 
receive advice, seek inspiration and discuss the issues of the day.

As an entrepreneur, it’s important to keep your own page optimised to raise 
your own business’s profile. Here’s how to make the best use of LinkedIn and 
other professional networks.

Keep them updated

The golden rule when it comes to networking 
<http://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/kia-fleet-partner-zone/2016/mar/14/more-business-more-opportunities-networking>
 – both personally and professionally – is to keep the content fresh. If you 
have a LinkedIn account, make sure it is updated with your company’s latest 
developments, new hires and big business wins. There’s nothing worse than 
heading to a page of a company you’re interested in and seeing that it hasn’t 
been updated since February of last year.

Related: More business, more opportunities. Just don’t call it networking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/kia-fleet-partner-zone/2016/mar/14/more-business-more-opportunities-networking>

To make sure that the posts are fairly regularly updated, assign the role to 
someone in the business with the capacity to devote time to it every week. 
LinkedIn recommend that you post at least 20 times a month and aim to publish 
at 7-8am and 5-6pm, avoiding Mondays and Fridays.

It’s personal 

Nothing beats a personal, word-of-mouth recommendation. You can use LinkedIn 
to ask people that you’ve done business with to endorse you for your skills. 
It’s possible to identify key skills in your profile to coordinate those 
recommendations and prevent your profile from becoming diluted. For example, if 
you run a design company, multiple endorsements about your proficiency with 
spreadsheets isn’t that helpful.

When it comes to your photo, make sure that it showcases you in a professional 
light. That means no photos on a night out, on holiday, or with friends. Opt 
instead for a work-appropriate outfit and plain background.

There may well be a number of relevant groups to join too, that show what your 
interests are and increase your network’s reach. These can be related to your 
business, connect to your university school or college, be for social causes 
you care about, and passions that you have in your spare time. Make time to 
comment on posts within these networks to raise your profile.

Consider other options

In terms of professional networking, LinkedIn is the most well-known platform, 
but there are competitors gaining ground, such asFacebook at Work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jan/14/facebook-at-work-social-network-launches-pilot-for-companies>
, and publishing app Snapchat.

Snapchat is particularly popular with the startup generation, who are making 
connections in a more experimental way. It’s an interesting tool for social 
media campaigns too – the videos are quicker and easier to produce, and you can 
easily target your chosen audience.

Use it to get more business

LinkedIn can also help you to get more business for your own company, simply 
by raising its profile in the right way. Follow these tips and you’ll be well 
on your way to achieving just that.

Content on this page is paid for and provided by Kia Fleet 
<http://www.kia.co.uk/kia-business-fleet-cars.aspx> sponsor of the Guardian 
Small Business Network Accessing Expertise 
<http://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/accessing-expertise> hub.
