
Massimo Bottura once believed he had reached the peak of his culinary success 
in 1980 when, at the age of 18, he would use a megaphone to call out to his 
friends on the beach near Salerno from the camp where they were staying and ask 
what they wanted for dinner: carbonara or amatriciana? Among friends, he was 
always the cook, but he never thought he would be a chef.

The 53-year-old, whose restaurant Osteria Francescana in Modena was this week 
named thebest in the world 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/14/former-london-supper-club-clove-club-worlds-50-best-restaurant-list>
, has said his passion for the kitchen began with his love for pasta; the way 
his grandmother rolled out translucent yellow sheets of dough for her 
tortellini twice a day, and how she told him the kneading, rolling, and folding 
would strengthen his character. He was attracted to how “humble” and “generous” 
the dish could be.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Fneuro-cuisine-exploring-the-science-of-flavour-video&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Fneuro-cuisine-exploring-the-science-of-flavour-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Neuro%20cuisine%3A%20exploring%20the%20science%20of%20flavour%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Fneuro-cuisine-exploring-the-science-of-flavour-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Neuro+cuisine%3A+exploring+the+science+of+flavour+%E2%80%93+video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Fneuro-cuisine-exploring-the-science-of-flavour-video&media=>
Neuro cuisine: exploring the science of flavour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/video/2016/may/23/neuro-cuisine-exploring-the-science-of-flavour-video>
“Pasta is flexible. It bends, it transforms, and goes to all ends to keep us 
in its company,” he said last year.

It would be easy to say that Bottura became the first Italian to win the top 
spot 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/14/massimo-bottura-mercurial-chef-reinvented-italian-food>
 of theWorld’s 50 Best Restaurants 
<http://www.theworlds50best.com/list/1-50-winners> this week because he is a 
famous master chef of a cuisine that is adored, and that Italy deserved the 
honour. But that would be too simple.

When friends and colleagues describe Bottura and what makes him special, they 
rarely talk just about the food.

Yes, he deconstructed a mortadella panino 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FzEIe8MtWbg> – the beloved staple his mother 
used to put in his school bag every day whose taste he said is “fixed in my 
soul” – using foam, pistachio, and a gnoccho on the side.

The dish – named “Memory of a mortadella sandwich” – is a feature of his €180 
tasting menu, which whisks the adventurous diner from a “Croccantino of foie 
gras” to a pudding entitled “Oops! I dropped the lemon tart” via “Five ages of 
Parmigiano Reggiano in different textures and temperatures” and “Beautiful, 
psychedelic spin-painted veal, not flame grilled”.

For the deconstructed panino, Bottura made a simmering mortadella water that 
he created through a distillation process, which he used to make a “creamy” 
version of the Italian sausage that, with just the right amount of fat, could 
be put through a siphon. With some charges of gas, he created the foam. The 
result, he claims, is a taste that disappears on the palate immediately, but 
has a “long and persistent” flavour. It took him four years to get the dish 
right.

But, despite their intricacy, his techniques seem secondary to his motivation.
 A dish from Osteria Francescana. Photograph: Osteria Francescana 
“He is a poet of the land in which he lives and he takes the history of the 
country and the region and the ingredients and turns that into something that 
is a dish,” says Dana Cowin, the former longtime editor of Food & Wine magazine 
andChefs <http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/chefs> Club International 
creative director. “Each dish tells a very complete story. Everyone today wants 
to be a storyteller – it is sort of a thing – but Massimo has been telling 
stories with his food since as long as he has been a chef.”

She adds: “His food and thinking are lyrical. It is like the Odyssey.”

Bottura’s own journey began when, unhappy at law school, he decided to buy a 
failing trattoria in his home town. At 23, having cooked for his friends for 
years, he sought to transform the dingy restaurant – which had practically been 
sold to him along with an accordionist and his singing wife – with the help of 
a pasta maker calledLidia Cristoni 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/14/massimo-bottura-mercurial-chef-reinvented-italian-food>
, whom Bottura calls his second mother-mentor.

He later learned of a French chef named Georges Cogny whose cooking he 
admired. Cogny had married an Italian and opened a restaurant called Locanda 
Cantoniera in the Apennine village of Farini. For the next two years, according 
to the New Yorker, he would make the two-hour drive into the mountains and 
spend every Sunday and Monday there, learning from the Frenchman.

After some initial success, Bottura grew in confidence and eventually decided 
to sell his restaurant and head to New York for a six-month stint in search of 
inspiration. At Caffè di Nonna in Soho, he worked in the kitchen while an 
American named Lara Gilmore was behind the bar serving up cappuccinos. They 
married and today Gilmore, with whom he shares a love of art, is seen as an 
integral partner in Bottura’s success.

Related: ‘Airbnbs for dining’ give Italian female chefs chance to shine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/22/social-eating-networks-italian-female-cooks>

“Lara took over my education. She opened the world of the avant garde to me,” 
Bottura told the New Yorker in 2013.

After a rocky start in their early courtship – Gilmore had moved to Modena to 
be with Bottura, only for her Italian boyfriend to receive an unexpected offer 
to move to Monte Carlo with the French star chef Alain Ducasse, leading to a 
breakup and Gilmore’s return to NY – they eventually returned to Modena 
together. In 1994 Osteria Francescana was born. Today, one of the most famous 
dishes on his tasting menu pays homage to Emilia-Romagna and its most beloved 
export: the “Five ages of Parmigiano Reggiano” mentioned earlier.

When it comes to cuisine and storytelling, Bottura’s best tale, according to 
the Italian food critic Roberto Perrone, involves a “vain eel” that is the 
subject of a short film, Il Ritorno, produced by the chef. It pays tribute to 
the river Po and playfully describes one of Bottura’s signature dishes on his 
tasting menu, called “An eel swimming up the Po river”. In it, Perrone says, 
the eel meets some polenta, finds its way around some apples, and finally 
encounters some of Modena’s famed balsamic vinegar.
 A dish from Osteria Francescana. Photograph: Osteria Francescana 
“He is a poet … a visionary,” says Perrone. “Francescana is fantastic because 
the best Italian tradition meets the fantasy and the brilliance of Bottura. 
This is the first secret of why he won.”

The second, Perrone says, is that Bottura has a high profile and knows that 
being a great chef also requires some show business. He has challenged deeply 
held views about tradition and food inItaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy>, and has done it – in Cowin’s words – 
with “contagious excitability” and “very thoughtful enthusiasm”.

In an interview with the Guardian last year, Bottura painstakingly described 
how he had once asked himself why he insisted on boiling six different cuts of 
meat – beef, pork, and chicken – for a recipe. The answer, he determined, was 
1,000 years of history, which was not a good enough reason.

Related: Never Trust a Skinny Italian Chef 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/nov/15/massimo-bottura-never-trust-a-skinny-italian-cook-review-michelin-star-recipes>

“That day, with that meat, I said: ‘No, I am not boiling the meat, because if 
I boil the meat I am losing everything and especially the work of these amazing 
farmers.’ To me it is so stupid to say that the recipe cannot be changed,” he 
said.

Asked about Bottura’s influence on other top chefs, Michael Gallina, executive 
chef and owner of Vicia in St Louis, Missouri, said: “As chefs we often feel 
pressured to reinvent the wheel and create new cuisine. He has reminded us that 
celebrating some of the special ingredients and traditions of our culture can 
lead to some truly spectacular dishes.”

Bottura is also a political campaigner within the culinary world who has 
spoken out about food production, sustainability, and poverty.


Last year, during the Milan Expo, Bottura worked with a Catholic charity to 
convert an abandoned theatre in Milan into an experimental soup kitchen for the 
homeless using leftovers from the exhibition, raising awareness about the issue 
of food waste. He invited top chefs to cook there, with Daniel Humm of Eleven 
Madison Park making a sweet pudding from day-old bread, andRené Redzepi of Noma 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/nomas-rene-redzepi-finally-comes-home-1442497498> 
using black bananas for banana bread.

In an era when chefs are celebrities – and often poorly behaved ones – Bottura 
does not fit the mould of the obnoxious star who berates and humiliates his 
staff.

Still, he wears his success well and with humour. Before he became a chef, 
during the year he spent in military service in Modena, he reportedly did so 
well on his base’s football team that no one bothered to stop him when he 
decided to drive in and out of the base, breaking the rules. He would honk his 
car at the gates and simply yell: “Open up! It’s me: number one.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yg8c%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yg8c%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8d80544d589cd8c67e619ca5b3a5767d35c5fc9%2F94_276_2954_1990%2F2954.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Massimo%20Bottura%2C%20the%20'poet'%20chef%20with%20the%20best%20restaurant%20in%20the%20world&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yg8c%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Massimo+Bottura%2C+the+%27poet%27+chef+with+the+best+restaurant+in+the+world&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yg8c%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8d80544d589cd8c67e619ca5b3a5767d35c5fc9%2F94_276_2954_1990%2F2954.jpg>
 Italian chef Massimo Bottura poses at the entrance of his restaurant, Osteria 
Francescana, in Modena. Photograph: Paolo Terzi/AFP/Getty Images 
Osteria Francescana’s tasting menu (€180 a head)

Memory of a mortadella sandwich 


Croccantino of foie gras 

An eel swimming up the Po river 

Pasta and beans 

Five ages of Parmigiano Reggiano in different textures and temperatures 

The crunchy part of the lasagna 

Beautiful, psychedelic spin-painted veal, not flame grilled 

Caesar salad in Emilia 

Sweet potato ravioli from Parma to Mantova 

Oops! I dropped the lemon tart

