
Paper Bird, As I Am

Colorado by Paper Bird <http://www.paperbirdband.com/> may have been the 
obvious choice for a playlist or possibly even a choice for a song that sums up 
the state, but As I Am from the recently released Rooms album has all the 
jubilation and exuberance of a sunrise over the Rocky Mountains. The three-part 
harmonies of the women and call-back choruses from the men evoke 
the independent spirit of the west and the community spirit of a growing Denver 
music scene.

Grizzly Bear, Colorado
 Grizzly Bear PR shot 
There are no grizzly bears in Colorado. According to the city of Boulder 
website's frequently asked questions page, the bears that wander around 
Colorado are, regardless of the colour of their coats, black bears. That didn't 
stop the bandGrizzly Bear <http://grizzly-bear.net/> from writing What now 
Colorado in their song Colorado from the Yellow House album, released in 2004. 
It's an interesting song to contemplate while driving a winding road through 
the mountains.

Townes Van Zandt, Colorado Girl
 Townes Van Zandt Photograph: Ian Dickson / Rex Features 
Townes Van Zandt <https://townesvanzandt.com/> was the quintessential cowboy, 
driving people to tears with his songs that painted pictures of people and 
places that remain everywhere in the west: the cowboy by the campfire, the 
trucker driving endless miles on highways and the bartender pouring drinks to a 
couple of regulars parked on stools in a dark bar. Colorado Girl is about a 
person but always makes me long for the place. Van Zandt never had a major hit 
while alive but his influence can be heard in the music of Steve Earle, Emmylou 
Harris and Alison Krauss.

Joe Sampson, Kill Our Friends

Joe Sampson <http://joesampson.bandcamp.com/>'s "Kill Our Friends" (here 
backed byNathaniel Rateliff <http://nathanielrateliff.com/>), embodies the 
collaborative nature of Denver's music scene. This relaxed, ambling track is 
reminiscent of the sparse western landscape where the Great Plains meet the 
Rocky Mountains.

Patrick Dethlefs, Another Colorado Song

Another Denver artist whose reputation is spreading among fans of sincerely 
written honest folk songs isPatrick Dethlefs <http://patrickdethlefs.com/>. He 
is inspired by the natural beauty of Colorado and the community that 
thrives here.

Slim Cessna's Auto Club, This is How We Do Things In the Country

Slim Cessna's Auto Club <http://slimcessnasautoclub.com/> are one of the 
founders and foremost leaders of the "Denver Sound". With their cowboy hats, 
belt buckles, gold teeth and gothic Americana, they have been a staple of 
Denver's music scene for 20 years. You could believe they headed west like a 
revivalist church, looking for the freedom that is allowed.

Ben DeSoto is bookings manager for Hi-Dive( hi-dive.com 
<http://www.hi-dive.com/>

• For more information on holidays in the USA, visit DiscoverAmerica.com 
<http://www.discoveramerica.com/>,) one of Denver's leading indie music venues
