
Nick Kemp is not a fan of street fundraising. In fact, he has a fundamental 
problem with it. “People have busy lives and the vast majority who choose to 
give do so through other means,” says the cabinet member for neighbourhoods at 
Newcastle city council. “I believe in giving to charity. I believe in and 
support a lot of the organisations represented by the chuggers.” But for Kemp, 
street fundraising represents an unsavoury side of the charity sector.

He is not alone in his concerns. In February this year, Charity Commission 
chair William Shawcross, gavea speech 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/william-shawcross-speech-at-commissions-public-meeting-in-southampton>
 in which he told charities that it was not right for the public “to be 
hounded, on the telephone, through the letterbox or in the street”. The same 
month, asurvey by YouGov 
<https://yougov.co.uk/find-solutions/whitepapers/charity-whitepaper/> found 50% 
of the public believed large charities had performed badly when it came to 
responsible street fundraising, while 67% thought accusations of “aggressive 
fundraising” were fair.

Related: I defended chuggers, until one turned up on my doorstep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/mar/09/charity-fundraising-chugger-doorstep>

Unlike many others, however, Kemp is in a position to do something about it. 
In March this year, councillors in Newcastle agreed to pursue a ban on 
face-to-face fundraising. The action will be taken using a public spaces 
protection order (PSPO), under legislation designed to help councils tackle 
anti-social behaviour. PSPOs allow local authorities to make it an offence to 
engage in any activities deemed to have a “detrimental effect on the quality of 
life of those in the locality”. To date, they have been used to ban activities 
including begging, swearing and thepossession of golf clubs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/29/golf-bags-remote-controlled-cars-banned-busybodies-charter>
.

Increasingly, they’re also being used to target chugging. Newport, in Wales, 
became the first council to do so, when it introduceda PSPO 
<http://www.newport.gov.uk/en/Transport-Streets/Anti-social-behaviour/Public-Space-Protection-Order.aspx>
 last November prohibiting anyone “approaching members of the public in a 
persistent manner with a view to persuading them to subscribe to a service or 
make charitable donations”. A spokeswoman for the council emphasised that it 
did not amount to a total ban on street fundraising, pointing to the focus on 
fundraisers acting in a “persistent manner”, and added that the order had 
resulted in “reduced presence in the city centre and a reduction in complaints”.

Freedom of Information requests submitted by the Guardian have revealed that 
at least three other authorities have followed Newport’s lead, or are preparing 
to do so. In December, Swindon, in Wiltshire, introduced aban on “aggressive 
charity collection” <http://www.swindon-csp.org.uk/asb/Pages/pspo.aspx> after 
finding 78% approval for the measure at public consultation. Next month, 
Kettering, in Northamptonshire, expects toban “assertive/aggressive commercial 
or charity collection” 
<http://www.kettering.gov.uk/downloads/file/6352/public_spaces_protection_order>
. Councillors in Newcastle have approved plans fortheir PSPO 
<http://democracy.newcastle.gov.uk/documents/s90953/4%20b.%20Cabinet%20ASB%20policy%20and%20PSPO%20FINALv2%2011%2003%2016.pdf>
 in principle and will shortly go out to consultation.

Should bans on street fundraising become widespread, the implications for 
charities could be severe. According to the PublicFundraising 
<http://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/fundraising> Association, 
152,212 new donors were signed up to give to charities through street 
fundraising in 2014/15.


Related: Fundraisers - tell us how the fundraising crisis affected you 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/jun/01/fundraisers-tell-us-how-the-fundraising-crisis-affected-you>

Rosie Chinchen, Amnesty International UK’s director of fundraising, describes 
the trend as “disappointing”. “Face-to-face fundraising is an excellent way to 
engage people in a conversation about human rights issues and it often leads to 
people becoming more involved, including by making monthly donations to support 
our work,” she says. “Amnesty’s human rights work is almost entirely funded by 
individuals, many of whom have been introduced to us through face-to-face 
fundraising.”

Like all other charities that rely on street fundraising, Amnesty is a member 
of the Public Fundraising Association (PFRA), which sets the standards expected 
of all face-to-face fundraisers. Mike Smith, head of public affairs at the 
association and the Institute of Fundraising, says he recognises that the 
practice must be regulated. “It’s in nobody’s interest to have everybody 
working and trying to gain supporters all the time,” he says.

However, Smith is concerned that some councils are using anti-social behaviour 
legislation to tackle problems. “We don’t think PSPOs are right,” he says. 
“It’s like using a sledgehammer to crack a nut.” Instead, the PFRA works with 
councils to address concerns and to develop site management agreements, which 
regulate the number and locations of fundraisers and the times they are allowed 
to work. “Ninety percent of councils which have implemented these say they 
would recommend them,” says Smith. “Our sense is that’s the way forward.”

It’s a view shared by Justin White, general manager at Concern Worldwide, who 
says banning street fundraising would be devastating. Street fundraising is 
worth an average of 3,000-plus new donors every year to the charity, Whitesays. 
“These are regular donors, people who give on a monthly or quarterly basis and 
we can budget on that basis.” White urges councils that have concerns about 
street fundraising to raise them with the PFRA. “Fundraising needs to be well 
managed,” he says. “Rather than banning it, we should all be working together.”

For more news, opinions and ideas about the voluntary sector, join our 
community <https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/>.
