
At last it’s summer, that precious season in the academic calendar when the 
days start early and end late because of astronomy and not the demands of the 
job.

Friends and family jokingly inquire about how to manage the stresses of 
poolside reading and I have to smile and admit that it’s true, at least in 
part. But the label, “summer vertigo 
<http://kieranhealy.org/blog/archives/2005/06/08/summer-vertigo/>”, that 
American sociologist Kieran Healy gives to the feeling academics get when 
contemplating those long free months, imagining the projects they could finish, 
isn’t what it used to be.

Administrative tasks have grown to account for 20% to 30% of our working week.

Like the rest of the year, this time is increasingly fragmented, splintered by 
the growing demands on an academic’s time.

A 2009 paper 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1468-2273.2009.00433.x/abstract> 
reported that UK academics have worked 50-plus hour weeks since the 1970s. The
figures <http://nces.ed.gov/pubs2006/2006176.pdf> are similar in the US where 
in 2003 faculty spent an average of 53.4 hours per week at work.

The long hours culture is not new and many consider it a price worth paying 
for doing something that they love. But the same studies found that 
administrative tasks have grown to account for 20% to 30% of our working week 
and this pushes the academic’s core activity – research – to the margins.

The problem is that new ideas take time to develop: at the proposal stage, 
while conducting the work, and when writing the papers. Without large 
continuous blocks of time, it isn’t possible to thoroughly engage with a 
subject. Emerging ideas are fragile; each disruption is like a gust of wind 
knocking over a house of cards.Studies of multi-tasking 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/05/05/opinion/sunday/a-focus-on-distraction.html?_r=0>
 have found that it takes individuals about23 minutes  
<http://www.fastcompany.com/3019659/leadership-now/what-multitasking-does-to-your-brain]>
to refocus on a task once interrupted. This is the micro equivalent of what’s 
happening to our summers as student projects, committee meetings and 
administrative reporting intrude on research time.

Related: ‘My professor demands to be listed as an author on many of my papers’ 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/jun/05/my-professor-demand-to-be-listed-author-on-research-paper>

Time is the currency of academia. It’s a medium of exchange because we give 
our time to others, reviewing and reading papers in the hope that they will 
return the favour for us. It’s also a store of value; a good paper or report 
embodies the work of months or even years and it can be referred to by others 
to learn more quickly. And of course it’s a unit of measurement; administrators 
love to see how we spend our time so that they can evaluate trade-offs between 
teaching, research and other duties.

But time is not the same as pounds and pence. If I spend one hour a week 
working on a topic for a year, then that’s fifty hours. But the depth of 
understanding and the quality of the work achieved would be much greater if I 
could concentrate that time in one week, working on nothing but that topic. 
Lots of small pieces do not have the same value as a large block. Time becomes 
a sheet of blank metal, a bolt of fabric, or a rolled out dough (select your 
hobby as appropriate). It can be formed and shaped into new and wonderful 
designs and purposes. But every interruption takes a chunk out of that surface, 
and in the end all we’re left with is scraps with which to try and cobble 
together something meaningful.


If university administrators want us to conduct world-class research, then 
they need to make time for it and preserving the summer for research is key. 
This might mean forgoing some MSc tuition income to reduce supervision loads. 
It could mean cultural changes that make it socially unacceptable to hold 
administrative meetings during a designated part of the summer period. It might 
even mean adopting the American model of nine-month contracts, leaving 
academics truly free to work on their research. But without a change, summer 
vertigo will soon dissolve into autumn regret.

• This week’s anonymous academic is a lecturer at a Russell Group university.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>.
