
When the universities and science minister Jo Johnson introduced his green 
paper 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/higher-education-teaching-excellence-social-mobility-and-student-choice>
 last month, one of the more controversial elements was a pledge to speed up 
the process for new providers to gain degree-awarding powers and, ultimately, 
achieve university status.

Many in higher education have since argued that this will lead to market 
forces permeating the sector 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/nov/10/the-higher-education-green-paper-will-see-market-forces-permeate-universities>
, resulting in higher fees that will hit the most vulnerable in society the 
hardest.

Related: Don't let social mobility fade out in the noise of university reform 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/nov/16/dont-let-social-mobility-fade-out-in-the-noise-of-university-reform>

This is a misconception. Private providers can – and already do – play a huge 
part in making access to education easier for everyone. Meanwhile, traditional 
providers often struggle to hit widening access targets.

Those targets are set to become even tougher. The government has put social 
mobilityat the heart of its plans 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/student-choice-at-the-heart-of-new-higher-education-reforms>
, and wants to double the proportion of disadvantaged students entering higher 
education and increase the number of black and minority ethnic (BME) students 
by 20% by 2020. This will be challenging for many traditional providers.

This isn’t to say that public university providers aren’t changing: £735m is 
being invested in widening participation across the sector 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-29686628> and, according to a recent 
Universities UK report 
<http://www.universitiesuk.ac.uk/highereducation/Pages/trendsinUKhighereducation.aspx#.VpO-1mThCuo>
, 42% more students from disadvantaged backgrounds were on full-time 
first-degree programmes in 2014 than in 2005.

But there are definitely things that these providers can learn from the 
private sector. The very nature of the traditional system (requiring A-levels 
or equivalent qualifications, for example) is already alienating to large parts 
of the population who don’t follow a conventional route into higher education.

Open access is key to improving social mobility. That doesn’t mean watering 
down the quality of teaching, or changing the calibre of student. It simply 
means catering to the specific study needs of a broader range of people. Yes, 
this takes more time and resources, but it is a must for effective widening 
participation.

Related: University reform is coming – get ready for another numbers game 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/nov/05/the-green-paper-is-coming-get-ready-for-another-numbers-game>

Students who follow non-traditional routes into higher education come with 
different priorities. At my institution,GSM London <http://www.gsm.org.uk/>, 
almost all of our students fall withinwidening participation 
<http://%20https//www.offa.org.uk/press/frequently-asked-questions/> 
categories: 95% come from a BME background; 80% are mature (over 21) and most 
of our intake is drawn from what are described as disadvantaged backgrounds.

But we don’t see this as a negative. We celebrate the diversity of our 
students and identify the attributes that their various (sometimes challenging) 
backgrounds can bring to their education. We incorporate that into our teaching 
and learning process.

The sector needs a diverse choice of education provider. The green paper 
mentions mature students twice and part-time students once, yet these are two 
key areas where diverse education provision can help, rather than hinder, the 
sector. Relying on traditional providers to meet the shortfalls in these areas 
would be short-sighted.

Between 2010-11 and 2014-15, students starting part-time study fell by nearly 
143,000, from 258,885 to 116,025 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-34658018http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-34658018>
, according to the Higher Education Policy Institute (Hepi). The government has 
recognised this decline and addressed it in thecomprehensive spending review 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/topical-events/autumn-statement-and-spending-review-2015>
, by making maintenance loans available to part-time students from 2018. But 
more needs to be done. Private providers such as GSM, which work with their 
local communities and actively engage in meeting their educational needs, can 
lead in this area.

Related: Jo Johnson's university reforms: reactions from the experts 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/nov/06/jo-johnsons-university-reforms-reactions-from-the-experts>

Some in the sector are open to widening the offer available to students. In 
response to the green paper, Dame Julia Goodfellow, president of UUK and 
vice-chancellor of the University of Kent,has acknowledged the need for a 
“diversity of providers” and supports more “competition and choice” for students
 
<http://www.universitiesuk.ac.uk/highereducation/Pages/UniversitiesUKresponsetogovernmentgreenpaperonhighereducation.aspx#.VpO_aWThCuo>
.

She also warns, rightly, that any new higher education provider entering the 
market should be able to supply “robust reassurances to students, taxpayers and 
government on the quality and sustainability of their course”.

 But higher education shouldn’t always be about competition – collaboration 
can also play a part. Providers on both sides of the public and private line 
can learn from each other. Social mobility is about education for all, from 
those who are best placed to provide it.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
