
I am a 73-year-old woman. I have had no trouble having orgasms with a vibrator 
until recently. But now, though I get close, it just doesn’t happen. What do 
you think is wrong?

The suddenness with which your anorgasmia appeared might suggest there is 
something going on of a physiological nature, and it would be wise to have a 
checkup with your doctor. Some medications – even over-the-counter preparations 
– might have sexual side-effects, and do ask your doctor about your hormone 
levels, as there is a relationship between hormonal activity and orgasm. To be 
proactive, step up your exercise programme if your doctor allows it, and 
maintain general healthy habits.

Has something changed in your life recently that might be sexually 
significant, such as a downturn in your self-esteem, body image or mood? Are 
you feeling sad or worried about something? Depression can negatively influence 
sexuality, and so can anxiety, stress and bereavement.

The use of fantasies or erotic materials during self-pleasuring sessions is 
recommended, but with overuse they can become boring, so consider revamping 
your repertoire. You could also consider experimenting with different kinds of 
lubrication, to explore the new sensations these might generate. If you engage 
in lovemaking with a partner, be brave enough to discuss the problem and ask 
for help. And there are many kinds of vibrators out there; cheating on your old 
one might just do the trick.

• Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a US-based psychotherapist specialising in 
sexual disorders.

• If you would like advice from Pamela Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, 
send us a brief description of your concerns toprivate.lives@theguardian.com <> 
(please don’t send attachments). Each week, Pamela chooses one problem to 
answer, which will be published online and in print. She regrets that she 
cannot enter into personal correspondence.
