
In 2012, Ikea made headlines 
<https://www.rt.com/business/ikea-green-energy-2020-123/> with its pledge to 
completely power its stores with renewable energy by 2020. Last week,HP, the 
US-based multinational IT company, made the same pledge 
<http://www.csrwire.com/press_releases/38824-HP-Commits-to-100-Percent-Renewable-Electricity>
, promising to switch completely torenewables by 2020 
<https://www.environmentalleader.com/2016/04/06/how-hp-plans-to-reach-100-renewable-energy-across-global-operations/>
. The fact that both Ikea and HP set the same deadline for renewables, despite 
the fact that their pledges were separated by four years, illustrates a 
stunning change in renewable power generation. When Ikea made its promise, it 
was in the process of installing its own power generation facilities. Four 
years later, HP has numerous other options.


It also has a lot of company on the renewables bandwagon. As part of its 
pledge, HP signed on for theRE100 campaign <http://there100.org/>, joining 
fellow corporations Google, Starbucks, Novo Nordisk and Goldman Sachs. RE100 
was launched less than two years ago by a coalition of businesses and 
nonprofits, but participating companies have, on average, already transitioned 
half of their energy use to renewables, according to a report 
<http://there100.org/news/14197043> released last month – and several companies 
have already hit the target.

Related: Have we reached the tipping point for investing in renewable energy? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/feb/13/renewable-energy-investment-fossil-fuel-divestment-investor-summit-climate-change>

For corporations looking to accelerate their adoption of renewable power, this 
is a pivotal moment. The steady drop in price for renewable energy 
<http://energy.gov/articles/6-charts-will-make-you-optimistic-about-america-s-clean-energy-future>
 – solar alone has dipped more than 50% since 2008 – means that renewables are 
an obvious and common approach to corporate sustainability. Several companies 
have noted the financial benefits as well: relying on renewable sources means 
they can worry less about the kind of energy price instability the fossil fuels 
markets can create, an effect they say will only grow as the renewables sector 
matures.

“We see this as the clean little secret of a sustainable business,” says Kevin 
Rabinovitch, global director of sustainability at Mars, Inc. “Preserving the 
climate can also save you money.”

In many ways, however, lawmakers, regulators and utilities have not caught up 
with the corporate appetite for sustainable power. Despite improving prices, 
local rules and supply limitations mean it is not possible to easily buy 
renewable energy at the same cost as conventional power in all geographies, 
according toa report 
<https://docs.google.com/viewerng/viewer?url=https://www.ceres.org/resources/reports/power-forward-why-the-world2019s-largest-companies-are-investing-in-renewable-energy/at_download/file>
 from business sustainability nonprofit Ceres. Furthermore,some countries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/28/government-subsidy-cuts-put-green-energy-companies-at-risk>
 andUS states 
<http://www.livescience.com/48189-green-energy-standards-frozen-in-ohio.html> 
have been inconsistent in their support for renewable energy, making the bottom 
line less predictable.

The companies participating in RE100 offer insight into the ways that business 
can help push the renewable energy ecosystem forward while getting themselves 
to 100% renewables, whether by purchasing renewable energy credits (RECs), 
buying clean energy directly from producers or generating renewable energy 
onsite.

RECs allow a company to essentially offset its use of conventional power by 
ensuring an equivalent amount of renewably sourced energy was also generated. 
However, this has been a controversial and divisive clean energy option since 
its inception. Some critics have called RECs a “feel-good scam 
<http://www.mercurynews.com/opinion/ci_12049267>” that not only fails to 
represent actual power generation, but does not even cover the difference in 
cost between renewable and fossil fuel energy. Supporters of RECs on the other 
hand argue they are the “first and simplest step to achieving a clean energy 
goal 
<https://www.technologyreview.com/s/542036/defending-renewable-energy-certificates/>
”.

Many businesses are taking extra steps to make sure the RECs they buy adhere 
to stringent environmental and social principles.Steelcase 
<http://www.steelcase.com/>, a Michigan-based producer of office furniture, 
only buys RECs generated by projects with no carbon emissions. Software giant 
SAP <http://go.sap.com/index.html> aims to push electricity producers to become 
even more sustainable by developing and implementing procurement guidelines 
that demand very specific standards.

“We consider renewable electricity from biomass only if it is disconnected 
from coal or other fossil power plants and if the biomass itself is not related 
to deforestation,” said SAP’s global environmental manager, Marcus Wagner. “In 
addition, we require that power plants must be no more than 10 years old, as we 
aim to foster innovation in the production of renewable energy.”

The next step down the path to renewable energy is for a company to buy power 
from wind farms or solar arrays for part of their energy needs (they will still 
need electricity from local utilities at night or when the solar or wind energy 
production is low). Some businesses even partner with energy producers to build 
solar or wind power plants.Mars  <http://www.mars.com/global/index.aspx>
partnered with Sumitomo 
<http://www.mars.com/global/press-center/press-list/news-releases.aspx?SiteId=94&Id=5629>
 on a 200-megawatt, 118-turbine wind farm in Texas that came online in 2015. 
Today, the installation produces electricity equivalent to 100% of the 
company’s US power needs, bringing its total share of renewable energy up to 
25% of its global usage.

Retail giant Walmart <http://corporate.walmart.com/> last year partnered with 
Pattern Energy on another wind facility 
<http://patternenergy.com/index.php/?cID=343> in Texas, committing to buy half 
of the energy produced by the 200-megawatt installation. This electricity alone 
will make up about 18% of the company’s US power needs. Today the company is 
32% of the way to its goal of running entirely on renewable energy.

Few companies directly generate significant amounts of their own power. One 
exception isGoogle <https://www.google.co.uk/green/energy/>, which is currently 
using renewables to provide 37% of its energy needs 
<http://googlegreenblog.blogspot.com/2015_10_01_archive.html>. Google uses a 
combination of purchasing green power near its data centers and investing in 
onsite renewable projects, including a 1.9-megawatt solar array at its main 
campus in California that meets as much as 30% of the site’s peak energy use. 
Google’s size, wealth and desire to be a leader in sustainability are all 
motivating factors, not to mention the long term business benefits 
<https://www.greenbiz.com/blog/2012/02/01/why-google-invests-clean-energy> of 
signing contracts to purchase clean energy at fixed prices.

The process of shifting to renewables is not always smooth. The sheer breadth 
of the task – understanding how renewable energy is generated, how it is 
purchased and how to support the most innovative possible technologies – can 
pose a challenge. SAP has found itself wrestling to sort out the various 
renewable options – solar versus wind versus biogas – and what factors define 
high quality energy in each category. And for many companies, the learning 
curve has been steep.

Related: Can you put a price on nature? A Californian nonprofit thinks it can 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/mar/13/value-of-nature-earth-genome-environment-sustainability>

In an attempt to mitigate these kinds of difficulties, Walmart and 11 other 
companies in 2014 signed up to the creation of the Corporate Renewable Energy 
Buyers’ Principles group <http://buyersprinciples.org/about-us/>, an 
organization that lays out and promotes ideas that will ease corporations’ 
adoption of renewable energy. These suggestions include 
<http://buyersprinciples.org/principles/> the creation of longer term contracts 
and increasing access to financing tools such as power purchase agreements.

“In many states there are policy barriers that restrict corporate buyers’ 
ability to negotiate with regulated utilities for renewable energy at a 
reasonable price, or procure renewable energy from a non-utility provider,” 
said Kevin Gardner, senior director of global responsibility communications for 
Walmart.

Other resources are also springing up to make it easier for companies to go 
renewable. John DeAngelis, renewable energy manager for Steelcase’s 
sustainability team, pointed to the Business Renewables Center 
<http://www.rmi.org/business_renewables_center>, part of the nonprofit Rocky 
Mountain Institute <http://www.rmi.org/>, a Colorado-based organization focused 
on finding market-based solutions to environmental problems including clean 
energy, transport efficiency and greener buildings. RMI’s Business Renewables 
Center <http://www.rmi.org/business_renewables_center> focuses on providing 
guidance to companies pursuing renewable energy use, he said.

Participating corporations are discovering that a commitment to renewable 
energy has more advantages that just the warm feeling of doing the right thing. 
SAP has enjoyed brand-boosting external recognition for its effort. The buying 
power of Novo Nordisk, for example, has convinced a large local energy supplier 
to convert from coal to biomass, Zarp-Andersson said. In addition, the presence 
of large corporate players in the market helps create a stable demand.

“Walmart and other companies’ commitment to renewable energy use creates more 
certainty in the marketplace and encourages others to invest, which helps lower 
the cost for everyone,” Gardner said.
