
1 | Stop polluting

There is a common belief that huge infrastructure will solve the problem, but 
mega-projects are causing huge problems because they deal with all sorts of 
polluted water. When household water, industry water and rainwater are mixed, 
treatment becomes more complex and more expensive. The best way to stop 
pollution is not to clean the polluted water, but to stop polluting. This 
means, in particular, stopping the use of toxics in industry and agribusiness.
Claudia Campero, water campaigner,Food and Water Watch 
<http://www.foodandwaterwatch.org/>/Alianza Mexicana contra el Fracking 
<http://www.nofrackingmexico.org/>

Related: The global water crisis in 13 photographs 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/gallery/2016/mar/22/world-water-day-global-crisis-13-photographs>

2 | Protect government sovereignty

El Salvador has had a moratorium on metal mining in place since 2008. This is 
a powerful example of a small country standing up to industry. Unfortunately, 
El Salvador isnow facing a lawsuit 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/mar/25/human-right-water-salvadoran-ngos-global-campaign>
 by Canadian-Australian mining giant Oceana Gold for acting in the interest of 
its own population. If this company actually got its way and were able to build 
its massive gold mine, it would jeopardise the Lempa River watershed, which is 
the source of drinking water for more than two-thirds of the population of El 
Salvador, and is also shared by Honduras and Guatemala.Meera Karunananthan, 
international water campaigner,Blue Planet Project 
<http://blueplanetproject.net/>

3 | Teach children about pollution

We believe in the role of children as change agents and have been supporting 
ministries of education in each country we work in on a curriculum for health, 
hygiene and environmental resources. It is a slow process but if students 
aren’t learning the importance of protecting natural resources from parents and 
grandparents, they must learn it in schools with their brothers and sisters.
Mark Duey, Latin America regional manager,Water for People 
<https://www.waterforpeople.org/>

4 | Inform the public

It’s all about information; the power is in knowing about laws and regulations 
so people can demand they are enforced. The government takes a lot of time to 
inform the community about water quality conditions, so we take the 
responsibility to inform and empower people with accurate information about 
health, the environment, as well as the laws and civil rights we have. We have 
also installed a lab so that we can take a weekly sample of our coastline’s 
water to monitor its quality and publish the results on our own app, because 
the results given by the government are taken monthly, published too late and 
are not accessible to the public.Margarita Diaz López, director, Proyecto 
Fronterizo de Educación Ambiental AC <http://www.pfea.org/> 

5 | Enhance the role of civil society

Giving civil society a voice is crucial. This can be done through citizens’ 
surveys and citizen report cards, improved grievance mechanisms, awareness 
campaigns, handling customers complaints as part of regulatory systems, and 
participation in watershed/river basin organisations.
Gustavo Saltiel, lead water and sanitation specialist, Water Global Practice – 
World Bank <http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/water>


Related: Five of the best water-smart cities in the developing world 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/feb/29/five-of-the-best-water-smart-cities-in-the-developing-world>

6 | Respect community rights

 Central governments with the power to grant concessions must respect the 
rights of communities to say no to environmentally destructive projects, and 
the rights of indigenous communities to prior and informed consent before 
permits and concessions are granted. These rights are being violated throughout 
the region in favour or the “rights” of big industries.Meera Karunananthan

7 | Treat wastewater at home

Here in Tijuana, we have three treatment plants, but the energy to move the 
sewage to the treatment plant is more expensive, and the clean water is not 
reused. The solution is that each households and businesses should treat and 
reuse their water on site, instead of counting on the government, because it is 
cheaper and more efficient.Margarita Diaz López

8 | Promote healthy watersheds

Native ecosystems can contribute to reducing the level of contaminants and 
sediments by their own filtering capacity. We must emphasise the importance of 
the water services provided by nature, as well as to recognise the fundamental 
role local communities and smallholders have when they conserve and restore 
native ecosystems. This will be more and more critical to guarantee water 
quality and quantity in perpetuity.Fernando Veiga, Latin America freshwater 
manager,the Nature Conservancy <http://www.nature.org/>


9 | Democratise water management

Local communities need mechanisms to help them decide how to manage their 
water. Leaving decisions to democratically-elected governments and development 
agencies that condition loans is a huge risk, whereas communities are likely to 
be more concerned about the long-term effects of decisions. Of course, 
democracy takes more time, but since water is life, this is a matter of life 
and death.Claudia Campero

Related: The human right to water: Salvadoran NGOs leading a global campaign 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/mar/25/human-right-water-salvadoran-ngos-global-campaign>

10 | Establish water justice

We cannot limit our solutions to conservationist strategies because the 
problems arise from the political and economic decisions that have been made by 
governments, and also forced upon them by international financial institutions 
and foreign governments. As Susan Spronk and I noted in a recentpaper 
<http://www.blueplanetproject.net/index.php/water-at-the-heart-of-el-salvadors-struggle-against-neoliberalism/>
 about the Salvadoran water crisis, environmental movements in El Salvador are 
tackling the social and political factors that have determined how water is 
used and distributed. They have put forward bold proposals (for example, the 
recognition of water as a human right, a national water bill and a ban on metal 
mining) to permanently close the door to metal mining, improve access to water 
resources, and establish mechanisms for the social control of water. This is 
the type of solution that needs to be implemented everywhere.Meera Karunananthan


Read the full Q&A here 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/mar/17/live-qa-what-are-the-steps-to-ending-water-pollution-in-latin-america>
.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter, and have your say on issues 
around water in development using#H2Oideas 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23H2Oideas&src=typd>.
