
It is time to think the unthinkable. Brexit is more than a possibility, if the 
polls are right 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/13/eu-referendum-leave-campaign-takes-six-point-lead-in-guardianicm-polls>
. We may soon have to get used to all sorts of intolerable lifestyle changes. 
But let’s not be defeatist. We’re British after all. Here is our guide to how 
to survive Brexit. Yes, it’s as speculative and loony as those government 
information films on how to survive nuclear war, but … well, there’s no good 
way to end that sentence.

Text Władisław


Is your toilet leaking? Don’t delay. Text Wladislaw right now, before he 
returns to Poznań. Remember what happened when you got dodgy Ken to fix that 
drip? That’s right, the strange stain on the ceiling keeps getting bigger.

Become Irish


Let me ask you this. Do you have a little Irish in you? Of course you do. If 
either of your parents was an Irish citizen who was born in Ireland, then you 
are automatically an Irish citizen, irrespective of your place of birth. And so 
you can still be a citizen of the EU while living in the heaven that is 
post-Brexit Godalming. If one of your grandparents is an Irish citizen who was 
born in Ireland, but neither of your parents were born in Ireland,you may 
become an Irish citizen 
<http://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving_country/irish_citizenship/irish_citizenship_through_birth_or_descent.html>
. Result! Or, as they say in Irish:“Togha!” If none of the above applies, you 
could always look pitiful, affect an interest in the Republic’s fortunes in 
Euro 16 and recite long chunks of Molly Bloom’s soliloquy at your citizenship 
hearing. Probably wouldn’t work.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y46k%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y46k%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71aa34afe1e6787da523acafdd15e79338189dbd%2F243_1221_3752_4690%2F3752.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20Brexit%20survival%20guide%3A%20freeze%20your%20cheese%20and%20holiday%20in%20Albania&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y46k%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A+Brexit+survival+guide%3A+freeze+your+cheese+and+holiday+in+Albania&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y46k%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71aa34afe1e6787da523acafdd15e79338189dbd%2F243_1221_3752_4690%2F3752.jpg>
 Go easy on the booze. Photograph: Alamy 
Go on a mission to Calais


Don’t panic. There’s still time for a booze run. There are no limits to the 
alcohol and tobacco you can bring in from EU countries so long as you plan to 
consume them yourselves or present them as gifts – which, however you look at 
it, is a lot of gewürztraminer. By contrast, if you’re not in the EU, you can 
bring home a mere 16 litres of beer and four litres of non-sparkling wine, 
which probably wouldn’t be enough to get the average England fan through Euro 
2016’s group stages. So hire a white van for a day and buy enough cheap 
continental hooch to create a retro 70s feature of a wine lake in your back 
garden.

Don’t break your arm skiing in the French Alps 


Yes, in pre-Brexit days, the European Health Insurance Card 
<http://www.nhs.uk/NHSEngland/Healthcareabroad/EHIC/Pages/about-the-ehic.aspx> 
allowed one to receive free or reduced-cost healthcare in other EU countries. 
No more. If you must break your arm skiing, do it in Aviemore. Yes, there may 
well be no snow to ski on in the Highlands, but that’s not really the point.

Freeze continental delicacies for the long dismal years ahead 


There’s a very good thread on moneysavingexpert.com entitled “What Can I Do 
With This Huge Camembert?” 
<http://forums.moneysavingexpert.com/showthread.php?t=633123>. One answer is to 
freeze it. This, of course, gives a pointer to how we must proceed. Ladies and 
gentlemen, we must buy huge fridge-freezers to store our French cheeses, German 
sausages, Portuguese custard tarts, tapas dishes etc. Yes, there are – 
apparently – British camemberts and bries and so forth, but – really?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y46k%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y46k%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1a83af916b27822cd4a8ee9e53ff7f70ad545bf%2F141_910_3680_4600%2F3680.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20Brexit%20survival%20guide%3A%20freeze%20your%20cheese%20and%20holiday%20in%20Albania&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y46k%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A+Brexit+survival+guide%3A+freeze+your+cheese+and+holiday+in+Albania&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y46k%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1a83af916b27822cd4a8ee9e53ff7f70ad545bf%2F141_910_3680_4600%2F3680.jpg>
 The good old British banger: now with added fat! Photograph: Christopher 
Thomond for the Guardian 
Enjoy the good old British banger 


For too long, eurocrats have been messing with our sausages, haven’t they? 
Yes, they have. The Sun once complained that those damned continentals 
interfered with our freeborn British practice of allowing acertain amount of 
fat to count as meat in sausages 
<https://blogs.ec.europa.eu/ECintheUK/the-infamous-euro-sausage-threatens-british-bangers/>
. No more. Let rampantcolon cancer and type 2 diabetes 
<http://www.nursingtimes.net/clinical-archive/nutrition/type-2-diabetes-linked-to-sausage-and-bacon/5033629.fullarticle>
 be the expressions of Britain’s newly independent spirit.

Be nice to your continental colleagues 


Your French/German/Polish workmates will be feeling rejected thanks to Brexit 
and will soon return home. So treat them to a glass of dishwater-temperature 
bitter and some authentic British cuisine – toad in the hole and spotted dick, 
for instance. That’ll make them feel happier about leaving.

Forget farming, start fishing


You’re a farmer whose business model has been predicated on receiving billions 
in EU agricultural subsidies while you lean on gates chewing grass and looking 
into the middle distance. It’s time to retrain. Go to your library and borrow a 
singalong sea shanty CD. That’ll be your first step in your new career. If the 
UK takes control of its waters and starts stopping factory ships from the 
continent depleting fish stocks, you see, fishing could well become a lucrative 
profession.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y46k%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y46k%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc8b05720d80e36550093e065edae4e646c3562a8%2F663_576_3537_2123%2F3537.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20Brexit%20survival%20guide%3A%20freeze%20your%20cheese%20and%20holiday%20in%20Albania&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y46k%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A+Brexit+survival+guide%3A+freeze+your+cheese+and+holiday+in+Albania&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y46k%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc8b05720d80e36550093e065edae4e646c3562a8%2F663_576_3537_2123%2F3537.jpg>
 Cod almighty: British fish for British people Photograph: Graham Turner for 
the Guardian 
Ditch the Français


Are there two sweeter words in the English language than “Unlearn French”? Of 
course there aren’t. You’ll never need to speak French, German, Italian or 
Spanish again. Plus, you need never watch all those Euro dramas on Walter 
Presents or BBC4 that you secretly never enjoyed but pretended to like to 
impress your peers. Instead, you can sit watching On The Buses reruns as nature 
intended.

Learn the joy of waiting 


Remember those happy days when you strolled through EU airports past a long 
queue of loser non-EU citizens waiting for immigration officials to give them 
cavity searches and/or unpleasant frownings? Thanks to Brexit, you’ll be in 
that queue soon. What to do? Catch up on your reading while you wait. What seem 
to be ludicrously big novels – Hanya Yanagihara’s A Little Life, Donna Tartt’s 
The Goldfinch, Elena Ferrante’s quartet, that sextet of autobiographical novels 
by that Norwegian – will be perfect company while you wait for hours to be 
patronised by snooty French immigration officials.

Fall in love with the good old British seaside


Remember when you used to go to that lovely sun-drenched island in some 
blissful EU country? Those days are over. Get used to the sand in your eyes, 
the chip fat in your hair, getting dive bombed by gulls, hypothermia if you put 
a toe in the sea, and four hours of stationary traffic on the M6 on the way 
home.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y46k%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y46k%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d4935f9ae6347f9b5a06deb942aa2c9b33e41c6%2F168_0_4215_5096%2F4215.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20Brexit%20survival%20guide%3A%20freeze%20your%20cheese%20and%20holiday%20in%20Albania&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y46k%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A+Brexit+survival+guide%3A+freeze+your+cheese+and+holiday+in+Albania&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y46k%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d4935f9ae6347f9b5a06deb942aa2c9b33e41c6%2F168_0_4215_5096%2F4215.jpg>
 At least the Germans won’t beat you to the beach. Photograph: Judith 
Collins/Alamy 
Alternatively, visit a European country outside the EU


Iceland, Moldova, Kosovo or Andorra. They say Ukraine is very nice this time 
of year. Who does, you ask? Ukrainians, mostly. I’m looking forward to 
holidaying in theAlbanian communist-era bunker that’s been converted into a 
hostel 
<http://www.spiegel.de/international/europe/project-converts-albanian-bunker-into-tourist-hostel-a-855901.html>
. It’s either that or Prestatyn.

Spend! 


Remember all those now-useless euros you’ve got in that sock in the drawer? 
Convert them into sterling at the Post Office and buy Doom on PS4. 
Alternatively …

Save! 


Britain’s small businesses are already stockpiling cash 
<http://www.businessinsider.com.au/hampshire-trust-bank-on-brexit-and-eu-referendum-2015-12>
 to buffer them from what economists are calling post-Brexit volatility. So 
don’t got nuts.

Visit grandad 


In the 1970s, did your grandad do one last armed blag before scarpering to 
Benidorm to avoid detention at Her Majesty’s pleasure? Of course he did. Now’s 
the time to visit him on the Costa del Crime, before he gets plastic surgery, a 
new wig, and relocates under a pseudonym to a semi in Leicester.

Get in touch with your inner Norwegian


Of course, once you’ve forgotten those useless EU languages, you’ll have 
plenty of head space to learn Norwegian and thus emulate the citizens of that 
marvellous Scandinavian country. It’s the Norwegians who show Brexiteers the 
way to be happy, well-adjusted and outside the loony constraints of the 
European super state. Repeat after me:“Jeg føler meg veldig selvsentrert, 
naermest hovmodig” (“I am feeling very self-centred, rather smug”).
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fhow-would-brexit-affect-you-eu-referendum-video-explainer&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fhow-would-brexit-affect-you-eu-referendum-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20would%20Brexit%20affect%20you%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fhow-would-brexit-affect-you-eu-referendum-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+would+Brexit+affect+you%3F+%E2%80%93+video+explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fhow-would-brexit-affect-you-eu-referendum-video-explainer&media=>
How would Brexit affect you? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jun/07/how-would-brexit-affect-you-eu-referendum-video-explainer>
 * This article was amended on 20 June 2016 to include the photographer’s name 
in the credit of the main photo.
