
Headteachers have been ordered to ignore a recent high court ruling that 
overturned a fine imposed for an unauthorised family holiday taken during term 
time.

The schools minister, Nick Gibb, told all state schools in England he was 
“disappointed” by the ruling and said they should continue applying the current 
regulations that allow parents to be fined.

“The high court’s judgment did not establish a hard and fast rule... ” Gibbs 
wrote. “Instead a decision will have to depend on the individual facts of each 
case.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kpbq%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kpbq%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f929635c9111552dcfe442dd238124ac14d6dca%2F831_157_1046_1307%2F1046.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Minister%20tells%20schools%20to%20ignore%20high%20court%20ruling%20on%20term-time%20holidays&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kpbq%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Minister+tells+schools+to+ignore+high+court+ruling+on+term-time+holidays&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kpbq%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f929635c9111552dcfe442dd238124ac14d6dca%2F831_157_1046_1307%2F1046.jpg>
 The schools minister, Nick Gibb. Photograph: Alastair Johnstone/SWNS.com/The 
Guardian 
Last month the high court ruled in favour of Jon Platt 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/13/high-court-father-fine-term-time-holiday-jon-platt>
, who took his daughter out of school on the Isle of Wight last year for a 
family holiday during term time that the girl’s school had refused to authorise.

The ruling threatened to erode the Department for Education’s strict new 
rules, which were introduced in 2013, that headteachers could only authorise 
absences during term time in “exceptional circumstances” such as funerals. 
Previously, headteachers had discretion in granting up to two weeks of absence 
for pupils with good attendance records.

Platt took legal action against the Isle of Wight’s attempts to fine him, and 
won rulings in the magistrates court and the high court in London.

The Isle of Wight local authority also announced it would appeal against the 
high court ruling, at the suggestion of the minister. A spokesman said: “Nick 
Gibb has formally requested that the Isle of Wight council makes an application 
for permission to appeal against the high court judgment of 13 May, in relation 
to unauthorised school absence. As a result, the Isle of Wight council has 
today formally submitted papers applying for permission to appeal.

“If an appeal is granted by the high court or, subsequently, the supreme 
court, the department has stated it will specifically seek to be joined as a 
party to the proceedings and take the lead in the appeal.”

On Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/schoolfinesrefund/posts/465585193637569>
, Platt was quick to express his displeasure at the news: “UNBELIEVABLE!! The 
Isle of Wight council, apparently on the Instructions of the DfE, have JUST 
announced a few minutes ago an appeal to the Supreme Court, the highest court 
in the land! This is absolutely outrageous. A HUGE waste of tax payers money on 
an issue that is beyond any doubt. Utterly shocked.”

The council’s leader, Jonathan Bacon, said: “Our initial response was not to 
expend further Isle of Wight council money on pursuing an appeal. However, as a 
result of the formal request from the minister, the local and national 
importance of this issue, and the DfE’s commitment to cover all the costs of 
the appeal and contribute to the council’s previous costs, we have decided to 
lodge an appeal in order to resolve the issue for all.”

Gibb wrote: “While family holidays are enriching experiences, the school year 
is designed to give families the opportunity for these breaks without having to 
disrupt their children’s education. It is for schools to consider the specific 
details and relevant context behind each request.Schools 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> know their pupils and are well 
placed to make those judgments.”

Parents who had been fined are now asking local authorities to rescind the 
penalties, but Gibb said the DfE’s view was to refuse such requests.

“We will set out any additional steps necessary to secure children’s 
attendance at school in due course,” he said.
