
Smallpox was the first and last disease the world eradicated 
<http://www.cgdev.org/page/case-1-eradicating-smallpox> with a vaccine – in 
1980, thanks to global immunization efforts. Since then, no vaccination program 
has successfully wiped out an illness worldwide. So do we stand a chance at 
eliminating other diseases?

Eradication – the complete, permanent worldwide removal – of a disease 
involves exceptional levels of commitment from governments and global health 
organizations. Only a few diseases are targeted for complete eradication – 
partly because heavily orchestrated efforts are required to get rid of those 
illnesses, and partly because eradication efforts facevarying degrees of 
scrutiny <http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMp1110539> for cost 
effectiveness. The fight against disease is tough, but programs targeting 
polio, guinea worm and measles are making progress worldwide.

Fighting polio from Africa to the Caribbean

Polio 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/11/polio-cases-wiped-out-12-months-world-health-organisation-pakistan>
 could be the next disease the world wipes out. Incidence has decreased by 99% 
since 1988, according to theWorld Health Organization 
<http://www.who.int/features/factfiles/polio/en/> (WHO), and currently, polio 
is endemic 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/05/pakistan-afghanistan-join-forces-to-wipe-out-polio-taliban>
 only in Pakistan and Afghanistan.

Related: Polio cases could be wiped out within 12 months, says World Health 
Organisation 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/11/polio-cases-wiped-out-12-months-world-health-organisation-pakistan>

Still, the battle against polio 
<http://www.polioeradication.org/Polioandprevention.aspx> has been hard-fought, 
particularly in Nigeria. In 2008, the World Health Assembly warned that the 
country, especially its northern region, was threatening the success of the 
global polio eradication initiative. Very few children were being vaccinated, 
and because polio is known for its rapid transmission, the increase in cases 
there threatened to spread to neighboring countries. Then-president Umaru Musa 
Yar’Adua brought in Dr Muhammad Pate to help turn the health crisis around.

“Nigeria was the last country on the continent of Africa not to have 
interrupted polio transmission,” Pate says. “We had the political pressure from 
the global community, but also domestically we realized there was an issue.”

Pate faced intense cultural resistance. Since 2003, rumors had been 
circulating that the polio vaccine was intended to sterilize Muslim girls, and 
therefore many people in northern Nigeria – which is poorer and has a larger 
Muslim population than the predominantly Christian south – would not allow 
their children to be inoculated. Pate knew he had to earn the confidence of the 
centuries-old network of local leaders, who held great influence over their 
communities.

State and local governments were also brought on board to tackle the disease. 
InNigeria, leadership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/28/muhammadu-buhari-nigeria-problems-boko-haram-corruption>
 at these levels can become fractioned. But Pate was the country’s authority on 
polio, and with Yar’Adua’s direct backing, he used public accountability to 
help regions meet disease-control targets. Adding incentive, the Bill & Melinda 
Gates Foundationlaunched 
<http://www.gatesfoundation.org/Media-Center/Press-Releases/2012/01/Nigerian-Governors-Sign-Up-to-Immunization-Leadership-Challenge>
 the Nigeria Immunization Challenge in 2011, encouraging states to meet preset 
vaccination targets, which were rigorously checked on a quarterly basis.

Related: Millions saved: how to make sure global health programs work 
<http://www.theguardian.com/health-revolution/2016/mar/22/millions-saved-book-healthcare-global-aid-policy>

Another challenge? The sheer number of children in Nigeria – 30 million 
younger than five. TheGlobal Polio Eradication Initiative 
<http://www.polioeradication.org/Dataandmonitoring/Poliothisweek.aspx> closely 
monitored progress, and Pate tapped into local volunteer networks to ensure 
that immunizations actually happened.

Over a few years, as more children were vaccinated and polio cases started 
plummeting, parents began to trust the methods. “We were able to use data to 
show that there had been progress,” Pate notes. “If it is measurable, people 
can see there have been changes.” There were no new cases in Nigeria in 2015.

But this kind of progress takes constant vigilance – and though the news from 
Nigeria is good, a recent lesson in Haiti proves that the risk isn’t over. In 
the 70s and 80s, National Immunization Days were critical to Haiti’s fight 
against polio, but those initiatives dipped in the 90s when the country’s 
health system weakened. In 2000, a two-year-old girl in Haiti contracted polio, 
and in just a year, 20 additional cases emerged in that country and the 
Dominican Republic.

Thanks to swift, multinational collaboration, the government and aid agencies 
helped stifle the outbreak, resulting in more than 90% of children younger than 
10 being vaccinated, as reported in the new bookMillions Saved: New Cases of 
Proven Success in Global Health <http://millionssaved.cgdev.org/>, published by 
the Center for Global Development. No cases were documented in Haiti after 
2001, showing the importance of national immunization campaigns, which are
currently facing 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/news/2016/01/deadly-blast-hits-anti-polio-centre-pakistan-160113044540957.html>
 Taliban resistance in Pakistan and Afghanistan.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbvc%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbvc%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8cd228157ac5566578d0112d00724c82d103841b%2F0_809_4800_2879%2F4800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Disappearing%20diseases%3A%20the%20global%20fight%20against%20polio%2C%20guinea%20worm%20and%20measles&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbvc%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Disappearing+diseases%3A+the+global+fight+against+polio%2C+guinea+worm+and+measles&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbvc%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8cd228157ac5566578d0112d00724c82d103841b%2F0_809_4800_2879%2F4800.jpg>
 Guinea worm is a painful parasite that people contract by drinking water 
contaminated with the larvae. Photograph: Maureen P Sullivan/Getty 
Images/Moment Open 
Global efforts to end guinea worm disease

Immunization isn’t the single answer for preventing endemic infectious 
diseases. Take the global efforts to eliminate guinea worm, a painful parasite 
that people contract by drinking water contaminated with the larvae. Unlike 
smallpox and polio, guinea worm disease isn’t prevented with a shot, but rather 
by educating at-risk communities, filtering drinking water and isolating human 
hosts.

Eradication is well under way. In 1986 there were 3.5m cases of guinea worm 
worldwide. By 2014 there were 126 cases, and in 2015, just 22 cases in remote 
and conflict-ridden parts of Africa, such asSouth Sudan 
<http://www.cartercenter.org/countries/south-sudan-health-guinea-worm.html>. 

Dr Donald Hopkins, special advisor for guinea worm eradication at The Carter 
Center <http://www.cartercenter.org/>, has been working on the issue since the 
80s. According to Hopkins, former US President Jimmy Carter – who founded the 
center with his wife, Rosalynn, and has helped lead eradication efforts since 
1986 – earned important buy-in from leaders in endemic countries. But Hopkins 
says more work is needed.

“I do feel happy that people are not suffering, but it’s not over until we are 
at zero,” he says. One challenge has been the amount of time it takes to 
monitor possible infections: there’s a one-year incubation period between 
larvae consumption and the parasite becoming fully formed.

If someone with measles walks into a room with 50 people ... if they aren’t 
vaccinated ... 90% ... will get the disease
Dr Robin Nandy, Unicef 
Measles: ‘the most communicable disease’

Another disease that’s disappearing – though not quite as quickly – is measles.
Global measles deaths <http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs286/en/> 
have decreased by 79%, according to WHO, from about 546,800 in 2000 to 114,900 
in 2014. But measles remains one of the leading causes of death in young 
children.

“Measles is one of most communicable diseases known to man,” says Dr Robin 
Nandy, principal adviser and chief of immunization atUnicef 
<http://www.unicef.org/immunization/index_measles.html>. “If someone with 
measles walks into a room with 50 people ... if they aren’t vaccinated or 
[don’t] have immunity, 90% of them will get the disease.”

While an effective, affordable measles vaccine exists, the road to delivering 
it isn’t simple. Although community volunteers can deliver polio injections 
house to house, measles immunizations have to take place at clinics with 
refrigeration for the shots and health workers who know how to administer them. 
That’s problematic in the poorest parts of the world with no electricity and 
few trained health workers.

Even in the developed world, children aren’t always vaccinated against 
measles. In the US, the anti-vaccination movement has been linked to measles 
outbreaks, like the145 cases 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/mar/17/measles-california-disneyland-vaccination-research>
 in early 2015 that spanned seven states. According to the US Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the majority of the 667 people in 2014 
and 189 people in 2015 who contracted measles in the US were notvaccinated 
<http://www.cdc.gov/measles/cases-outbreaks.html>.

“One thing we have learned is the importance of a comprehensive approach to 
these diseases,” Nandy explains. “One or two campaigns aren’t going to address 
all the problems. We have to be persistent and invest in the long haul.”

This content is paid for by the Center for Global Development
