 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h3jd%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h3jd%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e3d4379f16a5622ced72077d301498cdfc056cc%2F192_89_1306_1632%2F1306.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Should%20we%20scrap%20Ofsted%3F%20The%20pros%2C%20cons%20and%20alternatives&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h3jd%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Should+we+scrap+Ofsted%3F+The+pros%2C+cons+and+alternatives&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h3jd%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e3d4379f16a5622ced72077d301498cdfc056cc%2F192_89_1306_1632%2F1306.jpg>
 Photograph: Robin King/UCL Institute of Education 
“Scrapping Ofsted would leave us with a fragmented system”

Dr Melanie Ehren, reader in educational accountability and improvement, UCL 
Institute of Education <https://www.ucl.ac.uk/ioe>

Many teachers and headteachers feel that Ofsted does more harm than good: 
“overhauling Ofsted” and “abolishing the watchdog” have become popular catch 
phrases. A quick glance at some headlines over the years explains some of the 
concerns: inaccuracy and inconsistency of Ofsted gradings; and inspectors who 
are poorly qualified and disrespectful in their communication with schools, or 
have a formulaic view of teaching and leadership. Ofsted is seen as one of the 
(or perhaps the major) causes of stagnating improvement as the fear of “being 
Ofsted-ed” has produced a risk-averse school system. It is no wonder that many 
would argue to abolishOfsted <http://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> 
altogether: it has clearly become a poisoned brand.

Why then should we not scrap Ofsted? Research across Europe 
<http://www.schoolinspections.eu/impact> shows the many positive effects of 
school inspections, in this country and others. School inspections can unlock 
valuable knowledge about the performance of individual schools,pointing towards 
great practice 
<https://www.gov.uk/topic/schools-colleges-childrens-services/inspections#good-practice>
 in high quality teaching and learning.

Alternative systems, such as self-evaluation or peer review, would not provide 
a national and comparative overview

They can also highlight areas that need to be improved, both in individual 
schools and on a system-level. Recent Ofsted reports ongeographical inequalities
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/video/2015/dec/01/north-south-divide-secondary-schools-ofsted-audio>
 within the country, or failing academy chains have done just that: they have 
highlighted where we need to do better and how our government needs to be 
smarter.

Scrapping Ofsted would leave us with a system that is fragmented in the 
information available about school quality, placing an even larger emphasis on 
external examinations and performance league tables. Other countries that have 
such test-based accountability, such as the US, have seen an over-reliance on 
data and tests, extensive teaching to test, narrow curricula focused on tested 
subjects and root-based learning.

School inspection, on the other hand, informs us about the quality of schools 
on a range of indicators so we can compare, track and contrast their 
performance over time. Alternative systems of quality assurance, such as school 
self-evaluation or peer review, would not provide that national and comparative 
overview.

It is therefore time to value the expertise and good of our Ofsted inspectors 
and make sure they work towards the benefit of our schools. Having said that, 
we also need to acknowledge that there is a problem; we need to get our 
inspection service right. A big step forward would be a more positive tone of 
voice from our watchdog when talking about the performance of our teachers, 
headteachers and school governors. The appointment of a new chief inspector in 
December will hopefully provide the momentum to change the narrative and ensure 
a more constructive inspection force.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h3jd%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h3jd%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcbd27e67c9ce43ed814b5320acade13f1df2b43e%2F1837_40_2701_3378%2F2701.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Should%20we%20scrap%20Ofsted%3F%20The%20pros%2C%20cons%20and%20alternatives&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h3jd%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Should+we+scrap+Ofsted%3F+The+pros%2C+cons+and+alternatives&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h3jd%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcbd27e67c9ce43ed814b5320acade13f1df2b43e%2F1837_40_2701_3378%2F2701.jpg>
 Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
“Ofsted does not help schools improve: a self-evaluation system would be more 
effective”


John MacBeath, professor emeritus, faculty of education, the University of 
Cambridge <http://www.cam.ac.uk/>

 The litmus test: does Ofsted empower teachers to become better professionals 
or does it disempower? It’s beenwidely reported 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-31921457> that Ofsted is a major cause of 
stress among teachers. There’s atelling quote from Michael Wilshaw 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2012/jan/23/chief-inspector-schools-michael-wilshaw>
: “If anyone says to you that ‘staff morale is at an all-time low’ you will 
know you are doing something right.”

Related: Secret Teacher: I see Ofsted for what it is – a purposeless farce 
<http://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/feb/20/secret-teacher-see-ofsted-for-what-it-is-purposeless-farce>

 The reward for getting the top grade in an Ofsted inspection is that you 
won’t be inspected again for another few years. That says it all – it is 
clearly not an experience that schools look forward to, nor want again.

 In a number of countries in which we’ve conducted research, such as New 
Zealand and Hong Kong, there’s a form of external review or quality assurance 
which works from a different premise. Rather than “we’re coming to inspect you 
and here are our criteria which you have to meet”, the review team will ask 
staff and pupils what they consider a good school to be, how they evaluate 
their own school, the criteria they use and their sources of evidence. If a 
school is considered to be struggling, it will be given extra support to 
improve, not labeled as “requires improvement”.

 In the early 1980s in Scotland I was commissioned to help design an approach 
to self-evaluation. We met with teachers, parents, advisers and children aged 
five-18, and asked: what would make a good school for you? How would we know it 
was a good school? The consistency of answers from all groups provided a robust 
set of criteria.

 As professionals, teachers have a pretty good idea of what makes a good 
classroom and what makes good learning. Unfortunately with Ofsted, teachers are 
too often disenfranchised because the things that are important to them aren’t 
included in the inspection criteria. Ofsted focuses primarily on maths and 
English, and what is most easily measurable. They marginalise other creative 
aspects of school life, such as art, drama, sport or a range of student-led 
initiatives.

While there are many outstanding Ofsted inspectors, they are hamstrung in 
terms of what and how they have to inspect

 To Ofsted’s credit, it has – over the decades – changed, and changed again. 
Often these changes are ones many of us have long advocated, such as 
differential reviews in which some schools are given greater support than 
others.

 Although I’m critical of Ofsted, the nub of the problem lies with the nature 
of what Ofsted has to inspect. Michael Gove’s curriculum reform, for example, 
ignored the advice from his own experts – he knew from his own schooldays what 
a curriculum should look like and how it should be tested.

 While there are many outstanding Ofsted inspectors, they are hamstrung in 
terms of what and how they have to inspect, living with the legacy of a process 
and protocols which are widely seen by teachers as neither fair nor effective.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
