
The existing legal framework for UK aid has its roots in the 1994 Pergau dam 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2012/dec/12/pergau-dam-affair-aid-arms-scandal>
 case. A decision to fund a dam project in exchange for the securing of a major 
arms deal with Malaysia was found be unlawful by the high court. Following 
this, theInternational Development Act 2002 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2002/1/contents> was introduced to ensure 
that, in future, aid could not be used to further commercial and other 
interests. Aid can now only be given only for the purposes of poverty reduction.

This law, along with the International Development (Reporting and 
Transparency) Act 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2006/31/pdfs/ukpga_20060031_en.pdf>, 
underpins much the UK’s development activity. But this legal framework has been 
criticised for its weakness because the term poverty reduction is too vague to 
create strong accountability for aid. Law professor Patrick McAuslan argued as 
long ago as 2003 that the UK does not have “an effective legal backbone to the 
aid relationship”. This allows Justine Greening, the international development 
secretary, very wide discretion as to how aid is spent.

Related: Six reasons taxpayers can be proud of UK aid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/mar/30/six-reasons-taxpayers-can-be-proud-of-uk-aid>

Then, last year, came the act 
<http://services.parliament.uk/bills/2014-15/internationaldevelopmentofficialdevelopmentassistancetarget.html>
 that compels the UK to spend of 0.7% of gross national income on overseas 
development assistance (ODA) each year. This was an unprecedented commitment, 
and existing legislation has not caught up, leaving a weak framework for 
accountability. While a number of bodies (the Independent Commission for Aid 
Impact, the National Audit Office, and two parliamentary committees) are 
mandated to scrutinise how UK aid is spent, spending is only reviewed after 
projects have been implemented, not while decisions are being made.

Today, ODA spending is at its highest ever level, with an estimated total of 
£12.2bn 
<http://www.theweek.co.uk/63394/where-exactly-does-britains-122bn-foreign-aid-go>
 disbursed during 2015. But at the same time, the wider environment of UK aid 
spending has also been changing rapidly.

The most significant change in the UK aid landscape is the increasing 
disbursement of funds by departments other than the Department for 
International Development (DFID). An estimated total of £2.47bn in ODA was 
spent outside of DFID during 2015, with the proportion spent via DFID itself 
falling from 89.5% in 2011 to 79.8% in 2015.

The problem is, while DFID is required by the 2002 act to spend aid towards 
poverty alleviation, the legal framework governing the ODA spending of other 
departments is less clear. There is a risk that when aid is spread across 
Whitehall, the legislative framework could prove wholly inadequate. The UK’s 
commitment to poverty reduction could be trumped by other considerations – 
strategic, military and commercial – when spending aid. This danger has been 
recognised by the International Development Committee (IDC),which recently 
called 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/international-development-committee/news-parliament-20151/uk-aid-allocation-of-resources-report-published-15-16/>
 on the government to “make reducing poverty a legal obligation for the 
spending of all ODA, regardless of which department is spending it”.


Related: We need less paperwork and more aid in humanitarian work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/25/less-paperwork-bureaucracy-more-aid-in-humanitarian-work>

In November 2015 the government published a new strategy 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/478834/ODA_strategy_final_web_0905.pdf>
 outlining its vision for the future of UK aid spending. This document speaks 
of “aid spending in the national interest”, and sets out four objectives: 
strengthening global peace, security and governance; strengthening resilience 
and crisis response; promoting global prosperity; and – last of all – tackling 
extreme poverty.

The IDC 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/international-development-committee/news-parliament-20151/uk-aid-allocation-of-resources-report-published-15-16/>
 has suggested that this approach could detract from the work of poverty 
reduction. MP Stephen Twigg, chair of the committee, has pointed out that 
poverty reduction no longer appears to be the UK’s main priority: “The most 
important principle of allocating UK aid should always be that it is allocated 
to areas where it can most effectively be used to reduce poverty, which is 
clearly in the UK’s national interest.”

It’s clear the legislation governing UK aid spending is inadequate for the new 
realities of the 0.7% commitment, the government’s new aid strategy and a 
rapidly shifting aid landscape. So what do we do about it?

The first and most urgent task is to pass legislation to provide for the 
growing proportion of aid to be spent by non-DFID departments. Clarity is 
needed about the duties of departments now disbursing ODA, such as the FCO, the 
MOD and BIS.

The aid work of these departments was not envisaged by the International 
Development Act in 2002. To date, they have simply stated that they are guided 
by the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Developmentguidelines 
<http://www.oecd.org/dac/stats/officialdevelopmentassistancedefinitionandcoverage.htm>
 on aid spending. These provide that ODA must have the promotion of the 
economic development and welfare of developing countries as its main objective, 
a much broader provision than the requirement for poverty reduction under the 
International Development Act.

Second, a much stronger mechanism for aid scrutiny could be forged by 
requiring evaluation of aid decisions as they are made. Such a mechanism is in 
place under the EU’s financial regulation for example. It is used to assess the 
cost-effectiveness of all proposed expenditure programmes or actions for the 
union budget. Similar scrutiny of aid spending could be put in place.

Related: Does Britain spend too much on foreign aid? | Diane Abbott and 
Jonathan Isaby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/15/does-britain-spend-too-much-on-foreign-aid-head-to-head>

On 13 June, parliament debated an online petition 
<https://petition.parliament.uk/petitions/125692> demanding a reduction in the 
amount the UK spends each year on ODA, following a Mail on Sunday campaign that 
gathered over 220,000 signatures. Faced with this vocal opposition, development 
experts have so far shied away from looking critically at aid spending. Instead 
they have focused on the positive impact of aid. But to be able to make a 
strong case for aid, its advocates also need to pay close attention to the 
detail of aid governance. Otherwise, without a robust legal framework governing 
aid, it will continue to be possible for sceptics to cast doubt on the 
important work of tackling global poverty.

Ambreena Manji is professor of land law and development at Cardiff University, 
while Daniel Cullen is a Geneva-based researcher working in human rights. 
Follow them on Twitter@DanJCullen  <https://twitter.com/DanJCullen>and 
@AmbreenaManji. <https://twitter.com/AmbreenaManji>

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.










