
Decades of economic growth across Africa have failed to improve the lives of 
millions of people,according to a report 
<https://lif.blob.core.windows.net/lif/docs/default-source/publications/2016-africa-prosperity-report-pdf.pdf?sfvrsn=2>
 (pdf).

The Legatum Institute <http://www.li.com/legatum-institute>’s Africa 
prosperity index <http://www.prosperity.com/>, published on Wednesday, rates 
countries by opportunity, freedom, education and security, as well as social 
bonds.

It found that some African countries are much better at creating prosperity 
than others, and this is disproportionate to the amount of wealth they have. 
Researchers gave the example of Rwanda, which despite having a third of the 
wealth of oil-rich Angola, has been far more successful at creating a 
prosperous society.

Related: It's naira or never: Nigeria needs decisive action on its currency | 
Oluseun Onigbinde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/07/nigeria-naira-devaluation-central-bank-currency-crisis>

Although Nigeria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria> is Africa’s 
biggest economy, it is only the 26th most prosperous, according to the index, 
while South Africa came top. Rwanda was ninth, and Angola 33rd.

The director of the index, Alexandra Mousavizadeh, said it was “a powerful 
message for policymakers trying to write a new narrative ofAfrica rising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/oct/02/africa-not-rising-survey>, in a 
slow-growth climate”.

She said: “Countries like Rwanda have delivered a lot with very little wealth 
while in Angola, the situation is the complete opposite. The country has, until 
recently, benefited from a wealth perspective due to a boom in commodity prices
yet it has generated very little prosperity for its citizens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/14/angola-president-dos-santos-giving-up-power-2018-should-we-believe-him>
.”

“By far the most important drivers of prosperity alongside a country’s ability 
to generate wealth are the promotion of civil liberties, a strong rule of law 
and effective institutions as well as a diversified economy. By making these 
structural changes, many countries could start to see levels of prosperity 
rising quite rapidly even if overall growth begins to slow.”

African growth, which has been strong for the past decade, could slide to 2.9% 
this year 
<http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/3/08df6fce-fcaa-11e5-b5f5-070dca6d0a0d.html#axzz4AEMLHmpC 
http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/3/08df6fce-fcaa-11e5-b5f5-070dca6d0a0d.html#axzz4AEMLHmpC 
https://next.ft.com/content/08df6fce-fcaa-11e5-b5f5-070dca6d0a0d#axzz4AEMLHmpC>
, according to several forecasters.

Yvonne Mhango, sub-Saharan economist at Renaissance Capital 
<https://www.rencap.com/>, said the continent needed several more years of 
significant growth – “4%-5% at the very least” – for wealth to start trickling 
down. Also, growth is not the be-all and end-all, she said.

“It seems counterintuitive, but what I’ve observed in the continent [is] that 
there’s no substitute for governance. It doesn’t matter what commodity a 
country is producing and at what price it’s selling – if they don’t have the 
right leaders in place that are putting forward the right policies, you will 
not see that trickle down to the people. Some of the wealthiest countries on 
paper have some of the most abjectly poor people on the continent.”

Related: Finish line far out of sight in Nigeria's race to beat corruption | 
Oluseun Onigbinde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/11/nigeria-corruption-president-muhammadu-buhari-withholding-information>

Nevertheless, growth does have an impact, and the continent’s two biggest 
economies are struggling.

In Nigeria, Mhango said, “we’ll be lucky if we see positive growth this year. 
They’ve had a really dire,epic fuel shortage 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2016/04/08/africa/nigeria-fuel-fueledup-app/>. Even if 
it does grow in the second half of the year, 1%-2% will be fantastic. Some 
think the economy will just contract as a whole.”

The shortages have affected productivity as people have to spend hours queuing 
for fuel to run their cars and generators. SouthAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> has been dealing with low commodity 
prices.

“Just the two countries on their own – if they can’t scrape together 2% growth 
for themselves, we’re probably going to see one of the lowest rates of growth 
in sub-Saharan Africa since the beginning of the millennium,” Mhango said.
