
David Cameron said the EU referendum is a “once in a generation” decision 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/feb/23/cameron-eu-referendum-hague-a-divisive-referendum-campaign-could-damage-tories-for-a-generation-politics-live?page=with:block-56cc78ebe4b0f2fd18cb0208>
, and he may be right. It has, after all, been 41 years since the last one, in 
1975, whenHarold Wilson’s Labour government asked the public 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/may/18/in-out-referendum-eu-1975-all-over-again>
 whether Britain should remain in the European Economic Community, as it was 
then known.

It was Britain’s first nationwide referendum 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/from-the-archive-blog/2015/jun/05/referendum-eec-europe-1975>
. The decision to join the EEC was taken by Edward Heath’s government in 1973, 
but Labour’s manifestopromised a referendum on Britain’s ongoing membership. 
<http://www.politicsresources.net/area/uk/man/lab74oct.htm>


The question facing voters was, “Do you think the UK should stay in the 
European Community (Common Market)?” Britons were thus divided into Yes and No 
camps, as opposed to today’s‘Leave’ and ‘Remain’.  
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/01/eu-referendum-cameron-urged-to-change-wording-of-preferred-question>


Younger Tory voters may raise an eyebrow at footage of the then leader of the 
opposition Margaret Thatcher 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/video_and_audio/features/uk-politics-eu-referendum-35641263/35641263>
 arguing passionatelyin favour of Britain remaining in Europe 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2015/6/4/1433413944390/Thatcher-9-April-1975-001.jpg>
.

“Everyone should turn out in this referendum and vote yes, so that the 
question is over once and for all, we are really in Europe, and ready to go 
ahead,”she told a television interviewer. 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/video_and_audio/features/uk-politics-eu-referendum-35641263/35641263>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hxq4%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hxq4%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5705776f4c72fd72e983b9b83e9e8e09f2504353%2F0_290_3466_2079%2F3466.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Britain's%201975%20Europe%20referendum%3A%20what%20was%20it%20like%20last%20time%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hxq4%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Britain%27s+1975+Europe+referendum%3A+what+was+it+like+last+time%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hxq4%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5705776f4c72fd72e983b9b83e9e8e09f2504353%2F0_290_3466_2079%2F3466.jpg>
 Harold Wilson accompanying his wife, Mary, to the Polling station in Great 
Smith Street, to their vote for the Referendum on the Common Market. 
Photograph: Keystone/Getty Images 
Meanwhile, Labour were badly split over the issue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/may/18/in-out-referendum-eu-1975-all-over-again>
. The suspending of cabinet responsibility allowed senior figures to campaign 
against the government position (sound familiar?). Tony Benn was a leading 
figure in the No camp, and was widely mocked and demonisedin the press at the 
time. 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2014/mar/14/tony-benn-national-newspapers>


Most of the daily newspaper big hitters were on the Yes side, with only the 
Spectator, the Daily Worker and some local papers aligning themselves with the 
Outs.

The referendum resulted in a heavy win for staying in 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/from-the-archive-blog/2015/jun/05/referendum-eec-europe-1975>
. According to polling, issues focusing voters’ minds included economic 
considerations, defence, the future of Britain’s voice in international 
affairs; and optimism for a prosperous and peaceful future. With memories of 
the Second World War still relatively fresh, closer European cooperation was 
seen as a crucial means to avoid future conflict.


Do you remember the first time? If you recall the 1975 referendum - or even 
better, voted or participated in it - we want to hear from you. What do you 
remember from the campaign? Which way did you vote, and did that put you at 
odds with your friends and family? Do you feel you made the right decision at 
the time, and are you likely to vote the same way (albeit, in a very different 
set of circumstances) this time around?

You can share your stories by filling out the form below. If you have any 
photos from the time that you’d like to share, you can do so by contributing to 
our GuardianWitness assignment. We’ll feature your best stories, pictures and 
arguments in an article on our site.
