
Chinwag <http://chinwag.com>

City Limits <http://www.citylimits.org>

Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism 
<http://www.journalism.columbia.edu/>  trains students from across the world to 
become accomplished, high impact journalists. Our degree programs , including a 
Master of Science degree, a Master of Arts degree, and a Ph.D. in 
Communications, are intensive, rigorous and demanding.

In 2010, we created a dual-degree in Journalism and Computer Science with the 
The Fu Foundation School of Engineering. Students in this program will receive 
highly specialized training, enabling them to simultaneously develop technical 
and editorial skills in all aspects of computer-supported news gathering and 
digital media production.

Founder Institute <http://founderinstitute.com/r/guardian>

paid Content <http://www.paidcontent.org/> is a media and information company 
owned by Guardian News and Media. Based in New York city, the company covers 
the business of digital media, serving decision makers within the media, 
entertainment, publishing, advertising, marketing, and technology sectors. 
Founded in 2002, paidContent and its sister sites, mocoNews.net and 
paidContent:UK, chronicle the economic evolution of digital content that is 
shaping the future of the media, information and entertainment industries.

Mashable <http://www.mashable.com>

Motherboard.tv <http://www.motherboard.tv/> is a website and video channel 
produced by Vice focused on the wonderful and strange intersection of 
technology, science and human culture.

Techsoup Global <http://www.techsoupglobal.org/> is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit that 
provides technology education and assistance to nonprofits and libraries in 36 
countries. TechSoup.Org is a technology product philanthropy service which has 
saved the nonprofit sector $2.2 billion in IT expenses over the past 10 years. 
TechSoup Global works toward a time when every social benefit organization on 
the planet has the technology resources and knowledge needed to operate at 
their full potential.

For any media partner enquiries please contact Stephanie Martin at 
stephanie.martin@guardian.co.uk <mailto:stephanie.martin@guardian.co.uk>
