
I have always loved Sweden. I love the landscape, the culture and its 
consensus-driven society. And I deeply admire its healthy approach to gender 
equality.

It’s something that fundamentally differentiates Sweden from many other 
European countries – the gender gap is noticeably smaller here. Men and women 
enjoy something close to parity in Sweden. So, in matters of the heart, Swedes 
will approach one another freely.


Related: Eat like a Swede 
<http://www.theguardian.com/holiday-in-sweden/2016/may/03/eat-like-a-swede> 

Although it’s best to point out right away that this rule is automatically 
suspended for foreigners. Sorry...


This reticence is probably down to Swedes’ generally reserved nature, which 
generally stays in place for at least the first six months of getting to know 
them. This means, of course, that you, as the plucky, exotic foreigner, must 
make the first move.


And when you finally do ask, be careful not to actually call it a date. Swedes 
need to be coaxed out into their unfamiliar surroundings. Gently. You mustn’t 
spook them by being too forthright.


Ask them out for fika (coffee and cake) first, and several fikas later you can 
perhaps, just perhaps, start to call your meetings “dates”.


Luckily for me, I first met Donna (which by the way is a very unusual Swedish 
name) in London, through work. At first we were just good friends before the 
relationship developed into something more romantic. But it still took me to 
make all the running. Donna gave me flickers of encouragement, but hardly made 
it easy.


Donna bridled when I first called her “my girlfriend” in front of other 
people. “Must you labeleverything?” she said as soon as we were alone. I trod 
gingerly thereafter.


Like most of the Swedes I know, I love the outdoors and the Skåne region in 
the south is blessed with quintessentially Swedish landscapes - wild, romantic 
beaches and berry-filled forests – perfect for romantic getaways.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tfq4%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tfq4%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc9aebde46de8b6e2b55ff80f92d26c74ec2c286%2F0_0_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Love%20like%20a%20Swede&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tfq4%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Love+like+a+Swede&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tfq4%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc9aebde46de8b6e2b55ff80f92d26c74ec2c286%2F0_0_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 Hörte Brygga restaurant in Skivarp. Photograph: Christian Gustavsson 
On our first trip back to Sweden as an unofficial couple, we ate dinner at 
Hörte Brygga <http://hortebrygga.se/> in Skivarp, on the south coast, a 
45-minute drive from Malmö. Donna spoke to the receptionist in Swedish and 
referred to me as her “friend” (she had no idea I could understand basic 
Swedish), but Hörte Brygga’s romantic qualities remained undiminished. The
Mossbylund hotel <http://www.mossbylund.se/> nearby is a delightful place to 
stay.

Our room was lit by soft autumn sunshine and we ate fresh seafood just metres 
from the rumbustious surf. We walked for miles each day along deserted beaches. 
At the end of the second night Donna actually called me her boyfriend, 
incontrovertible proof of the romantic powers of the southern Swedish 
coastline. Evenshe looked shocked that the word had crept out.


After two more of these weekends a fire had been lit in the heart of my Nordic 
beau. She told me she loved me, but, due to family reasons, she had to return 
to Sweden. I immediately offered to come with her – I loved Sweden and now I 
loved a Swede, so why not?


Within weeks we had our own apartment. But we had no furniture and I knew what 
that meant. A trip to Ikea. Somehow our relationship not only survived a 
four-hour tour of every nook and cranny of the giant store, it was actually 
strengthened. I fell asleep in an armchair at one point. Donna’s laugh woke me 
and I fell in love a little more. Anyone who can laugh during a shopping trip 
to Ikea is someone worth holding on to. A plan formed in my head.

A couple of weekends later, I took Donna to western Sweden. My Stockholm girl 
had never been so she was hugely impressed that her foreign boyfriend knew the 
area so well. Donna was entranced by the thousands of islands where the 
Atlantic Ocean pummels the coast. She was even more impressed by the 
unimpeachableSalt & Sill <http://www.saltosill.se/> on Klädesholmen, with its 
incredible fresh fish and its 23 rooms built on a pontoon over the water, from 
which you can step straight into the sea.


Indeed, Donna was so bowled over she immediately said “yes” when I asked her 
to marry me. I was almost as shocked as she was: many Swedes regard marriage as 
an outdated institution. I know Donna certainly did. Divorce rates are around 
50% so why, she often argued, take the risk of messing with something that 
works?


But she’s my wife now and we have beautiful twin girls.


I asked Donna recently why she so unexpectedly agreed to my marriage proposal.


She smiled and said: “Because I found someone who loves Sweden as much as I 
do.”
