
A deal which will see disaster victims being given cash instead of vouchers or 
food, and which requires aid agencies to be more transparent and efficient in 
the way they spend money, is generally seen as the most significant step 
forward at the UN’s first ever aid summit this week.

But there was no progress on the growing problem of breaches of international 
humanitarian law - from bombing of hospitals to fighting in built-up areas - 
which are leading to horrifyingly high rates of civilian death and injury. And 
some felt that important opportunities for radical change to the system had 
also been missed.

Four years <http://www.un.org/sg/priorities/> in the making, the World 
Humanitarian Summit - the first time the humanitarian sector has ever come 
together on such a large scale - was conceived by UN Secretary-General Ban Ki 
Moon as a way to draw attention to the growing global humanitarian crisis, 
where global costs have risen from$3.7bn in 2004 to $2obn last year 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/dec/08/why-the-un-humanitarian-aid-appeal-20-billion-dollars-nine-charts>
. But it also aimed to look at the sector itself, generally seen as an ad hoc 
system evolved for dealing with one-off emergencies and now put under untold 
strain by the demands of long-running crises like Syria or Sudan over the last 
decade.

Related: 'We are demanding change': the Somali woman taking on international 
NGOs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/mar/21/degan-ali-somali-woman-taking-on-the-humanitarian-system>

After months of anxiety within the sector that the summit would be a closed UN 
shop and would bring about little real reform, most admitted to being 
pleasantly surprised by theGrand Bargain 
<https://consultations.worldhumanitariansummit.org/bitcache/49e7f4a097b98159887e398adeda818147450fb7?vid=580250&disposition=inline&op=view>
, a mutual agreement between donors, who will be more flexible and give more 
directly to local organisations, and aid agencies, who will have to make 
serious changes to the way they work.


$1bn a year can be cut from aid spending by back-room efficiencies, believes 
one of the deal’s architects, the EU commissioner Kristalina Georgieva. 
Speaking to the Guardian, Georgieva pointed out that the big donors and aid 
agencies had all signed up; “Even more signed up than we hoped for. Now, we 
need to make it happen. If we don’t reform, shame on us.”

“It is really exciting,” said Charlotte Lattimer, of Global Humanitarian 
Assistance which tracks spending in the sector. “At the moment we know very 
little about what happens to the money after it passes from donors to UN 
agencies and international NGOs. We know that it is often transferred on to 
other organisations before it reaches people in need, but lack of reporting 
prevents us from understanding those transaction chains better. Publishing to 
IATI on funding given and how it’s spent can begin to transform that.”


Related: ‘It's like trying to hit a football field from the top of Everest' – 
why aid airdrops just don’t work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/20/airdrop-effective-syria-humanitarian-government>

One of the most contentious issues in the sector has been the unfair 
distribution of aid, with less than2% of all funding 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/oct/16/less-than-2-of-humanitarian-funds-go-directly-to-local-ngos>
 going directly to local NGOs despite the fact that, according to relief chief 
Stephen O’Brien, they take the majority of the risks. The Grand Bargain commits 
to a target of 25% of funding by 2020, a move described by Degan Ali, head of 
Kenyan NGO Adeso, as “one of the successes of the whole WHS process.” But she 
added that “We need to work to ensure that this target is not static and keeps 
increasing year on year.” The newly-launched Network of Empowered Aid Response 
(of which Ali is one of the founders), a global network of local and national 
NGOs, will aim to keep that pressure on.


The plan to move to a wider use of cash transfers has also been widely 
welcomed. They’re increasingly seen as more efficient than vouchers or food, 
more empowering and a useful stimulant for the local economy. Other positive 
initiatives include the launch of aninternational education fund 
<http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=54018#.V0R4b2SrSYU> for children 
in emergency situations.


On refugees, campaigners said the summit had seen mixed results. There was 
progress in understanding refugee crises as drawn-out challenges needing 
long-term developmental responses, rather than just short-term aid hand-outs. 
But few countries seemed interested in upholding international treaties like 
the refugee convention, or in resettling significant numbers of refugees from 
the developing world. Andreas Kamm, head of the Danish Refugee Council, said 
“Politicians and decision-makers are fleeing from institutions like the UN that 
could actually make a difference [in resettling refugees]. I’m not an optimist 
in the short term on burden sharing – if we can’t do it in Europe, within a 
union, how can we expect it to happen globally?”


Related: The humanitarian system: 'A mammoth machinery losing track of what it 
is for' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/22/humanitarian-aid-system-power-concentrated-hands-of-few-losing-track>

The no-show by heads of state from the G7 (Angela Merkel was the only high 
profile western leader to attend) was noted by both Ban Ki Moon and Turkish 
prime minister Recep Tayip Erdogan as respectively “disappointing” and “quite 
upsetting”. This may also have been a factor in the failure to make any 
progress on international human law (IHL). At a International Committee of the 
Red Cross conference in December, even the very gentle suggestion of a 
voluntary forum for member states to discuss best practice on IHL was rejected, 
and progress on this issue seems increasingly difficult. “The problem we’re 
seeing now is that we are no longer dealing with soldiers who have been trained 
in humanitarian law, we’ve got actors who have no formal military training, and 
the situation is just worsening,” said Michael Adamson, head of the British Red 
Cross.


Final judgements on the summit are still being formulated. Dr. Danny 
Sriskandarajah, secretary general, CIVICUS, hoped that some of these agreements 
could “signal the beginning of the end of the development industrial complex 
which involved a few rich countries providing aid through a few big players”. 
Head of ODI Sara Pantuliano, Managing Director at the Overseas Development 
Institute felt the “commitments made at the Summit have fallen short in 
substance and ambition”.


But many others felt that just bringing the whole sector together like this 
was worthwhile. “I don’t think we’ve ever all met up like this,” said Sean 
Lowrie, head of the Start Network. “I’m so used to going to meetings and seeing 
the same faces over and over again. It’s been invigorating, refreshing to see 
how big and wide the humanitarian sector is. For that, if for nothing else, 
it’s been worthwhile.”

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
