
Women around the world have spoken out about their experiences of travelling 
after two young Argentinian women, María Coni and Marina Menegazzo, werekilled 
while backpacking in Ecuador 
<http://www.news.com.au/travel/travel-advice/health-safety/murdered-backpackers-maria-coni-and-marina-menegazzo-facebook-post-goes-viral/news-story/c552054f4e92e8d11b40ba778f463634>
. In the wake of their deaths, online commenters seemed to blame the women for 
what had happened, asking why they were “travelling alone”.

But, as Paraguayan student Guadalupe Acosta pointed out in a Facebook post 
that has been shared more than 730,000 times 
<https://www.facebook.com/guadalupe.acosta.58/posts/10207451024425690>, there 
is an enormous double standard in asking questions like this of female 
travellers. It’s the equivalent of asking women who have been subjected to 
unwanted sexual attention or violence what they were wearing, instead of 
focussing on the wrongdoing of the male perpetrators.

In response to the furore, the phrase #viajosola 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/viajosola?src=hash> (I travel alone) trended on 
Twitter, with more than 5,000 women using the hashtag to discuss their 
experiences. One womanpoignantly wrote 
<https://twitter.com/JennyJinya/status/710061256112267264>: “Travelling is 
freedom. Freedom has no gender.” Another wrote: “I want to … travel alone 
without the fear I’ll be punished for it.”Another said 
<https://twitter.com/VadorBat/status/710022023817400320>: “For women to stop 
travelling alone would be admitting we are to blame and have to be careful, 
when it is the world that has to change.”

Many people also rightly pointed out the irony of criticising the two women 
when they were, in fact, travelling together. To suggest that women shouldn’t 
travel even with female friends takes victim-blaming a step further still – 
implying that women shouldn’t stray from home at all without male chaperones.

The truth is, women do experience a large amount of harassment and abuse while 
travelling alone, but they also experience danger in their local communities. 
To suggest that any woman shouldn’t travel alone is illogical when no country 
has successfully tackled, and stopped, gender inequality and sexual violence.

The tragic case of the two backpackers, 22-year-old Coni and 21-year-old 
Menegazzo, is by no means the first of its kind. When 33-year old New Yorker 
Sarai Sierra was killed in Turkey during her first trip abroad,online 
commenters questioned her common sense and asked why she was travelling without 
a male companion 
<http://matadornetwork.com/change/travel-safety-is-not-a-gendered-issue/>. 

But Sierra’s case 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/25/nyregion/conviction-in-murder-of-new-yorker-sarai-sierra-in-istanbul.html>
 (the man convicted of murdering her said the attack began after she rebuffed 
his attempt to kiss her), was strikingly similar to that of Mary Spears, for 
instance,shot and killed in Detroit in 2014 
<http://michronicleonline.com/2014/10/08/shot-down-mother-of-three-killed-because-she-said-no-to-a-mans-advances/>
 having rebuffed a man’s advances, and to that ofanother woman who had her 
throat slashed by a man in New York 
<http://thinkprogress.org/health/2014/10/09/3578215/street-harassment-escalates/>
 (but fortunately survived) after she turned down the offer of a date.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hj77%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hj77%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95501a523ff981058ca12a79dfbd02ad50654f8f%2F0_0_2040_1224%2F2040.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20is%20travelling%20alone%20still%20considered%20a%20risky%2C%20frivolous%20pursuit%20for%20women%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hj77%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why+is+travelling+alone+still+considered+a+risky%2C+frivolous+pursuit+for+women%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hj77%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95501a523ff981058ca12a79dfbd02ad50654f8f%2F0_0_2040_1224%2F2040.jpg>
 Reese Witherspoon in Wild, 2014. Photograph: Allstar/FOX SEARCHLIGHT PICTURES 
The exact same fate might just as easily have befallen Sierra at home, but it 
didn’t protect her from judgments and criticisms of her decision to travel. In 
this sense, there is also an element of racist stereotyping in our readiness to 
condemn crimes against women that happen abroad as representative of wider 
violent attitudes towards women. Meanwhile, we fail to make the same 
generalisations about attacks that happen at home.

To put things in perspective, according to the Foreign and Commonwealth Office 
(FCO), in 2013-14 there were 106 reported rapes of British nationals abroad and 
152 reported sexual assaults 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/363684/141013_British_Behaviour_Abroad_report_2014.pdf>
. TheOverview of Sexual Offending in England and Wales 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/214970/sexual-offending-overview-jan-2013.pdf>
, released by the Ministry of Justice, Home Office and Office for National 
Statistics in 2013, revealed that 85,000 women are raped in England and Wales 
every year, of whom around 15% report the incident to police. In the same way 
that confining women to women-only carriages on trainsdoesn’t solve the problem 
of harassment 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/aug/26/women-only-carriages-train-passengers-react-to-jeremy-corbyn-idea>
, but restricts women’s movements while tacitly condoning perpetrator actions, 
the same could be said about telling women to solve the problem of harassment 
and violence by staying at home. It unfairly curtails women’s freedom, and 
suggests that violence against them is simply inevitable.

Yet the restriction of women’s solo travel remains a curiously acceptable form 
of victim-blaming. When Sierra was killed, for example,one headline read 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/dispatches/2013/02/03/sarai-sierra-american-death-turkey-solo-travel/1887759/>
: “American’s death in Turkey puts focus on solo travel”. Compare this witha 
headline about the death of Harry Devert 
<http://europe.newsweek.com/rest-peace-harry-devert-32-new-yorker-world-traveler-lover-life-261431>
, a 32-year-old US citizen killed while travelling alone in Mexico: “The 
untimely death of world traveler Harry Devert.” When Australian Lee Hudswell 
died after an accident while tubing down a river in Laos, thepress reported 
<http://www.illawarramercury.com.au/story/2047377/fatal-end-to-lees-overseas-adventure/>
: “Fatal end to Lee’s overseas adventure”.

Female travellers have long been subjected to restrictions and double 
standards, with their gender emphasised over their capability and strength. 
Female travellers are much more likely to be categorised into reductive 
stereotypes – such as the glamorous adventuress – than their male counterparts. 
Think HG Wells in ‘Warehouse 13’, sexy Lara Croft, or the film portrayal of 
Adèle Blanc-Sec versus that of Tintin. When men travel in films, they are 
usually just travelling, but when women do, they are often running away from 
(or towards) a male romantic partner. (Compare The Holiday, Wild, Under the 
Tuscan Sun, Eat Pray Love, to The Motorcycle Diaries or Into the Wild.) There 
are, of course, welcome exceptions (take a bow, Dora the Explorer).

Travel has historically been, and to an extent still is, seen as a natural, 
bold activity for men, and a risky or frivolous pursuit for women. And as with 
so many other forms of low-level sexism, the knock-on impact is enormous. At a 
local level, curtailment of travel can prevent women from accessing healthcare, 
visiting family or taking job opportunities. When we restrict women’s wider 
freedom, we also curtail their ability to broaden their horizons and acquire 
valuable language skills. The impact on women’s careers can be clearly seen in 
the responses to female journalists who experienceassaults while reporting 
abroad and face not only immense victim-blaming 
<http://mediamatters.org/blog/2011/02/16/logans-sexual-assault-brings-wave-of-blaming-th/176510>
 but alsothe curtailment of foreign assignments 
<https://cpj.org/reports/2011/06/silencing-crime-sexual-violence-journalists.php>
 as a result.

When CBS correspondent Lara Logan was assaulted in Cairo in 2011 while 
reporting on the uprising, for example,one Canadian newspaper ran an article 
entitled 
<http://www.torontosun.com/news/columnists/peter_worthington/2011/02/18/17331046.html>
: “Women with young kids shouldn’t be in war zones”. The (male) writer asked: 
“Should women journalists with small children at home be covering violent 
stories or putting themselves at risk? It’s a form of self-indulgence and 
abdication of a higher responsibility to family.”Another commentator asked 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/shannon-galpin/whats-blonde-got-to-do-wi_b_824319.html>
: “Why did this attractive blonde female reporter wander into Tahrir Square 
last Friday? What was she thinking?”

All travellers should take safety precautions, regardless of age or sex. 
Nobody is suggesting that women shouldn’t make the same sensible preparations 
as their male peers. But any attempt to constrain women’s movements solely on 
the basis of gender not only feeds into the idea that violence against them is 
inevitable, instead of tackling it, but also ignores the very real threats they 
face at home.

• This article was amended on 24 March 2016 because the Toronto Sun is a 
Canadian newspaper, not US as an earlier version said.
