
The government has put great emphasis on the role of personal factors in 
poverty. The Department for Work and Pensions’social justice framework 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/social-justice-outcomes-framework-indicators>
 focuses on issues such as family stability, entrenched worklessness, and drug 
and alcohol dependency.

What this neglects are the wider social and environmental factors 
<http://rtpi.org.uk/placepoverty> that can cause and entrench poverty – or 
provide people with greater opportunity, as the Royal Town Planning Institute 
has examined ina new report 
<http://www.rtpi.org.uk/media/1811222/poverty_place_and_inequality.pdf>.

Without this, the government’s ambition to confront “big social problems” 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-34460822> seems destined to miss the 
target.

At first sight, theannouncement of a “comprehensive approach to regeneration” 
for so-called sink estates appears like an attempt to correct the social 
justice agenda’s skew towards people not place.

Related: Red doors, sink estates, a homeless man's death: how to dehumanise 
the poor 
<http://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/jan/22/david-cameron-housing-crisis-asylum-seekers-homeless>

In January this year, the prime minister vowed to blitzpoverty and announced 
government plans to replace what he called run-down housing estateswith 
attractive and safe homes. The government has committed to £140m in loan 
funding to private sector organisations to get additional funding for the 
regeneration of 100 estates, and an estate regeneration advisory panel to be 
overseen by Lord Michael Heseltine.

 As many commentators have suggested, this funding is far too limited. The 
government has heraldedsuccessful estate regeneration schemes 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/520977/Estate_Regeneration_statement.pdf>
 such as the Packington estate in Islington. But Packington alone benefited 
from £33m in public funding.

Attempting to regenerate many more estates for much less suggests that any new 
schemes are likely to be financially viable only if social properties are let 
at higher market rates, raising significant questions about the extent to which 
genuinely affordable housing for existing residents will be maintained.

Indeed, too many past attempts of regeneration, such as Elephant and Castle or 
Woodberry Down (another example highlighted by the government) have led to a 
net loss of social housing.

 There’s a bigger issue however, and that’s thinking about regeneration not 
just as physical improvement but a broader social programme. Some regeneration 
projects in the past have struggled to make a significant impact on poverty and 
inequality because their approach has been too narrow.

 If you believe that the local environment plays a role in causing and 
deepening poverty – and many people would – then the obvious implication is 
that demolishing and refurbishing estates isn’t enough.

It is worrying that 40% of local authority plans do not make any specific 
reference to poverty and inequality

 Take the £220m regeneration of the Ocean Estate in Tower Hamlets 
<https://www.east-thames.co.uk/ocean-estate-tower-hamlets>, London. This single 
investment dwarfs the government’s new scheme. But more importantly, alongside 
improving 1,200 council properties and building more than a thousand mixed 
tenure homes, it provided new retail and community facilities, including a 
community centre offering an extensive GP service, housing services, space for 
community groups, and play areas.

The point is, environment matters.

Improving life chances has to mean more than better properties. It has to mean 
better places.

The language of “sink estates” only serves to reinforce a sense of 
segregation. They’re not sunk, they’re starved – of amenities, infrastructure, 
open spaces, good design, and all of the other things that anyone would want 
from where they live.

So let’s start from a different, more positive question: what makes some 
estates successful? What in these environments gives people a chance, a sense 
of security, and a stake in the community? What makes them sustainable?

These are questions that good planning can answer, of course, which makes 
swiping at“pointless planning rules” 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/estate-regeneration-article-by-david-cameron>
 not just misleading but misguided.

There are many things that local authorities and new mayors can do to adopt a 
more holistic approach to planning and improve the places that people live in.

Related: Don't demolish the sink estates – they're people's homes 
<http://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/feb/03/demolish-sink-estates-homes-david-cameron-bratislava>

From putting housing in the right location to designing better bus services, 
planning at city, county and regional levels can and should tackle physical and 
social deprivation more directly as a core part of housing delivery and growth 
deals, supported by social services that address local needs.

It is worrying that 40% of local authority plans across the UK do not make any 
specific reference to poverty, social exclusion and inequality.

Personal responsibility is part of reducing poverty, but it’s not the end of 
the story. Advancing social justice also requires a social approach, focusing 
on better places, not just “better people”.

Victoria Pinoncely is research officer at the Royal Town Planning Institute. 
Place, poverty and inequality: why place-based approaches are key to tackling 
poverty and inequality is available on theRTPI website. 
<http://www.rtpi.org.uk/media/1811222/poverty_place_and_inequality.pdf>

Join the Guardian Housing Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/housing/register/> to read more pieces like 
this. Follow us on Twitter (@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/GuardianHousingNetwork/?ref=hl> to keep up with the 
latest social housing news and views.
