
It’s easy to feel paranoid walking home alone from a club at 2am – especially 
in a new city, at a university three hours away from home. Your ears are 
ringing as you walk back to your halls. The unfamiliar streets seem especially 
dark and eerily quiet. Right now you’d give anything just to hear a friendly 
voice.

Whether it’s fresher’s week or exams week, a university nightline service can 
be a life-saver, sometimes literally. Nightlines are student listening services 
that open in the small hours, relying on student volunteers to run and 
publicise the service. Nightline currently provides emotional support to over 
1.5 million students, with36 branches 
<http://nightline.ac.uk/student-unions-universities/> based at over 90 
universities and colleges over the UK and Ireland.

As a former volunteer for Voice <https://www.exeterguild.org/voice/>, the 
University of Exeter’s student nightline, I know first-hand how rewarding – and 
challenging – the role can be.

Related: Six things students can do to boost their mental health 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/03/students-how-to-boost-mental-health-at-university>

On a typical shift, I’d arrive just before 8pm, ready for the 12-hour shift 
ahead. There were usually two or three volunteers a night, depending on whether 
it was a busy time of the year, such as the exam period. Someone would put the 
kettle on and bring out the snacks, and we’d all chat, watch a movie or get on 
with coursework.

I would meet new people on most nights, but there was always a sense of 
camaraderie. At around 11 or 12pm, we’d climb into makeshift beds and sleeping 
bags, always with one person next to the phone. The ringtone was loud so there 
was never any worry about sleeping through.

The number of callers varied every night, which kept us on our toes. Sometimes 
no one would call, and on other nights the phone would ring minutes after I 
stepped through the door.


Some calls left me feeling drained. During one of my earliest sessions there 
was a distressed caller at three in the morning, and the call lasted almost two 
hours. But it always feels good to know a conversation is genuinely making a 
difference to someone.

The majority of calls I answered were from students who were either homesick 
or just wanting reassurance walking home alone, but I was trained for anything: 
from prank calls to people on the verge of suicide.

The anonymous part of this job can be upsetting

 Tessa, 19, has done night shifts totalling 250 hours for Exeter’s Voice 
nightline, and finds the work can take its toll. “Very distressed calls from 
students can be emotionally taxing,” she says. Her most memorable call was with 
a final-year student with declining grades and appalling issues at home that no 
one knew about.

“They had obviously been holding on to all of this emotion for a while without 
talking about it,” says Tessa. “It’s then that the anonymity part of this job 
can be upsetting; I have no idea what happened to that caller. On calls like 
that, you form a relationship. You become emotionally invested in their story.”



The peer-to-peer element of student nightlines helps callers to feel more 
comfortable than they might talking to staff counsellors. Steven Mills, who set 
up a nightline service atRobert Gordon University <http://rgu.nightline.ac.uk/> 
in 2013, says: “In my own experience of the university’s counselling service, I 
felt that the older counsellors didn’t quite get me.

“Being a gay man, they didn’t get some references I made, or understand 
student nightlife,” he says. “I think peer-to-peer [services] can be more 
relatable; callers can talk more freely and informally.”


Interactions over Facebook and Twitter allow students to reach out at any time 
of the day, and publicity for nightlines also often relies on social media. 
Will Vasey, 22, general coordinator of Exeter’s Voice nightline, says his 
branch now posts on YikYak. “We always post when we’re open and seem to get a 
cracking response with plenty of upvotes. It’s always really heartwarming to 
see comments from people on Yaks saying we helped them out,” he says.

Related: Student mental health: if you can't see a counsellor, consider other 
options 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/05/student-mental-health-if-you-cant-see-a-counsellor-consider-options>

University wellbeing services can often be over-subscribed 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/05/student-mental-health-if-you-cant-see-a-counsellor-consider-options?CMP=share_btn_tw>
, with month-long waiting lists. For students with mental health issues who are 
waiting to speak to professionals, nightlines provide anonymous help and 
comfort in the interim. The times of day that nightlines operate are also when 
students can feel most vulnerable. As a victim ofdrinks spiking 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/aug/16/drink-spiked-student-reaction>
 during my first year of university, it’s comforting to know that students wary 
of sexual assault can speak to someone.

Since nightlines rely on their confidentiality, volunteers must remain 
anonymous, telling as few friends as possible about their role. As such, it can 
sometimes feel like thankless work. But Tessa best sums up why we do it: “When 
callers end the conversation saying they feel a little better, it makes the 
shifts when we don’t have any calls, the waking up in the middle of the night, 
the missing out on social plans with friends, all seem worthwhile.”

• If you need someone to talk to, go to the Nightline website 
<http://nightline.ac.uk/> to find the number of your local branch. Or contact 
theSamaritans <http://www.samaritans.org/> at 116 123 (UK).

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
