
We all know the story of the well-loved orphan who sings her way through 
life’s miseries and gets to live in a mansion with the mega-rich Oliver 
Warbucks. Everyone’s sung along to the catchy and cheery songs that make Annie 
so fantastic. And we’re always so pleased that Annie gets a happy ending, 
despite her bad beginning. But it’s fiction – of course there was going to be a 
happy ending.

The reality is not all young people growing up in care get a happy ending: 23% 
of the adult prison population has been in care 
<http://www.thewhocarestrust.org.uk/pages/the-statistics.html> and almost 40% 
of prisoners under 21 were in care as children. Only 6% of care leavers go on 
to university, compared to 38% of other young people. Whether it’s financial 
issues, accommodation or not having supportive people around them, children in 
care have the odds against them and it doesn’t get any better as they hurtle 
towards adulthood.


Related: When I left my foster home, getting support became a nightmare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/may/20/foster-care-transitions-support-care-leaver>

Growing up in care, that’s what I was most afraid of: becoming an adult and 
having to completely survive on my own. Annie got a happy ending, why shouldn’t 
I? I wanted to live in a mansion and never have to worry about rent, uni fees 
or learning how to cook. I wanted to make sure I’d be looked after.

Mr Warbucks doesn’t exist, obviously. But mansions do, and who has an entire 
collection of huge houses, palaces and castles? Her Majesty the Queen of 
course. Maybe I could have my own version of Annie’s happy ending, British 
style. Just swap Mr Warbucks for Mrs Windsor and replace Sandy the dog with a 
couple of Corgis and you’d think it was the same story.

Inspired by my ginger, singing hero, I sat down and wrote my letter to the 
Queen, asking her to adopt me. I’d been in care since the age of four, taken 
away from my parents due to their drug addictions and extreme domestic 
violence. I loved my care staff and social workers like family, but as I 
approached adulthood, it became clear that I couldn’t stay in the kids’ home 
forever. One day I would have to grow up.

I’d completely forgotten about the letter until one day, I had a posh envelope 
waiting for me at my kids’ home and saw the Buckingham Palace stamp. The 
quality of the paper meant I instantly knew this was a letter from someone 
important. My heart raced as I read through the letter, but it sank just a 
little knowing I wouldn’t be changing my name to Prince Jack Windsor anytime 
soon.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yd44%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yd44%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F368f4fabf7f3091aaa19cff8d87ac18e2ac3873d%2F41_0_643_862%2F643.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20I%20asked%20the%20Queen%20to%20adopt%20me&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yd44%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why+I+asked+the+Queen+to+adopt+me&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yd44%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F368f4fabf7f3091aaa19cff8d87ac18e2ac3873d%2F41_0_643_862%2F643.jpg>
 Jack’s letter from Buckingham Palace. Photograph: Jack Smith 
Looking back, I could have written a stronger argument for myself and maybe 
refrained from putting “Look it’s you, your Majesty” with a giant arrow under 
the stamp. Putting “it will be a good PR stunt” in, because I’d run out of 
other reasons, obviously didn’t swing it either. I definitely understand why 
she didn’t want to adopt me.


Plus, to be fair they do already have one ginger in the family and I can 
understand why they wouldn’t want another one. The royal family already has to 
have a top notch press team on board to handle the stories and headlines Prince 
Harry creates, they’d have a heart attack if they took me on as well.

Despite not being adopted by Her Majesty, getting a reply was really cool and 
it made all the staff in my kids’ home smile. Since leaving care, I have had my 
ups and downs. I don’t think living off cereal can compare to the first-class 
catering service I would have received living at Windsor castle. And my balcony 
is nice, but I don’t think the view could compare to that of one from 
Buckingham Palace!

However, the future looks good. I am going to start university in September, 
studying politics and international relations. Hopefully, I will have a career 
in politics, and maybe one day I could meet the Queen in person.


This new series 
<http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/dec/21/social-care-stories-social-workers-occupational-therapists>
 aims to show what working in social care is really like. If you’d like to 
write for the series, emailsocialcare@theguardian.com 
<mailto:socialcare@theguardian.com>

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
