
“Road Candy” is how I describe driving in the Deep South. You’re not driving 
fast, you’re meandering around back roads, stopping often and meeting people. 
The people in the south are very approachable, unlike the north and the 
south-west. In the south, you stop, people will say hello and you can engage 
them in conversation. In most cases, you’re also driving through beautiful 
places: parts of Alabama, Mississippi, South Carolina, Georgia, the Ozark 
mountains in Arkansas.

The small towns of the Deep South say something about America that the big 
cities don’t. The towns show you how they have been abandoned by their own 
governments, how they have been left behind by education and politics. It’s in 
the small towns you see the effects of poverty and of the outsourcing of US 
manufacturing. You don’t see it in the big cities; big cities seem like booming 
places: Atlanta, Birmingham, Little Rock, but look closer at the smaller towns 
and you see the real America and the plight of poor America.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4demp%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4demp%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc381a4d8d75f18970806c79bbc5d766db16e7574%2F0_206_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paul%20Theroux%E2%80%99s%20journey%20through%20America%E2%80%99s%20Deep%20South&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4demp%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paul+Theroux%E2%80%99s+journey+through+America%E2%80%99s+Deep+South&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4demp%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc381a4d8d75f18970806c79bbc5d766db16e7574%2F0_206_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Paul Theroux. Photograph: Elise Amendola/AP 
Related: Deep South review – Paul Theroux’s journey through the southern 
United States 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/20/deep-south-review-paul-theroux-southern-united-states>

You don’t see that many ghost towns in America, but in the south there are 
plenty. Allendale, South Carolina, is an extreme example; it’s a hollowed-out 
town, just nothing there – and nothing on the horizon, either. The people in 
these small US towns are often living in spectacular rural landscapes but they 
seem like classic examples of peasants. You don’t think of the US as having a 
peasant society but it does.

Virtually every town has a little diner or a soul food restaurant, typically 
serving fried chicken, rice or catfish. These are not tourist meals; it’s where 
local people go to meet up.Lottie’s <http://lottiesrestaurant.net/> in Marion, 
Alabama, is a great place in a nice town where Coretta Scott King, Martin 
Luther King’s wife, was born.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4demp%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4demp%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea52d17045c7e43c694215a782170cdec13b23f4%2F0_15_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paul%20Theroux%E2%80%99s%20journey%20through%20America%E2%80%99s%20Deep%20South&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4demp%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paul+Theroux%E2%80%99s+journey+through+America%E2%80%99s+Deep+South&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4demp%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea52d17045c7e43c694215a782170cdec13b23f4%2F0_15_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 Station Cafe, downtown Bentonville, Arkansas. Photograph: Alamy 
As a travel writer you want to negotiate your way among strangers, to meet 
people and hear their stories. Diners and restaurants tended to be on my route. 
Once I got to know them I’d think, well I can go to this town and not only have 
a meal but I’ll meet someone and find out something.

Travel in America isn’t an ordeal, it’s the opposite. It’s a country where 
there’s always a restaurant and a place to stay and where, in general, people 
will be friendly. In my book, Deep South, I write about the idea of the “mock 
ordeal” and that’s people pretending that America is a strange and hostile 
place. In travelling the US, the ordeal, or difficulty, is finding out what 
people are really like and making them trust you enough so that they’ll tell 
you their story.

Getting past Americans’ veneer of politeness isn’t always straightforward. 
That veneer can start with them saying: “Oh, hi. You’re from England? You talk 
strange. I thought you were from Australia.” But if you ask them where do you 
live, how many children do you have, who do you think is going to be the next 
president of the US, they’ll probably say: “What, are you writing a book? Who 
wants to know? Are you from the government?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4demp%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4demp%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3713ac70096f7cbaa8f30304d301b6e5e6942139%2F0_74_640_385%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paul%20Theroux%E2%80%99s%20journey%20through%20America%E2%80%99s%20Deep%20South&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4demp%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paul+Theroux%E2%80%99s+journey+through+America%E2%80%99s+Deep+South&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4demp%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3713ac70096f7cbaa8f30304d301b6e5e6942139%2F0_74_640_385%2F640.jpg>
 Sunrise on Asheville, North Carolina, in the Blue Ridge Mountains. Photograph: 
Alamy 
Asheville, North Carolina, is like Cheltenham without the architecture. The 
setting, in the Blue Ridge mountains, is lovely and there are great places to 
stay and you’ll find good food but it would make me very restless being there. 
I need to get in the car and go somewhere and talk to people.

A gun show is like going to a masonic lodge … suddenly everyone’s on the same 
page.It tells you everything about a place: the people, how they talk about the 
past, how they talk about the government. I was in Charleston, South Carolina, 
and found out there was a gun show on – I had to go. People were telling me 
about the city’s sushi bars, harbour and architecture but I went to the show 
instead and it was great.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4demp%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4demp%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce5063ae3fe83dfc0016d80c64c8b56b8939cc20%2F0_35_640_385%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paul%20Theroux%E2%80%99s%20journey%20through%20America%E2%80%99s%20Deep%20South&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4demp%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paul+Theroux%E2%80%99s+journey+through+America%E2%80%99s+Deep+South&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4demp%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce5063ae3fe83dfc0016d80c64c8b56b8939cc20%2F0_35_640_385%2F640.jpg>
 Waffle House restaurant roadside diner, Montgomery Alabama. Photograph: Alamy 
To get the temperature of a place I’d tune in to local talk radio stations and 
listen to the ranting … usually it was the bible, or politics. Local rants – 
and local weather – are very interesting. Sometimes, though, I’d need it to be 
more soothing, so I’d listen to Philip Glass to put me in a trance-like state.

• Paul Theroux’s Deep South 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/20/deep-south-review-paul-theroux-southern-united-states>
, with photographs by Steve McCurry, is published by Hamish Hamilton. To buy a 
copy for £16 including UK p&p visitbookshop.theguardian.com 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/326774/>
