
Cafod, Christian Aid <http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/aid>, 
Islamic Relief, Tearfund, World Vision: all are major international NGOs with 
an avowedly religious imperative. All draw much of their support from adherents 
to their religion; giving to charity is an important tenet in Christianity and 
Islam.

Religion is not a mainstream topic in development. It is not mentioned in the 
millennium development goals, and the sustainable development goals onlymention 
it in item 10, which deals with reducing inequality 
<http://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/focussdgs.html>. Yet, with the rise of 
Islamic fundamentalism and evangelical Christianity, religion is increasingly 
making its presence felt across many aspects of society.

In a globalised world, where development agencies are dealing with the 
culturally sensitive issues of female genital mutilation, abortion, family 
planning and HIV – and where aid workers have been attacked because of their 
perceived religious allegiance – do religious NGOs still have a role to play? 
Should NGOs work in communities of a different religion to their own? Can 
humanitarians claim to be independent while working for a faith-based 
organisation?

We want to know your thoughts. Submit a response of 250 words or fewer and 
we’ll publish a selection of the best ones. Keep your response clear and 
concise, avoiding development or academic jargon. Email your response to
development@theguardian.com <mailto:development@theguardian.com> with “Students 
Speak” in the subject line. Please include your name, the country where you 
live, and the university or college you attend. Submissions close at 6pm GMT on 
19 December.
