
Alastair Campbell <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/alastaircampbell>, 
former press spokesman for Tony Blair, has called newspaper coverage of this 
election “beyond parody” and criticised broadcasters for following print’s 
agenda.

After defending Blair’s relationship  
<http://www.pressgazette.co.uk/alastair-campbell-says-press-against-labour-because-leveson-threat-sun-says-labour-wants-silence>
with Rupert Murdoch’s News UK titles, Campbell said the bias shown this year 
was affecting the way the TV reported the elections.


“When you look at the way some of our newspapers have covered this general 
election they are frankly beyond parody,” he told the audience atthe British 
Media Awards <http://britishmediaawards.com/> in London on Wednesday night. “If 
they were to have the influence they think they should have then ...David 
Cameron is home tomorrow night with a majority of 450.”

“My complaint about newspapers has never been that they are biased, I was a 
very biased journalist on the Daily Mirror. My complaint has often been to the 
broadcasters to allow that bias to impact on them.”


Related: Daily Telegraph backs Tories with email to marketing database 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/may/07/daily-telegraph-tories-email-david-cameron-labour>

Just hours after Campbell gave his speech, the Telegraph took its support for 
the Conservatives a step further by using its marketing database to urge people 
to vote Conservativevia email 
<http://m.email3.telegraph.co.uk/nl/jsp/m.jsp?c=@c6Fo/cv4s82wfkyD0bnco%2Bhj9Cf4BU9IMEGjs5IF7J4%3D&WT.mc_id=e_DM15879&WT.tsrc=email&etype=Edi_Pol_Sol_XXXXXEMR_ElectionLeader&utm_content=buffer4f6fe&utm_medium=social&utm_source=twitter.com&utm_campaign=buffer>
, in what the newspaper’s editor Chris Evans described as an “unprecedented 
step”.

Some recipients turned to Twitter to express their surprise, saying they had 
only signed up to the newspaper’s technology and finance emails. Others 
complained they had not handed over their email address to receive political 
messages from the newspaper.

The message, sent to people who had “agreed to receive marketing messages by 
email from Telegraph Media Group”, is signed by Evans and includes links to the 
newspaper’s election day leader article, other political coverage and an offer 
for a free 45-day digital subscription.
— Toby Harnden (@tobyharnden) May 7, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/tobyharnden/status/596139276028350465> 
Slightly creepy "unprecedented" email from @Telegraph 
<https://twitter.com/Telegraph> editor Chris Evans telling me to vote 
Conservativepic.twitter.com/sM42Czi6jm <http://t.co/sM42Czi6jm>
 <https://twitter.com/tobyharnden/status/596139276028350465> 
On Twitter, Campbell has linked 
<https://twitter.com/campbellclaret/status/595834888760197120> the venomous 
coverage of Ed Miliband to the newspapers’ opposition to the Labour leader’s 
support for Leveson reforms. “The media has gone through a very very bad 
period,” he said at the awards event. “Murdoch’s influence, [Daily Mail editor] 
Paul Dacre, all the stuff that led to Leveson, I really think the public want 
and deserve something better.”

Campbell said that declining trust in traditional media was handing more 
influence to social media and other less traditional ways of reaching the 
public, citing Ed Miliband’s decision to be interviewed by Russell brand.

“It’s not the first social media campaign, but it is the first campaign where 
social media has had a genuine significant output and input,” he said.

“Why has social media been so important? Politicians aren’t trusted any more, 
business isn’t trusted like it was, the media is certainly not trusted like it 
was. So who do people trust? The genius of social media, and the genius of 
Facebook is the concept of the friend. We trust our friends.

“When [the media] say ‘Oh Ed Miliband did this’ and ‘David Cameron did that’ 
you think it will have an impact. I’ve got to be honest, the last few days the 
impact that we have is in face-to-face conversations and electronic 
face-to-face conversations.”

Campbell said Cameron and the press had made a mistake in dismissing 
Miliband’s interview with Russell Brand, in part because the star’s YouTube 
show The Trews generated public interest.

“When Cameron came out and said ‘Russell Brand is a joke and Ed Miliband is a 
joke for talking to him’, I think he was wrong,” Campbell said.

“Something like that Russell Brand interview, the mainstream so-called media 
gave it massive hype, and the fact it was mostly negative hype didn’t matter 
because people who then decided to watch it made the choice to do that.

“I’ve done this Trews. If you do something on Newsnight you might get three or 
four people come up to you. But I promise you the level of connection from 
having done that [The Trews] is much deeper.”
