
Call off the search. The most outrageous official lie of the entire referendum 
campaign has now been told:Michael Gove claims <> to be backed by “people from 
the world of entertainment – including Liz Hurley”.

That Hurley’s performances are primarily used in EU black sites on behalf of 
the CIA is a fact that cannot possibly have escaped the justice secretary’s 
attention – but then, he lives in a post-fact world. The sadness is that he 
declined to respond to the news on Tuesday thatDavid Beckham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/21/david-beckham-backs-remain-for-future-our-children>
 was backing the remain side, with the obvious gag, “I think Britain has had 
enough of dead-ball experts”.


Even so, I’m really looking forward to episodes of the TV series Behind the 
Music on the various referendum campaigns. The rival leave factions are now 
resembling one of the more Byzantine hair metal feuds. The Axl Rose in all this 
– the guy even people on the pain reliever Percocet can’t work with – isNigel 
Farage <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage>.

They’ve all got beef with Farage. “I shuddered,” said Gove over the Ukip 
leader’s Breaking Pointposter 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jun/19/michael-gove-shuddered-nigel-farage-anti-migrant-poster-video>
. “Michael Gove had better look at his own posters,” shot backFarage 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/20/farage-dons-the-tinfoil-as-his-brex-appeal-begins-to-falter>
. Nigel is now being relentlessly briefed against as a tactical quarterwit.

Today it was the turn of Boris Johnson 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> to be sniffy. “We have nothing to 
do with that campaign,” he told LBC of Leave.EU. Could he in all conscience 
accept the votes it garnered? At this point things took a turn for the surreal. 
When he stood for London mayor, Boris recalled, people said he would get 
far-right votes. “And I said, I don’t want those votes.”

So there you have it: there are good Brexit votes and bad Brexit votes – and 
Boris doesn’t want the bad ones. It all had something of the flavour of the 
Chris Morris Brass Eye sketch in which he differentiated between “good Aids” 
and “bad Aids”. Then again, it was in an even earlier incarnation, as the 
psychopathic news anchor on The Day Today, that Morris underscored thatshow 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JX2ziMnm2tw>’s almost supernatural ability to 
satirise the future. “And at 10 past 10,” ran a joke written in 1994, “it’s 
Question Time – LIVE FROM WEMBLEY STADIUM.”

Is this EU vote farce repeated as history? Boris certainly plays Wembley arena 
on Tuesday night (think of it as the referendosseum), while the BBC announces 
that they could have filled their megadebate 
<https://twitter.com/daily_politics/status/745214634701926400> gig 10 times 
over. This raises the possibility that there might well be ticket touts 
operating outside Question Time – all exactly as predicted in the Book of 
Revelation.

As for the gladiatorial battle therein, Boris’s classicism is a little more 
refined than Russell Crowe’s (though equally self regarding). But let’s hope he 
opts to turn to the audience after finishing off fellow panellist Francis 
O’Grady and demanding: “Are you not entertained? ARE YOU NOT ENTERTAINED? Is 
this not why you are here?” Only for a lone voice in row W to pipe up: “No, I 
thought it was a Motley Crue gig.”

Maximus had a little more at stake on his outings, of course. On Tuesday Boris 
declared he’d go on TV to apologise if Brexit caused a recession. Which 
certainly turns an out result into a win-win for, say, the people of Wearside, 
whose loss of aHitachi factory 
<http://www.sunderlandecho.com/news/business/chairman-of-50million-investors-hitachi-warns-sunderland-jobs-at-risk-in-cold-reality-of-brexit-1-7950561>
 will definitely be cancelled out by a televised BoJo soz.

 And yet, for all Johnson’s sweet attempts to level the playing field in this 
way, it is difficult to escape the impression that the referendum is being 
contested by people so financially insulated that they have nothing to lose bar 
a kitchen supper invitation. Cameron’s former buddySteve Hilton 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-eu-referendum-36582391> is now 
undermining the PM’s account of migration targets.

Boris is calling the chancellor a liar with the sarcastically exaggerated 
diffidence you imagine he deployed when George Osborne was known to fellow 
Bullingdon Club members as Oik on account of his only having attended St 
Paul’s. “I hope I wasn’t too strong,” Boris fretted hammily on LBC, after some 
mildly exasperated criticism of Osborne. The former London mayor’s family might 
have come out for remain in the EU. “I think they’re all secret Brexiters,” he 
chuckled, “but anyway … ”

 Elsewhere, much has been made of the schism between the Goves and the 
Camerons, given that Gove’s wife, the Daily Mail columnist Sarah Vine, is 
godmother to the Camerons’ youngest child. But even that feels like little more 
than just another warning to those weirdo careerists who make work friends 
godparents to their children.

It was the same with Rupert and Wendi Murdoch 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2014/feb/06/wendi-deng-tony-blair-rupert-murdoch-philip-seymour-hoffman>
 and their close chum Tony Blair. One minute they were all laughing it up at a 
christening on the banks of the river Jordan; now Tony’s probably having to 
send little Grace and Chloe their presents via the Pentagon.

And so with the Goves and Camerons, who may never again break homemade 
focaccia in a kitchen that is better than Ed Miliband’s. I mean, I’m sure it’ll 
make the Conservativesummer ball  
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2015/jul/02/conservatives-throw-the-best-party-ever-david-cameron-410000-auction-photo>
vaguely awkward. But it’s not exactly Boys From The Blackstuff.
