
If you live a busy, modern lifestyle, you will be aware that there just isn’t 
the time to do important things, like have sex and maintain the human race. 
There’s Facebook to check, emails to respond to, and that entire series of
Breaking Bad <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/breaking-bad> – the one 
you’re pretending you’ve already seen – isn’t going to watch itself.

Related: Is our love of connectivity turning Britons off sex? | Nell Frizzell, 
Daisy Buchanan, Rupert Myers and Flic Everett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/06/too-much-connectivity-streaming-britons-game-of-thrones-sex>

On Saturday, at the Hay festival, David Spiegelhalter, the Winton professor of 
the public understanding of risk at Cambridge university, was talking about his 
bookSex by Numbers 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Sex-Numbers-Statistics-Behaviour-Wellcome/dp/1781253293>
. He highlighted figures from theNational Survey of Sexual Attitudes and 
Lifestyle, <http://www.natsal.ac.uk/> which show how average rates of sex have 
declined over the past 30 years: from five times (over a four-week period) in 
1990, to four times in 2000 and three times in 2010. Spiegelhalterblamed 
technology 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/science/2016/06/05/britons-are-having-less-sex-and-game-of-thrones-could-be-to-blam/>
. “I think it’s the box set, Netflix. ‘OMG, I’ve got to watch the entire second 
series ofGame of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/game-of-thrones>.’ The point is that 
this massive connectivity, the constant checking of our phones, compared with 
just a few years ago when TV closed down at 10.30pm or whatever, and there was 
nothing else to do.”

Related: The female orgasm simulation game that's too hot for Apple to touch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/06/female-orgasm-simulator-la-petite-mort-apple>

It won’t be news to anyone who has ever been annoyed by their partner’s phone 
habit that tech devices are probably having a negative effect on relationships. 
In a small 2014study 
<http://news.psu.edu/story/337901/2014/12/10/research/disconnected-study-suggests-technology-interferes-couple>
 of 143 heterosexual women in relationships, the majority reported that phones 
or tablets frequently interrupted time with their partner, such as mealtimes or 
conversations. Those who reported this most frequently were less satisfied with 
their relationship.

At the current rate of decline, “by 2030 couples are not going to be having 
any sex at all. Which is a very worrying trend,” said Spiegelhalter. But I 
wonder if 2030 might be optimistic. We anxiously await the next survey, seeing 
as, since 2010, the iPad was launched,Netflix 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> has taken off and Candy Crush was 
invented. It’s a miracle anybody is still having any sex at all.
