
A festival of fact-checking presents itself as we turn to the education 
section of the Conservatives’ manifesto. Packed into the document’s first two 
pages on schools reform are a host of contentious claims. Sadly, by contrast, 
the Labour document is a bit light on facts that can be scrutinised.

“The number of pupils studying the core academic subjects at GCSE had halved 
[under the Labour government],” theConservative manifesto 
<https://www.conservatives.com/manifesto> states, before boasting of having 
“brought high standards back to teaching”.

Fair enough is the first response, given that the GCSE statement is based on 
official data on the numbers studying all of the EBacc subjects: English, 
maths, science, a language and history or geography. But closer analysis shows 
half of the subjects counting towards the EBacc actually saw GCSE entries grow 
between 1997 and 2010, with the fall in the figure quoted by the Tories driven 
almost entirely by the collapse in numbers studying French or German after 
Labour’s 2002 decision to make languages optional. So the problem is a bit more 
specific than the manifesto suggests.

“Nearly 800 of the worst-performing schools have been taken over by 
experienced academy sponsors with a proven track record of success,” reports 
the manifesto. But three of the largest primary sponsors – Academies Enterprise 
Trust, the KemnalAcademies <http://www.theguardian.com/education/academies> 
Trust and E-Act – have faced critical reports from Ofsted following 
investigations.

We could go on – are free schools always being “set up and run by local 
people”, as the document claims, rather than by academy chains? – but, alas, 
we’ve run out of space.

Bristol Tory candidate raises heads’ hackles

Headteachers in Bristol are fuming after a Conservative election candidate 
wrote of her plans to help set up a free school “so that children do not have 
to travel to school across or outside the city to access the best standards.”

The leaders of the seven secondary schools in the South Bristol constituency 
have written to Isobel Grant accusing her of presenting a “distorted, 
inaccurate” view after the statement in her election pamphlet, which also said 
“the best schools should not all be in the north [of Bristol]”.

The letter points out that all secondary schools in South Bristol, which has 
some of the city’s poorest neighbourhoods, are rated good or outstanding by 
Ofsted. “We are proud of our schools, our young people, our staff and our 
governors,” they write. “We would expect a candidate for our MP to be proud, 
too, and challenge other people who may have misconceptions.” One headteacher 
said there was no shortage of school places locally, so a free school would not 
be a good use of money.

Late last week, Grant, who needs all the votes she can muster in this safe 
Labour seat, wrote to the headteachers to apologise. “I have only got positive 
things to say about schools in South Bristol, and no implied criticism is 
intended in my leaflets,” she said, thanking the heads for inviting her to 
visit. She might face a frosty reception.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F47zkk%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F47zkk%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F24%2F1429889850537%2F02f76fe3-03c9-44e4-9a57-f053056c1d82-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Factcheck%3A%20Tory%20manifesto%20claims%20on%20schools%20don%E2%80%99t%20add%20up&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F47zkk%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Factcheck%3A+Tory+manifesto+claims+on+schools+don%E2%80%99t+add+up&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F47zkk%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F24%2F1429889850537%2F02f76fe3-03c9-44e4-9a57-f053056c1d82-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Isobel Grant, left, at the hustings debate on education at Bristol University 
with other candidates. Photograph: Adrian Sherratt 
Banbury cross: academy plans anger council

Oxfordshire county council is in the midst of a major row with an academy 
trust over the admissions policies of one school, with a senior Conservative 
councillor accusing the chain of trying to deny future places to at least 400 
local pupils.

The council says Banbury academy, run by the Aspirations Academies Trust, must 
abide by the terms of its funding agreement – the legal contract with ministers 
under which it was set up – which states that its capacity is for 1,953 pupils. 
Yet a document setting out Banbury’s admissions policy for 2016 puts the 
school’s capacity at only 1,550. In a letter to the regional schools 
commissioner for the area, Martin Post, Conservative councillor Michael Waine, 
who chairs a local group on school admissions, says Aspirations is trying “[to] 
artificially restrict the amount of pupils it is prepared to admit”.

Aspirations argues that the drop in capacity has been caused by the creation 
last September of a “studio school” on the academy site, using buildings 
designed for 748 pupils to house just 300. It says a new version of its funding 
agreement is being agreed with the government.

But Banbury is experiencing population pressure, partly fuelled by a new 
housing development, writes Waine. Allowing Banbury to operate under capacity 
while the expansion of other schools has to be paid for would be a “colossal 
waste of public money”.

A report presented by the council to its school organisation stakeholders 
group also argues that Banbury academy’s plans to introduce new “fair banding” 
tests for pupils entering from next year are not compliant with admissions and 
equalities legislation.

In a statement, Aspirations says: “Clearly opening an innovative new school 
[the studio school], with the requirement for hall space, communal areas, 
offices and science labs, means that the new school takes up more capacity than 
the classrooms it replaced.”

The academy trust adds that its 2016 admissions policy is legally compliant. 
“The local authority were considered to have failed [Banbury’s] predecessor 
school and we are now turning round [its] fortunes.”




Big casualty in east London school saga

The saga of who should run one of south London’s largest local authority 
comprehensives took what for his supporters was a sad twist last week, as its 
headteacher resigned.

Ken Mackenzie is to stand down as head of Sedgehill school in Lewisham after 
its interim executive board – controversially installed in January by the local 
authority – announced the appointment of a new “chief executive”, Julia 
Scannell, to take over.

Mackenzie’s position had appeared vulnerable at Christmas, after Lewisham – 
citing concerns about the school’s results – pushed ahead with plans to sack 
governors and have the school run in partnership with Bethnal Green academy in 
east London.

After Christmas, Bethnal Green pulled out of the deal, seemingly in the face 
of an 1,800-signature petition supporting Mackenzie and the former governing 
body, with campaigners also fearful that the school was being pushed towards 
academy status. That concern still exists.

Wiltshire’s thank you for the music and goodbye

Finally, more than 5,000 people have signed a petition against the abolition 
of Wiltshire county council’s music service, which has provided instrumental 
tuition and run ensembles for generations of pupils. The service is being 
scrapped from September, with the reported loss of 76 music teachers and 10 
administrative jobs. This is in a bid to make a £247,000 saving as the council 
faces a £30m budget shortfall.

Wiltshire says schools will still be able to employ self-employed music 
teachers directly, with a new “music hub” taking the lead in overseeing 
provision. But the service’s supporters argue that provision will decline, with 
the move especially hard on lower- and middle-income families and rural 
schools. We do wonder if the same level of service can be provided under the 
new regime.
