
If the future of England’s schools is to become part of larger academy chains, 
then the control of that future looks, at present, as though it will be largely 
white and very male.

An Education Guardian analysis of the boards of England’s 10 largest chains, 
as listed on their websites, shows that three-quarters (81 out of 110) of these 
academy trustees are men, with some organisations overwhelmingly skewed towards 
male directors.

England’s largest chain, the Academies Enterprise Trust, lists eight directors 
<http://www.academiesenterprisetrust.org/governance/board-of-trustees>, all of 
whom seem to be white males. The trust said: “We are taking steps to increase 
the diversity of our board of trustees. We hope to make an announcement about 
new appointments in the near future.”

Ark Schools <http://www.theguardian.com/education/schools>, one of the most 
successful chains, lists a single woman, Lucy Heller, on its eight-strong, 
all-white board, although its management team of six includes three women. A 
spokesman said 24 of the chain’s 34 schools were led by women, and 22 of its 
individual school governing bodies had a female chair. He added that research 
had shown there were only 15 black male heads in England, but two were running 
Ark schools.

Only one of the 10 largest chains, the Kemnal Academies Trust 
<http://www.tkat.org/96/meet-the-team>, lists more women than men on its board. 
Just three of the largest 10 chains have female chief executives. And all this 
is in spite of the fact that women form a large majority of the teaching 
profession. In comparison, a survey by the National Governors’ Association of 
almost 2,000 of its members across state schools last year found 57% were women.

Carter the unstoppable MAT machine

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t7jd%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t7jd%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae23d89acf5cbac26fc0c601529e0ff0fdfded28%2F579_0_1306_1632%2F1306.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20academy%20chiefs%20of%20the%20future%3F%20They%20will%C2%A0be%C2%A0largely%20white%20and%20very%20male&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t7jd%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+academy+chiefs+of+the+future%3F+They+will%C2%A0be%C2%A0largely+white+and+very+male&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t7jd%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae23d89acf5cbac26fc0c601529e0ff0fdfded28%2F579_0_1306_1632%2F1306.jpg>
 David Carter, national schools commissioner 
Some very interesting slides have come our way of a presentation 
<https://www.dropbox.com/s/b1b7txif4wcpyht/DCarterpresentationMarch2016.pptx?dl=0>
 given by the man who is to preside over the ultra-controversial transfer of 
all England’s state schools to academy trusts by 2022, asannounced by George 
Osborne in the budget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/15/osborne-chancellor-focus-budget-schools-reform-academies>
 and included in theschools white paper 
<http://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/mar/27/the-big-issue-academies-schools>. 
The talk was given by Sir David Carter, the national schools commissioner, who 
oversees academies at the Department for Education, at a conference on 18 March.

The slides contain a few assertions that rang alarm bells among two leading, 
local authority-friendly, experts on school organisation we spoke to. These 
included a claim that the multi-academy trust (MAT) is “the vehicle for 
collaboration”, when there seems a growingconsensus 
<https://www.tes.com/news/tes-magazine/tes-magazine/appeal-autonomy-all-academic-now>
 that chain governance can mean schools are run in a top-down, seemingly 
non-collaborative, manner.

Indeed, the slides contain an apparent admission from Sir David that schools 
joining MATs “probably” lose autonomy. He also suggests that chains will need a 
minimum of 1,200 pupils to be financially viable in future.

Related: Senior executives leave struggling academy chain – and take big 
payoff with them | Warwick Mansell 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/feb/23/senior-executives-struggling-academy-chain-big-payoff-warwick-mansell>

The slides reveal Sir David wants to recruit 300 leading academy figures to 
act as “advocates” for the scheme, with interesting priorities that include 
“press handling”. He envisages a demand for another 1,000 multi-academy trusts 
by 2020, and another 1,000 chief executives – presumably all of whom will be
highly paid 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/feb/23/senior-executives-struggling-academy-chain-big-payoff-warwick-mansell>
.

And among the qualities of the “most successful” leaders within this new 
system, states Sir David, is the ability to “see the MAT as a business model as 
well as an educational hub”. Game, set and match, then, to those who argue that 
the values of the corporation now rule in education reform?

One man, two guvnors?: interim head doubles up


Heard the one about the “interim executive headteacher” of a primary school 
who also serves as chief executive of an academy trust running another group of 
schools, 100 miles away?

David Brown, chief executive of the London-based Chapel St Community Schools 
Trust, is also interim executive headteacher of Al-Hijrah primary, a local 
authority school in Birmingham.

Birmingham council told us he worked three to four days a week for Al-Hijrah, 
having been contracted to do so since December 2014. But the arrangement may 
raise more questions for Chapel St, an academy chain that runs seven schools 
from its base in Morden, south London, and was recently handed a “financial 
notice to improve 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/financial-notice-to-improve-chapel-street-community-schools-trust>
” by the government. How can Brown fulfil his duties on such a part-time basis?

Russell Rook, who chief executive of an overarching group of charities 
including Chapel St’s academy trust, said: “David carries out his role on a 
part-time basis. In 2014-15 David was paid, including all expenses, less than 
£40k. We are a small trust and David now gives his time to the charity entirely 
on a voluntary basis.” How curious.

Ask a question – then ignore the answer 


Finally, the government’s decision to scrap the scheme of baseline assessments 
for English children when they start reception, on the grounds that the rival 
systems from which schools have been allowed to choose did not generate 
comparable results, seems to show that ministers should have listened to 
criticism when they first launched the plans.

The coalition’s official consultation [pdf]  
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/297595/Primary_Accountability_and_Assessment_Consultation_Response.pdf>
on the proposal, in 2013, found that 73% of the 1,079 people who responded to 
the question “Should we allow schools to choose from a range of commercially 
available assessments?” answered no, with only 15% saying yes. Yet the scheme 
went ahead anyway last September.

Ministers have stressed that it was always planned to carry out checks on the 
reliability of the new assessments, which were only optional in 2014-15. 
But was public money needlessly spent on this?
