
Images of Syrians fleeing their homes and taking treacherous journeys in 
search of safety in Europe have dominated the news as levels of global 
displacement have escalated. Figures released on Monday by the UN refugee 
agency, the UNHCR,show that forced displacement affected more than 65 million 
people in 2015 <http://www.devinit.org/GHA2016>, the highest level ever 
recorded. Most of these people are in developing countries in their regions of 
origin.

With two landmark meetings in the offing, the world is facing tough decisions 
on how it responds to the crisis. In September, agathering 
<http://www.un.org/pga/70/2016/03/23/united-nations-summit-on-refugees-and-migrants/>
 convened by the UN secretary general anda summit hosted by the US president, 
Barack Obama 
<https://blogs.state.gov/stories/2016/02/01/strengthening-global-response-refugee-crises-worldwide>
, will offer a chance to tackle the situation and strengthen global 
responsibility-sharing.

But how much do we really know about those affected and the resources 
available? Do we have enough information to develop an effective and 
forward-thinking response?

Related: One in every 113 people forced to flee, says UN refugee agency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/20/one-in-every-112-people-uprooted-war-persecution-says-un-refugee-agency>

Estimates of the numbers of forced migrants – including refugees, asylum 
seekers and internally displaced people – are publicly available.

In addition to annual estimates by UNHCR on the number of people who have been 
forcibly displaced, Eurostat provides data on first-time asylum seekers 
registered in the EU, which are believed tohave reached a record high of more 
than 1.2 million people last year 
<http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/documents/2995521/7203832/3-04032016-AP-EN.pdf/> 
(pdf).

The Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre 
<http://www.internal-displacement.org/> collates data on the number of 
internally displaced people worldwide, which is estimated to have reached 40.8 
million at the end of 2015,an increase of 2.8 million 
<http://www.internal-displacement.org/globalreport2016/> in a year.

However, the question of who gets counted is a politically charged issue. 
Difficulties in accessing populations within host communities and outside camps 
– or in counting non-registered refugees, people who have been repeatedly 
forced from their homes, and those who have been displaced for a long time – 
mean that some people are invisible, and ultimately do not get help.

The crux of the issue is that collecting data on refugees has traditionally 
been the domain of humanitarian organisations, on the one hand, as they sought 
to address immediate needs, and national asylum and immigration systems, on the 
other hand, as they tracked and processed claims.

This means that refugees are often omitted from national poverty surveys and 
other crucial studies, and so are left out of efforts to track the progress of 
people moving out of poverty.The longer-term livelihood needs of refugees and 
displaced people are not systematically addressed 
<http://www.lidc.org.uk/sites/default/files/Missing%20millions.pdf> (pdf). 

Given the burgeoning scale and protracted nature of the crisis, there is a 
pressing need for data on refugees and migrants to be a poverty and development 
issue – not just a humanitarian or migration concern.

The complexity of refugees’ needs demands a more sophisticated understanding 
of poverty and a repertoire of political, humanitarian and socio-economic 
responses, as well asevidence on the actual and potential economic contribution 
of refugees in their host countries 
<http://www.rsc.ox.ac.uk/files/publications/other/refugee-economies-2014.pdf>.

Related: A refugee in Edinburgh: 'My children don’t want to know they’re 
Syrian' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/20/syrian-refugee-edinburgh-scotland-children-dont-want-to-know-syrian-world-refugee-day>

As a step in the right direction, the World Bank and UNHCR undertook the first 
poverty and welfare assessment of a refugee population 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2015/12/16/welfare-syrian-refugees-evidence-from-jordan-lebanon>
, in Jordan and Lebanon in December, drawing lessons for forced migrants 
elsewhere. New financing tools are emerging, bringing together multilateral 
banks, Islamic financing and aid donors.

But when looking at funding, and resources beyond humanitarian assistance, the 
availability and quality of data is also a challenge.

We do not have a full picture of what countries are spending on hosting 
refugees, or of donors’ responses to displacement elsewhere.

The only international platform 
<https://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=CRS1> for host countries to 
report spending does not give us all the facts. It only shows what can be 
counted as official development assistance and, within this,reporting practices 
vary dramatically 
<https://www.oecd.org/dac/stats/RefugeeCostsMethodologicalNote.pdf> (pdf). It 
doesn’t show the contributions of many developing countries, such as Lebanon 
and Pakistan, that host large numbers of refugees.

In addition, the data is out of date, since it is published a year after it is 
spent. In the absence of comparable and up-to-date data, not only do myths 
creep into the rhetoric, but it’s also hard to identify and fill financing gaps.

How can we improve the data on refugees to ensure that they aren’t left behind?

 * Collect poverty data on refugees and migrants, and place this at the centre 
of decision-making. The inclusion of refugees and displaced people in national 
poverty surveys would, for example, ensure that their needs are reflected in 
national planning. 
 * Strengthen the timeliness of expenditure information by reporting to the 
international aid transparency initiative <http://www.aidtransparency.net/>. 
This would enable all development and humanitarian resources, including 
refugee-hosting costs, to be tracked side-by-side in a timely manner. 
Data on refugees and financing still won’t tell us the full story. But 
understanding the poverty of people forced to flee, and the investments needed 
to help them, would constitute a vital step in the right direction.

 * Sarah Dalrymple is a senior policy and engagement adviser on humanitarian 
and conflict issues atDevelopment Initiatives <http://devinit.org/#!/>, which 
will publish areport <http://www.devinit.org/GHA2016> on trends in humanitarian 
financing on 27 June
