
The Australian journalist Peter Greste has called on Egypt’s President Abdel 
Fatah al-Sisi to pardon him and his imprisoned colleagues after a shock court 
ruling on Saturday found them guilty of terrorism charges andsentenced them to 
three years in jail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/29/egyptian-court-sentences-3-al-jazeera-english-journalists-to-3-years-in-prison>
.

He said the convictions of him, Mohamed Fahmy and Baher Mohamed, who worked 
with him on al-Jazeera reports, struck at the heart of the rule of law, and 
called on governments around the world to continue to fight for the imprisoned 
journalists’ release. The three men were detained in December 2013, accused of 
broadcasting false reports and colluding with the Muslim Brotherhood.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F29%2Fal-jazeera-journalists-sentencing-amal-clooney-sisi-video&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F29%2Fal-jazeera-journalists-sentencing-amal-clooney-sisi-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F29%2F1440847580639%2FKP_414042_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Al-Jazeera%20journalists%20sentencing%3A%20Amal%20Clooney%20calls%20on%20Sisi%20to%20overturn%20court%E2%80%99s%20decision%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F29%2Fal-jazeera-journalists-sentencing-amal-clooney-sisi-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Al-Jazeera+journalists+sentencing%3A+Amal+Clooney+calls+on+Sisi+to+overturn+court%E2%80%99s+decision+-+video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F29%2Fal-jazeera-journalists-sentencing-amal-clooney-sisi-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F29%2F1440847580639%2FKP_414042_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Lawyer Amal Clooney calls on Sisi to overturn court’s decision.Link to video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2015/aug/29/al-jazeera-journalists-sentencing-amal-clooney-sisi-video>
Fahmy and Mohamed have remained in custody in Egypt throughout their 20-month 
legal battle. Greste was convicted in absentia after Sisideported him in 
February 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/feb/01/joy-release-peter-greste-egypt> 
and is now in Australia.


Related: Al-Jazeera journalists sentenced to three years in prison by Egyptian 
court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/29/egyptian-court-sentences-3-al-jazeera-english-journalists-to-3-years-in-prison>

Speaking at a press conference in Sydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> on Sunday morning Greste 
condemned the conviction and said it was an extraordinary injustice against 
Fahmy and Mohamed, who are likely to now be placed in solitary confinement for 
several weeks.


“I’m absolutely devastated – sickened, frankly – by the verdict that was 
handed down inEgypt <https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> last night,” he 
said. “This is an injustice, this is a form of suffering that they and their 
families are having to go through.

“There was never any evidence that the court presented, that the prosecution 
presented, either in the first trial or the second to confirm any of the 
allegations against us. And in fact I’d like to publicly challenge the 
prosecutor to present evidence of anything that we produced that was falsified.”

Sisi had promised to pardon the journalists in the event they were convicted 
of terrorism offences and Greste called on him to live up to that commitment.

“President Sisi now has an opportunity to undo that injustice, to correct that 
injustice,” he said. “The eyes of the world are upon Egypt. The eyes of the 
world will be watching this trial, in particular to see Egypt’s commitment to 
these principles.

“It is now up to President Sisi to do what he said he would do, and that is 
pardon us if we were ever convicted.”

Greste’s deportation – though greeted with jubilation by supporters – meant he 
was unable to defend himself in court. He is seeking advice from his legal team 
on avenues of appeal.

“This for me is a matter of natural justice,” he said. “As you all know I was 
removed from the country on the order of the Egyptian president. I was not in 
Egypt, not because I was on the run, but because I was taken out of the country 
under Egyptian law, in accordance with Egyptian law, and yet I was placed on 
trial.

“In doing so I was denied the most fundamental principle of law, and that is 
the right of an accused person to defend themselves. That alone ought to be 
enough to have my conviction tossed out.”

We need support from ​… everyone who has ever tweeted or supported or liked 
Facebook pages … to continue the fight
Peter Greste 
Greste said he had received strong support from the Australian foreign 
minister,Julie Bishop <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/julie-bishop>
, but called for continued pressure on Egypt from Britain, the US, Australia 
and other countries.

“I’ve also spoken to foreign minister Julie Bishop, who has personally 
expressed her support, and said she will do everything in her power to use 
every diplomatic means available also to help support us and get this 
overturned,” he said.

“We need more than just Julie Bishop’s support and the Australian government’s 
support. We need support from governments around the world, diplomats around 
the world, and indeed from everyone who has ever tweeted or supported or liked 
Facebook pages … to continue the fight. Because to give up now, frankly, would 
be a repudiation of everything we’ve fought for.”

Greste later told the Guardian it would difficult to see any circumstances in 
which he could return to Egypt.

“I was removed from the court on presidential order. I can’t go back to Egypt 
without violating that order. I was removed in accordance with Egyptian law. 
It’s hard to see circumstances in which it would be appropriate for me to go 
back.

“We need to talk to my lawyers in Egypt in more details about the options, 
that appeals process and what we can and can’t do. You can be sure that we’ll 
use every means available to us.”


The British government is to hold talks with Egypt later this year. He said 
the British government needed to take every opportunity to fight for the 
release of journalists imprisoned in Egypt.

“It makes it very difficult for the prime minister [David Cameron] to sit 
alongside President Sisi as an equal, as a democrat,” he said. “I’m not going 
to at this stage say that that meeting shouldn’t take place, but I want the 
British government to use every opportunity and every second that it has with 
President Sisi to make it abundantly clear that this can’t stand, and normal 
relations can’t continue until they sort out some of these issues around the 
rule of law and freedom of the press.”
