
Following George Osborne’s announcement that NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> bursaries would be axed in 2017, a 
grassroots campaign has been started by students.

Yet another successful demonstration as part of the Bursary or Bust campaign 
was held earlier this month in London, with high-profile speakers including 
fashion designer Vivienne Westwood and Green party leader Natalie Bennett, who 
recognise the catastrophic effects axing the bursary will have on the NHS’s 
future.

Related: Will scrapping nurse bursaries help or worsen NHS staffing crisis? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/dec/07/will-scrapping-nurse-bursaries-help-or-worsen-nhs-staffing-crisis>

Currently supporting more than 60,000 students every year, the bursary 
provides means-tested financial support to people studying courses such as 
nursing, midwifery and occupational therapy.


Under the new system, the only financial support available will be loans. To 
put this into perspective, student nurses, who work for 50% of their degree, 
will pay up to £9,000 per year to train, and graduate with upwards of £60,000 
debt and starting salaries ofjust over £21,000 
<http://nursing.nhscareers.nhs.uk/why/pay_work_conditions/pay_comparisons>.

Last month, politicians gathered in the House of Commons to discuss the issue 
of NHS student bursaries in a debate called by the shadow health secretary, 
Heidi Alexander. Based on a cross-party motion signed by hundreds of MPs, the 
debate was a chance for the government to listen to evidence from experts and 
key stakeholders, and consider viable options for future student funding. One 
suggestion was thatstudents be paid a living wage 
<http://www.nursingtimes.net/roles/nurse-educators/healthcare-students-should-be-paid-living-wage-while-on-placement/5084213.fullarticle>
 while on placements in recognition of the work they do. However, the 
Conservatives voted down the motion to drop the bursary cuts.

The plans may have sounded appealing to some, but the flaws in the proposed 
legislation are now apparent. Janet Davies, chief executive of theRoyal College 
of Nursing <https://www.rcn.org.uk/> (RCN), says the plans are not reflective 
of the realities of modern nurse training and that no evidence has been given 
for the government’s claim regarding increased nursing places. She warns the 
moves are likely to have the opposite effect.

Dr Crystal Oldman, chief executive of The Queen’s Nursing Institute 
<http://www.qni.org.uk/>, has said that scrapping the bursary has already 
negatively impacted career decisions 
<http://www.nursingtimes.net/news/education/bursary-loss-already-having-impact-on-career-decisions/7004217.fullarticle>
. Furthermore, at a recent conference for GPs in London, fears over the number 
of future practice nurses were raised, with many predicting the capital will be 
the hardest hit.

Looking at the bigger picture, the effects of worsening austerity cannot be 
ignored and, as we progress with our campaign, startling new evidence appears 
regularly. In asurvey by the RCN 
<https://www.rcn.org.uk/london/-/media/reports/rcn%20london%20housing%20survey%20full%20results%20web%20copy.pdf>
, [pdf] 74% of nurses said the NHS pay freeze had made it more difficult to 
work in London and 66% had considered leaving due to housing costs. Withmore 
than 10,000 unfilled vacancies 
<https://www.rcn.org.uk/london/about/publications/safe-staffing-report-2015>, 
equating to a 17% shortage last year, the future of nursing in London is not 
looking good, and it’s set to get worse.

Unison and the National Union of Students commissioned an impact assessment 
<https://www.unison.org.uk/content/uploads/2016/05/UNISON-NUS-Report-Nurse-fees-and-funding.pdf>
 [pdf] with London Economics that found the new plans were likely to cost the 
NHS more in the long run, rather than save money. They estimate annual losses 
of around 2,000 graduates resulting from the 71% increase in student costs, 
meaning the NHS will become even more reliant on agency and overseas 
recruitment to make up the shortfall.

Related: The future of nursing: bursaries versus loans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/feb/23/the-future-of-nursing-bursaries-versus-loans>

The report also predicts that universities will be £57m-£77m worse off in 
terms of student intake and may have to stop running courses, leading to 
greater shortages in some regions. The Treasury will be at a loss overall, as 
many mature students have previous degree debts. The likelihood is most will 
never be able to fully pay the loans back.

Key concerns surrounding patient safety also arise with the proposal of a 
nursing associate role 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/nursing-associate-role-offers-new-route-into-nursing>
, which would require on-the-job training using the resources already in short 
supply, such as mentors, placements and guidance from registered nurses. Again, 
these concerns have not been adequately addressed by the government and 
highlight the long-term dangers of the proposals.

The campaign continues to grow and we must all keep the pressure up while the 
bursary plans are being consulted on. The consultationcan be found here 
<https://consultations.dh.gov.uk/workforce/healthcare-education-funding/consult_view>
 and is open to both individuals and organisations.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
