
My wife and I are both 41 and parents to three children. Our love life is 
nonexistent. I have been realistic and patient, but she says that the thought 
of any physical contact at all makes her feel physically sick. She has 
suggested that I sleep with other people, which I will never do as the only 
person I want is her.

There is a significant difference between “I’m too tired for sex” and 
“Touching makes me physically sick”. You are right to be concerned and it would 
be wise to address this problem comprehensively. Start by acknowledging what 
you already know: that parenthood and work can be overwhelming. Next, express 
your deep feelings – your sadness, frustration and sense of loss. Ask her to do 
the same. It is important to get her attention, and to ask for exactly what you 
need. It may be best to set an immediately attainable goal of simply being able 
to discuss your relationship. Many couples get off track, and it can be painful 
when passion and eroticism get lost. Your task together is to begin to relate 
to each other as lovers. She has forgotten what this was like, so help reawaken 
her sense of who she used to be. It is also possible that unconscious elements 
from her own early experiences could be affecting her ability to comfortably 
combine the roles of motherhood and sexual partnering; so, if you make little 
headway, seek professional help.

• Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a US-based psychotherapist specialising in 
sexual disorders.

• If you would like advice from Pamela Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, 
send us a brief description of your concerns toprivate.lives@theguardian.com <> 
(please don’t send attachments). Each week, Pamela chooses one problem to 
answer, which will be published online and in print. She regrets that she 
cannot enter into personal correspondence.
