
Netflix has 76,897 unique ways 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2014/01/how-netflix-reverse-engineered-hollywood/282679/>
 to describe types of movies. By breaking down every single attribute 
describing film and television content – narrative elements, moral aspect of 
characters, romance quality, scariness – Netflix came up with personalised 
genres that are specific to the point of ludicrous. By mixing all those 
micro-genres with millions of users’ viewing habits, Netflix successfully 
created popular television shows.

If we apply this same micro- and human-centred approach to media planning, we 
get media design. Netflix succeeded because it put its personalised genres at 
the centre of its content universe. Brands will succeed if they put their 
customers at the centre of their media.

From a customer’s point of view, brands are valuable when they respond to 
their motivations, barriers and goals. The most successful companies today, 
such asUber <https://www.uber.com/>, Airbnb <https://www.airbnb.com/>, Spring 
<https://www.shopspring.com/> or Farfetch 
<http://www.farfetch.com/shopping/women/items.aspx>, are in the business of 
being valuable to their customers. Spoiled by the service and experience they 
were getting from these upstarts, consumers started to expect the same thing 
from all other brands. Superior brand service and experience has since become a 
given: it’s noticeable only when it’s missing.

Related: Marketers should be hunting for a perfect product, not influencers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/feb/18/marketers-perfect-product-influencers-brands>

Consumers today want brands to meet and exceed their expectations and to add 
value to their lives, in a manner that’s not unlike the Japanese principle of
motenashi 
<http://www.fastcodesign.com/3048651/innovation-by-design/what-japanese-etiquette-can-tell-us-about-good-ux-design>
: by being intuitive, effortless and flexible. To deliver on this expectation, 
companies need to understand how their customers move through the service and 
experience they provide, and to connect these steps into a customer journey. 
They need to move away from their single-minded focus on individual 
interactions between a customer and the brand and understand how these 
interactions form a relationship. Motenashi-based media design allocates and 
sequences investments across steps in this relationship that are most desirable 
from the customer’s point of view and critical in their decision-making process.

If 198 million <https://blog.pagefair.com/2015/ad-blocking-report/> active 
adblock users around the world are any indication, today’s advertising fails to 
play an important role in customers’ decision-making, other than to disturb it. 
“Email used to be amazing. Banners used to be amazing. Now they are almost 
irrelevant. That’s natural decay,”says Andrew Chen 
<http://andrewchen.co/the-state-of-growth-hacking-guest-post/>, who is in 
charge of growth at Uber. “You can’t focus on tactics, because eventually they 
become useless. To really reap the benefits, you have to be at the bleeding 
edge and do things that no one else is doing.”

To do this, brands need to stay close to their customers, understand their 
behaviour, detect the key touchpoints on their journey and deliver on an unmet 
need or against an unrecognised barrier that exists.

Hello Alfred <https://www.helloalfred.com/>, a home management system whose 
purpose is “come home happy”, adopts a broader approach than traditional media 
buying and planning offers. It combines the brand narrative, user experience 
design and business analysis. In this, Hello Alfred is not alone: disruptive 
businesses such asSpring <https://www.shopspring.com/> and AYR 
<https://www.ayr.com/>, and established platforms such as Pinterest all 
constantly seek to enhance their customers’ lives in a smart and targeted way.

Media design starts from the entire service and experience that a brand 
delivers, rather than from a single channel or device. Media mix is driven by 
the architecture of the customer journey through this service and experience, 
which links individual interactions in a way that creates new value for an end 
customer. This value-adding journey becomes central to the way customers 
experience a brand and its products. It becomes the key factor for brand’s 
growth.

Currently, campaign-centred media buys favour brand messages instead of 
creating and delivering value. They funnel customers toward a transaction and 
measure success through the volume of sales and awareness.

It is hard to change this media planning rhythm. Brands are big and change is 
expensive. But in the long run, the costliest thing imaginable may turn out to 
be them focusing on media, not customers.

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Paid for by” – find out morehere 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
