
Aid is arriving in Malawi, where communities were cut off by the country’s 
worst floods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/17/malawi-floods-kill-176-people> 
in 50 years. At least 174,000 people have been displaced, with houses 
destroyed, crops swept away and water sources contaminated. The Guardian’s 
Africa correspondent, David Smith, visited some of the camps for displaced 
people andspoke to survivors 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/30/malawi-floods-grim-legacy-death-destruction-devastation>
. Take a closer look at thedestruction, in pictures 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2015/jan/21/malawi-floods-cause-devastation-in-pictures>
.

This year marks the 15th anniversary of a landmark UN resolution to involve 
more women in peace processes. But women in the Democratic Republic of the 
Congo are still fighting for the right to participate in their country’s
peace-building process 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/22/congo-drc-women-peacekeeping>
. We met some of thefemale UN peacekeepers  
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/22/female-united-nations-peacekeepers-congo-drc>
in DRC, who are significantly outnumbered by men, andexplained the significance 
of the UN resolution 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/22/women-rights-war-peace-un-resolution-1325>
 and its impact.

Elsewhere on the site

 * Water privatisation: a worldwide failure? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/30/water-privatisation-worldwide-failure-lagos-world-bank>
 * Ethiopia’s women vow to turn tide of violence, rape and murder 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/27/ethiopia-women-violence-rape-murder>
 * Grief and anger in Congo follow violent protests against Joseph Kabila 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/26/democratic-republic-congo-protests-joseph-kabila>
 * Nepal’s “poor woman’s problem”: how obstetric fistula blights lives 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/26/nepal-obstetric-fistula-women>
 * Central African Republic: saving lives at the river’s edge – a story told 
in pictures 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/28/central-african-republic-saving-lives-river-edge>
On the blog

Jonathan Glennie shared his view on the importance of dignity in development 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/28/dignity-sustainable-development-goals>
. “The saddest thing in the world is not poverty per se; it is the loss of 
human dignity,” he wrote. As business leaders and policy-makers gathered at the 
World Economic Forum, Lawrence Haddad argued whysustainable development, not 
growth 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/30/growth-davos-world-development-forum-sustainability>
, should be top of the agenda. Plus, Mario Pezzini and Andreas Schleicher 
shared their view on Latin America’s efforts to reduce poverty and inequality, 
and why skills and training should be the focus.

Multimedia

Video: Suffering in silence: obstetric fistula in Nepal, Pakistan and 
Afghanistan 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2015/jan/26/obstetric-fistula-nepal-pakistan-afghanistan>

Gallery: Life, laughter and loss in a Nepal leprosy colony – in pictures 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2015/jan/25/life-laughter-loss-nepal-leprosy-colony-in-pictures>


Gallery: Nuba refugees in South Sudan strive for independence – in pictures 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2015/jan/29/south-sudan-nuba-refugees-strive-for-independence-in-pictures>

Take part

Médecins sans Frontières is calling for the cost of the life-saving 
pneumococcal vaccine to be slashed, as it has become prohibitively expensive 
for poorer countries. We’d like to know how much the vaccine costs where you 
live:help us crowdsource prices 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/20/help-us-crowdsource-vaccine-prices-around-the-world>
.

Do you treasure something that could be at risk due to climate change? 
Environmental campaigners are calling for people todeclare their love for the 
planet 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/29/climate-change-guardianwitness-valentines-day>
 on 14 February, Valentine’s Day, and we want to know what you think could be 
affected in your community.Share your photos and stories via Guardian Witness 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/54c8e324e4b087a04fca56fc>.

What you said: top reader comment

On the opinion piece – Jobs in Latin America: where there’s a skill there’s a 
way 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/30/latin-america-jobs-employment-education>
hilmillerwrote:

Good article, however, if there are weak government institutions with little 
supervision or enforcement, all the education in the world will not change the 
social and economic situation in Latin American countries. The educational 
system, which is a government institution, and overall policy strengthening and 
enforcement need to be tackled in concert – and hypothetically can be now that 
the governments have stabilised to a certain degree. The problem is, just as in 
Europe and the United States, resistance to change, fear and workers not able 
or willing to take responsibility or risks in solving the problems.

Highlight from the blogosphere

International Institute for Environment and Development: Facing up to the 
awkward realities of the post-2015 agenda 
<http://www.iied.org/facing-awkward-realities-post-2015-agenda>

And finally …

Poverty matters will return in two weeks with another roundup of the latest 
news and comment. In the meantime, keep up to date on theGlobal development 
website <http://www.theguardian.com/global-development>. Follow @gdndevelopment 
<https://twitter.com/gdndevelopment> and the team – @swajones 
<https://twitter.com/swajones>, @LizFordGuardian 
<https://twitter.com/lizfordguardian>, @MarkC_Anderson 
<https://twitter.com/MarkC_Anderson> and @CarlaOkai 
<https://twitter.com/CarlaOkai> – on Twitter, and join Guardian Global 
development on Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardianglobaldevelopment>.
