
The recent discovery of the body of Geraldine Largay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/26/hiker-who-went-missing-on-appalachian-trail-survived-26-days-before-dying>
, a 66-year-old backpacker who got lost on the Appalachian Trail in Maine and 
survived 26 days before succumbing to exposure and starvation, marks the 
beginning of another summer season of hikers losing their way and sometimes 
paying for it with their lives.


 You might think that with the remarkable popularity of TV survival shows, 
everyone would already know all they need to know to live through getting lost. 
Alas, the eternal quest for higher ratings means these shows foolishly focus on 
the bizarre, the ridiculous and the idiotic. Why would you spend days 
constructing a laughable structure that can’t even keep out the rain? What 
happened to the regular old raincoat?

Related: Hiker who went missing on Appalachian trail survived 26 days before 
dying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/26/hiker-who-went-missing-on-appalachian-trail-survived-26-days-before-dying>

I once spent a week with a survivalist for a story. He showed me how to build 
a bow-and-drill – an ancient Native American device – to light a fire. Really? 
What’s wrong with a lighter? On another assignment, a survivalist taught me 
what plants were edible and how to skin a rabbit. C’mon. What hiker doesn’t 
have a handful of energy bars in their backpack?

 People who get lost and die in the wilderness often have all they need in 
their backpack to survive. These items are commonly called the “10 essentials”: 
pocketknife, matches/lighter, map and compass, headlamp, sunglasses/sunscreen, 
raincoat, extra clothes, food, water (and purification), first aid kit (with 
whistle).

To this list, you can also add new tech essentials: a GPS tracking device, a 
GPS app for your cellphone, apersonal locator beacon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/20/adventure-spot-gps-safety-hiking>
 or a satellite phone. Most of these require considerable field time practice
beforetaking them into the woods.

Two years ago, I hiked up the highest mountain in Utah, Kings Peak 
<http://www.summitpost.org/kings-peak/150376>, and was astonished to find a 
pack of Boy Scouts scrambling to the summit. They were in basketball shorts, 
T-shirts and sneakers. The scout master was an overwhelmed Mormon dad who 
offered that every fourth or fifth kid had a pack with water and food. So much 
for the scout’s motto: be prepared.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jmm6%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jmm6%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9480b77b0712db6b27631d120c202f6abdc6e9f6%2F0_216_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=So%20you're%20lost%20in%20the%20wilderness%20%E2%80%93%20these%20tips%20could%20save%20your%20life&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jmm6%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=So+you%27re+lost+in+the+wilderness+%E2%80%93+these+tips+could+save+your+life&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jmm6%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9480b77b0712db6b27631d120c202f6abdc6e9f6%2F0_216_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 ‘Take pictures, lots of them.’ Here, the Waiohine Pinnacles in the Tararua 
Mountains and Forest Park, New Zealand. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the 
Guardian 
 Not getting lost starts long before getting to the trailhead. You should not 
only have the 10 essentials with you, but know how to use them.

Being able to “read” contours on a map – what is a mountain, what is a valley; 
contour lines point upstream crossing creeks and point downhill crossing ridges 
– and recognize these features in the landscape around you is perhaps the most 
valuable skill, and not surprisingly, the biggest deficit among novice hikers 
(I once did an informal survey of hikers in Rocky Mountain national park and 
found that less than 50% actually knew how to use a map and compass).

 Before heading out, leave a detailed description of where you’re going and 
when you expect to be back with a close friend or relative. This will require 
you to take a close look at your map and actually have a plan.

Identify landmarks, potential hazards (stream crossings, snowfields) and 
distances. Leaving a photocopy of the map with your actual route drawn on it 
could be invaluable if something untoward happens.

 Go ahead and bring your cellphone, fully charged, with emergency contacts 
already on it – but don’t for a minute think your phone will save you if you 
screw up. Check the point weather forecast for exactly where you’re going. If 
it’s expected to be raining, snowing or blowing, think twice. Finally, if you 
can find someone fit and fun, go with a partner.

 Get an alpine start. All things being equal, you should be hiking at 
daybreak. Everything is easier and safer with more time and more sunlight. 
Besides, in the mountains, afternoon thunderheads are common and dangerous – 
think lightning and hypothermia. Before leaving the trailhead, hide a spare set 
of keys somewhere on the vehicle and tell your partner where they are.

 On the trail, you should be regularly matching landmarks on the map – peaks, 
river crossings, signs – with their three-dimensional counterparts in the real 
world. And keep track of time. Mark on your map how long it takes to climb up 
to a saddle or through a ravine. Note conditions and incline. On one 
mini-expedition to New Zealand, I climbed six peaks in seven days. On every 
peak I documented how long it took to go how far, vertical gain, aspect, snow 
conditions, wind and precipitation. These details gave me enough information to 
solo the final peak, Mt Cook, in four hours.

 Take pictures, lots of them. You’ll be pleased you did when you get back 
home, and, if you do get lost, they provide essential information for finding 
your way back.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jmm6%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jmm6%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26e09475b0e152ace428ca944e88eb67c2e3b66d%2F0_0_3404_2257%2F3404.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=So%20you're%20lost%20in%20the%20wilderness%20%E2%80%93%20these%20tips%20could%20save%20your%20life&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jmm6%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=So+you%27re+lost+in+the+wilderness+%E2%80%93+these+tips+could+save+your+life&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jmm6%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26e09475b0e152ace428ca944e88eb67c2e3b66d%2F0_0_3404_2257%2F3404.jpg>
 Being able to ‘read’ contours on a map and recognize these features in the 
landscape around you is perhaps the most valuable skill. Photograph: Alamy 
 Peer behind you regularly to know what the landscape looks like going the 
other way. If you’re on a faint trail, you might leave tiny reminders of your 
passing, like a small limb in an unlikely place.

 If you think you’ve done everything right and you still end up lost, well, 
welcome to the club. If you hike a lot, you’ll occasionally get turned around. 
I’ve been lost in Tibet and in the Sahel outside Timbuktu, in the Himalayas of 
Bhutan, and in the mountains not 30 miles from my home.

 Every putative expert, graphic survival book and lame TV program will tell 
you that you should not panic. Yeah, right. Unless you get lost and find your 
way out frequently, being lost will not feel comfortable. You might well begin 
to panic. The trick is to let your panic pass.

 There is a useful acronym for what to do when you’re lost: STOP. 

 S is to simply stop. Frantically moving faster will only get you more lost. 
Sit, and breathe from your belly (short quick breaths only increase the 
symptoms of anxiety – lightheadedness, trembling, confusion). Drink and eat. 
With any luck, your amygdala (the almond-size flight-or-fight controller in 
your head) will calm down and your cerebral cortex (responsible for rational 
thinking) will take over again.

 T stands for think. Ask yourself some basic questions. Which direction were 
you going? What was the last landmark you recognized? How long ago was that? 
How far have you come since? Hiking on a trail with a pack, most people travel 
only about two miles per hour. Where was the last time you knew where you were?

 O is for observe. Look around you: can you see any landmarks? Can you 
recognize a craggy mountain top or arcing valley? Try to find what you see 
around you on the map. Get out your camera, go back through the pictures and do 
the same thing. Think about time. How long have you been hiking? How do you 
feel? How long before sunset? What is the weather doing? What is the weather 
predicted to do? Is there natural shelter nearby? Is there dry fuel for a fire?

 P means plan. Don’t move until you have a plan. (If and when you do move, do 
so methodically and observantly.) If you whistle, might someone hear you? Do 
you have enough daylight to try to retrace your route? Should you consider 
building a fire because it is almost dark?

And finally – can you make a call? Can you text? If you do get through, can 
you tell anyone where you are?

 Geraldine Largay sent multiple text messages, none of which went through. 
Having a cellphone doesn’t, and shouldn’t, mean you’ll be saved. You should 
first try to save yourself. One of the oft-stated reasons for going into the 
wilderness is to have the opportunity to be more self-reliant. Getting lost is 
one of those opportunities.

 Except in canyon country, walking downhill, especially in forests and 
mountains, will often get you out. It won’t be easy, and it will involve 
considerable bushwhacking, but eventually you’ll hit a trail or old logging 
road. This is particularly true in the eastern US, where it is essentially 
impossible to ever be more than 10 miles from a road. (The most remote place in 
the lower 48 states, near the south-east corner of Yellowstone national park, 
is still only 23 miles from a road. When I was there, we saw a dozen wolves, 
two grizzlies, and no humans.) Even if you’re only moving at a crawl, keep 
going downhill and after, say, 10-20 hours, you’ll reach some form of 
civilization.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jmm6%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jmm6%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F197cee1610ba14609f9245d57471c9b27c9cd50c%2F0_0_5133_3081%2F5133.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=So%20you're%20lost%20in%20the%20wilderness%20%E2%80%93%20these%20tips%20could%20save%20your%20life&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jmm6%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=So+you%27re+lost+in+the+wilderness+%E2%80%93+these+tips+could+save+your+life&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jmm6%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F197cee1610ba14609f9245d57471c9b27c9cd50c%2F0_0_5133_3081%2F5133.jpg>
 Hiking in New Mexico: access to water will be paramount. Photograph: Prisma 
Bildagentur AG/Alamy 
 So let’s say your cellphone has no coverage and you don’t know how to use a 
map and compass and you didn’t take any pictures and you’re a little panicky – 
your average lost person. What to do? Or in the immortal lyrics of the Clash, 
“should I stay or should I go?” Depends.

 If you still have lots of daylight, it is often worth trying to retrace your 
path. Try to locate your footprints, or rocks that moved when you stepped on 
them – anything that’s a sign of your passing. Leave obvious landmarks (little 
stone cairns, piles of branches) all along your return path. If you do manage 
to get back to the trail and know where you are, hightail it out and back to 
your car. Even if it means moving in the dark – wear your headlamp. The last 
thing you want is a search and rescue mission to begin – that always puts other 
lives at risk.

If you don’t hit a trail, and find yourself even more lost and confused, just 
start heading downhill.

 If it’s nearing night, stay. First, get warm. Put on your extra layers. If 
you’re wearing a cotton T-shirt, you’ll be warmer taking it off and having a 
synthetic fleece against your skin. Try to find a natural shelter that might 
afford some protection from wind and rain. Collect fuel and start a small fire, 
enough to keep you warm but unlikely to get out of hand. Eat your granola bar. 
If you don’t have any food left, don’t worry about it: the human body can go 
weeks without food. Food is the least of your concerns. Water, on the other 
hand, is critical: depending on conditions, humans can live only three to six 
days without water. But don’t go searching for water in the dark. Sit there, 
stay warm, and suffer through the night.

One very difficult condition is cold rain. A fire won’t be possible and 
hypothermia is a life-threatening possibility. If this is the case, zip up your 
raincoat, attempt to get inside a cave or a makeshift shelter, and jog steadily 
in place.

 In the morning, reassess. If you think you might be able to retrace your 
steps back to a known location, try it, leaving breadcrumbs along the way. If 
this is not possible, whistle your ass off, hang all your bright clothes on 
tree limbs, build an SOS of rocks or branches in a clearing, use a mirror to 
bounce the sunlight in multiple directions, move to the top of a hill to get 
cellphone service.

If you do all these things, chances aren’t bad that you’ll be found. But after 
several days of waiting, don’t let your energy get so low that you can’t make a 
real effort to get out on your own.

 Thousands of hikers get lost every year and manage to find their way out 
(usually with a great story about narrowly escaping disaster). A few 
navigational skills and the right equipment are useful, but common sense and 
equanimity are paramount. The truth is, getting lost doesn’t kill anybody. You 
don’t die from not knowing where you are – you die from bad decisions.
