
Children as young as eight are working 15-hour days making bricks used in 
international development projects in Nepal, aGuardian investigation has found 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/feb/12/aid-money-development-projects-nepal-child-labour>
. The “blood bricks” have been used in construction projects funded by 
international donors including the UN, UK and the Asian Development Bank. See 
what life is like for the children trapped in bonded labourin our video 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2015/feb/12/blood-bricks-the-children-broken-by-nepals-kilns-video>
 and see what Nepal is doing toreform its brick industry 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/feb/12/how-nepal-is-trying-to-solve-its-blood-brick-problem>
.



Elsewhere on the site

 * What will it take to stop Isis using rape as a weapon of war? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/feb/17/disarm-isis-rape-weapon-war>
 * Money from Malawi ‘Cashgate’ scandal allegedly funded electoral campaigns 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/feb/13/malawi-cashgate-scandal-money-funded-electoral-campaigns>
 * Ebola spending: will lack of a positive legacy turn dollars to dolour? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/feb/13/ebola-spending-positive-healthcare-legacy-west-africa>
 * Julia Gillard: the world must target quality education for all children 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/feb/13/julia-gillard-quality-education-for-all-children-sustainable-development-goals>
 * Teenage girls in Burma find their voices to defend their rights 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/feb/11/teenage-girls-burma-girl-determined>
 * Yaoundé’s last waiting room: caring for the terminally ill in Cameroon 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/feb/09/cameroon-palliative-care-yaounde-last-waiting-room>
On the blog

Jonathan Glennie <http://www.theguardian.com/profile/jonathan-glennie> argued 
it’snot just Greece and Spain 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/feb/04/greece-spain-debt-restructuring>
 that need their debt restructured; poorer countries have been experiencing 
crippling debt problems for decades. To mark international day of zero 
tolerance for female genital mutilation, Miriam Jerotich explained how her
mother’s refusal to undergo FGM 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/feb/06/female-genital-mutilation-kenya-international-zero-day-of-tolerance-fgm>
 had given her licence to dream. Meanwhile,Alex Evans 
<http://www.theguardian.com/profile/alexevans> asked who was going to step up 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/feb/17/global-poverty-targets-sustainable-development-goals-financing>
 to finance global poverty targets at July’s financing for development summit 
in Ethiopia.

Multimedia

Video: Photoclub Mogadishu: children in Somalia offer a snapshot of lives 
overshadowed by war 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2015/feb/05/photoclub-mogadishu-somalia-children-war-unicef>

Podcast: How middle-income countries became fat 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/the-shape-we-are-in-blog/audio/2015/feb/03/obesity-how-middle-income-countries-became-fat-podcast>

Gallery: GuardianWitness: Climate change on Valentine’s Day – in pictures 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/guardianwitness-blog/gallery/2015/feb/11/guardianwitness-climate-change-valentines-day-in-pictures>

Take part

As the deadline for the millennium development goals draws near, much has been 
discussed about the goals that should replace them. We want to know what 
students think about the proposed 17sustainable development goals 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive>
. Do you think the number is about right, or too many? Or do you think we 
should do away with goals and targets all together?Submit a response 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/feb/16/students-speak-sustainable-development-goals>
 of 250 words or fewer, and we’ll publish a selection of the best ones as part 
of ourStudents Speak 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/series/students-speak> series. 
Submissions close at 6pm GMT on 16 March.

What you said: top reader comment

On the piece – My mother’s refusal to undergo FGM has given me licence to dream
 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/feb/06/female-genital-mutilation-kenya-international-zero-day-of-tolerance-fgm>
Ladi Ladebowrote:

As a researcher and producer of social sensitisation advocacy programmes in 
west Africa, I have come to accept that one vital strategy to eradicate female 
circumcision in the short and long run is mass education. It is instructive to 
notice how moving pictures do lead to behavioural changes among human beings. 
Opinions can be conveniently changed in viewers of dramatised documented film 
images especially among the very young adolescents, male and female, in any 
culture, and globally. The secret is that viewers are exposed to such 
sensitisation film programmes and are able to start conversations and debates 
which help individuals form opinions on taboo issues which young people are 
forbidden to discuss with their parents or guardians.

Highlight from the blogosphere

Triple Crisis: Is all growth good? The case of China 
<http://triplecrisis.com/is-all-growth-good-the-case-of-china/> 

And finally …

Poverty matters will return in two weeks with another roundup of the latest 
news and comment. In the meantime, keep up to date on theGlobal development 
website <http://www.theguardian.com/global-development>. Follow @gdndevelopment 
<https://twitter.com/gdndevelopment> and the team – @swajones 
<https://twitter.com/swajones>, @LizFordGuardian 
<https://twitter.com/lizfordguardian>, @MarkC_Anderson 
<https://twitter.com/MarkC_Anderson> and @CarlaOkai 
<https://twitter.com/CarlaOkai> – on Twitter, and join Guardian Global 
development on Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardianglobaldevelopment>.
