
What do Sadiq Khan and Barbie have in common? They’re both waging war on 
unrealistic body image pressures. The London mayor recently announced thathe 
will ban adverts on London transport that “demean people, particularly women, 
and make them ashamed of their bodies” 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/13/sadiq-khan-moves-to-ban-body-shaming-ads-from-london-transport>
. The move comes a year after the infamous “beach-body ready” campaign, which, 
in trying to sell protein powder, sparked a nationwide discussion about the 
stress and anxiety advertising can cause.

Meanwhile, across the Atlantic, one of the most famous bodies in the world has 
undergone a transformation, as Barbie’s 36in bust and 18in waist (which, 
according to scientists, would leave her with too little body fat to 
menstruate) has evolved into a variety ofbody shapes and skin colours 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/28/barbie-finally-becomes-a-real-girl-with-more-realistic-figure-and-skin-colours>
. Both are steps in the right direction, but there’s no denying that your 
students will still have to navigate a world full of unhealthy images and 
pressure. So how can you help them manage it?

Primary

Start by getting your pupils to think about different representations of 
bodies on screen with thisresource pack 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/23133/Into-Film-Body-Image-on-Film-Primary>
 fromIntoFilm <https://www.intofilm.org/>. It includes background information 
and discussion questions to tackle after watching films such asThe Girl With 
the World in her Hair <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EC-v30Ds92E>, The 
Elephant Man <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ye4YTZOq2fk>, and Willy Wonka and 
the Chocolate Factory <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2cBja3AbahY>. 

Related: How to teach … healthy eating 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/teacher-blog/2014/apr/07/how-to-teach-healthy-eating-lesson-resources>

In her brilliant letter to her teenage daughter 
<http://brouhahadreamer.tumblr.com/post/55349059350/caitlin-morans-posthumous-advice-for-her-daughter>
, Caitlin Moran advises: “Stay at peace with your body. While it’s healthy, 
never think of it as a problem or a failure. Pat your legs occasionally and 
thank them for being able to run. Put your hands on your belly and enjoy how 
soft and warm you are – marvel over the world turning over within.”

Ignite your pupils’ fascination with the inner workings of their bodies with 
thisdetailed resource 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/22519/The-Human-Body-Pack> 
fromTeaching Packs <http://www.teachingpacks.co.uk/>. It explains several 
incredible processes including how blood travels, what bones are made of and 
how skin responds to touch and pain.


You can also get your pupils to think about the power of their bodies with this
investigation 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/23137/Do-long-legs-equal-long-jumps--investigation>
 fromTeachit Primary <http://www.teachitprimary.co.uk/>. It works on the 
hypothesis “people with long legs jump the furthest” – and introduces the ideas 
of prediction, fair testing and analysing results.Twinkl 
<http://www.twinkl.co.uk/> also has this dice race activity 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/23134/Face-race-activity> 
to get pupils thinking about different kinds of faces. Working in pairs, they 
have to roll dice and draw the feature linked to each number – the first to get 
a complete face wins the game.

Your students probably know their bodies will undergo changes as they grow up, 
but the idea can be unsettling. Get them up to speed with what to expect using 
thisclear worksheet 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/23136/How-the-body-changes-in-puberty>
. It shows the changes that puberty brings to both male and female bodies, with 
a labelling activity to demonstrate their understanding.


Finally, you can teach your pupils the importance of self-belief with this 
extract 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/22808/A-guide-to-being-more-confident-for-primary-pupils--Being-me-and-loving-it>
 from the confidence-building bookBeing Me and Loving It 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/414719/>. The tale 
follows Noah, who is initially scared to show off his knowledge about space and 
try new things because he is worried about what other will think of him. The 
related discussion asks pupils to think about their attitudes towards 
themselves and how they can stay positive.


Secondary

Related: 'My tummy is bigger than yours': how private schools are battling 
body issues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/sep/08/my-tummy-bigger-how-private-schools-battling-body-issues>

Should we be worried about cosmetic surgery? Is the fashion industry to blame 
for anorexia among young people? Is Barbie’s new body a win for feminism? These 
are some of the questions explored in thiscollection of articles 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/23131/The-Day-teaching-about-body-image-using-today-news>
 fromThe Day <http://theday.co.uk/>. Each topic is examined through a 
student-friendly news story and a selection of linked activities, plus a 
glossary of useful vocabulary.

Meanwhile, IntoFilm also offers a look at body image for older students 
through aseries of thought-provoking cinematic outings 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/23132/Into-Film-Body-Image-on-Film-Secondary>
, including:Milo <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MByluNK_GFo> (about a boy 
with a rare skin disease);Eating Lunch <https://vimeo.com/74038035> (about 
living with an eating disorder); andGirl Model 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mHWDLkkOk4Y> (a documentary about the 
exploitative machinations of the modelling industry).


It can also be helpful to remind your students that the notion of what 
constitutes a beautiful body has changed dramatically throughout history. This
interesting video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xrp0zJZu0a4> looks at how 
the ideal female body shape has changed over time, from the Greek fashion for 
rounded curves to the 1990s look of “heroin chic”. It could be useful for 
sparking discussion and debate among your classes.


And it’s also important that students understand that the images of beauty 
they are confronted with each day have been digitally manipulated to achieve a 
certain look. Thisself-esteem workshop 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/22362/Sport-Relief-2016-Dove-Self---Esteem-Workshop-----Single-Session>
 (and associatedworksheets 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/22363/Sport-Relief-2016-Dove-Self---Esteem-Workshop-----Student-Activity-Sheets>
) fromSport Relief <http://www.sportrelief.com/> offers inside information on 
image manipulation. Follow-up tasks ask students to prepare a role play 
discussing why they can’t look like the people in the pictures and exploring 
ways to battle body anxiety.


Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
