
I’m a 28-year-old cat-lover from Aberdeen. I work for the independent 
regulator of social work and care in Scotland. My main task is getting reports 
on care services ready and then published. I haven’t always worked in an 
office, working in retail for six years during and after studying for a degree 
in media studies. But after my dad passed away unexpectedly in December 2013 I 
decided it was time to turn things around; in the next year I moved into a 
flat, quit my retail job, got my current job, and decided to go back to 
university to get my master’s. As well as working full-time, I am carrying out 
an MSc in sociology part-time. I have used a number of Guardian articles as 
references in essays and for research and have often saved articles that I 
think may be useful for future coursework. I am currently in the planning 
stages of my dissertation. When I’m not at work or studying I like reading, 
knitting, taking pictures of my cat, music and zumba. I also have a newfound 
interests in yoga and cooking and have been teaching myself French and Japanese.

I started reading the Guardian when I was an undergraduate student and now 
read it every day online. I have an interest in following US campus sexual 
assault stories and trials, and the Guardian is good at reporting on this. I 
choked up reading the victim impactstatement from the Stanford sexual assault 
case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/06/stanford-sexual-assault-case-victim-impact-statement-in-full>
 this week. I have also found the recent coverage of veganism great after the 
published statistics of therise of veganism 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/27/the-rise-of-vegan-teenagers-more-people-are-into-it-because-of-instagram>
 in the UK. The Guardian is much more culturally aware than other publications.

I use the Guardian mobile app, which gives you updates on breaking news 
(morbidly, I am usually the first person at work to know when someone in the 
public eye has passed away), allows you to follow contributors and alerts you 
when they publish an article. The writers I follow includeJessica Valenti 
<http://www.theguardian.com/profile/jessicavalenti>, Laura Bates 
<http://www.theguardian.com/profile/laura-bates> and Laurie Penny 
<http://www.theguardian.com/profile/laurie-penny>.

• If you would like to be interviewed in this space, send a brief note to 
good.to.meet.you@theguardian.com <>
