
Government plans to change the way unions can donate money to political 
parties face a challenge in theHouse of Lords 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/lords>, after it was revealed that the 
proposals could reduce the Labour party’s income by £6m.

Labour <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> peers have tabled an 
amendment to the trade union bill that would establish a Lords select committee 
to examine the proposals to change party funding. The amendment is expected to 
receive backing from the Liberal Democrats.

The government’s bill changes the way trade unionists pay into their union’s 
political fund, which is how unions donate to Labour. The changes mean each 
union member would have to agree in writing every five years to opt in to 
paying the political levy, as opposed to opting out under the current system.

The bill also includes plans to introduce a threshold of a 50% turnout for 
industrial action ballots and – for “important public-sector services 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jan/10/tories-plan-raise-threshold-public-sector-industrial-action-tuc-strike-conservatives-job-cuts>
” – a requirement of at least 40% of all eligible voters to be in favour of 
action.

The proposed legislation would require unions to inform police and employers 
of strike plans 14 days in advance – including any proposed use of placards or 
loudspeakers, blogs or social media – and it would also lift the ban on using 
agency workers to replace permanent staff during strikes.

Related: Labour expecting £6m loss in funding through trade union bill 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/10/labour-expecting-6m-loss-in-funding-through-trade-union-bill>

A confidential Labour document released to the Guardian last week revealed 
that the party facesan expected £6m drop 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/10/labour-expecting-6m-loss-in-funding-through-trade-union-bill>
 in its annual income as a result of the changes to the political levy being 
introduced in the bill, making it impossible for it to maintain its current 
structure, staffing or offices.

The amendment would establish a committee to consider the impact of clauses in 
the bill to change the way unions can donate to political parties. It would 
also look at “the necessity of urgent new legislation to balance those 
provisions” with recommendations made in a reportfrom the committee on 
standards in public life 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/228646/8208.pdf>
on the “big donor culture” in politics.

The committee would run parallel to the bill being debated in the Lords and 
would feed back into later stages, reporting by 29 February. It would be made 
up of four Conservative peers, four Labour peers, two Lib Dem peers and two 
cross-bench peers.

It is the first time a Conservative government has not also dominated the 
second chamber, as the House of Lords Act 1999 removed the majority of 
hereditary peers, many of whom were Tory supporters. As a result, the 
government has suffered a string of defeats in the second chamber since the 
start of the new parliament.

A Labour source in the Lords said the benefit of tabling such an amendment was 
that the party could not be accused of going against theSalisbury convention 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Salisbury_Convention> and trying to block the 
bill’s passage. That convention dictates that the Lords should not vote down a 
governing party’s manifesto promises, although party funding changes were not 
explicit in the Conservative manifesto.

The same approach was used by the Lords in 2003 when it considered the bill 
that established an independent supreme court and separated the role of the 
lord chancellor and the lord speaker. On that occasion the House of Lords 
accepted that a select committee be established to examine the proposals 
contained in the legislation.

The amendment, to be debated next Wednesday, came as peers discussed a report 
by Lord Strathclyde into the power held by the Lords in the wake ofthe second 
chamber blocking government plans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/oct/25/george-osborne-is-in-listening-mode-over-softening-tax-credit-cuts>
 to cut £4bn from working tax credits.

Strathclyde told peers that the move from a hereditary House of Lords to one 
appointed on merit had come with “a loss of collective memory and a lesser 
understanding of the implications of what happens when we use our powers too 
aggressively”.

Lady Smith, the shadow leader of the Lords, said it was hard not to see the 
Strathclyde review as “an authoritarian executive waging war on the 
institutions that hold it to account”.

“This government is seeking to stifle debate, shut down opposition and block 
proper scrutiny. It is a government that fears opposition and loathes 
challenge,” she said.
