
According to the Essence of Enterprise report 
<http://file:///Volumes/Downloads/Internet%20Downloads/hsbc-essence-of-enterprise-2016-report.pdf>
 (pdf) released last month by HSBC Private Bank, half of all UK entrepreneurs 
feel they have a responsibility to support those less fortunate. Many 
self-starters go much further than regularly donating to a charity – they 
commit substantial amounts of time, energy and their companies’ expertise to 
make their communities a better place.

Eight years ago, Ruth Hampson left the fair trade company Cafedirect where she 
had worked as PA to the managing director, to set upBean and Bud 
<http://www.beanandbud.co.uk/>, an independent coffee shop and tea house in the 
Yorkshire town of Harrogate. Her business is not a social enterprise, and 
Hampson isn’t committed to only using Fairtrade products. Instead, her driving 
focus has been to source the very best quality, single origin coffee beans she 
can find and to educate customers about the challenges facing coffee farmers. 
She invests considerable time in seeking out green bean importers and roasters 
who are as committed as she is to trading with integrity.

So does she pay more for her coffee beans than similar businesses? “Oh gosh 
yes!” Hampson laughs. “Our suppliers actually go to the farms and build 
relationships with growers. It’s about fair pricing, but also about working 
with people [in developing countries] on improving the quality of their product 
and their operation.”

Looking beyond profit margins

Spending substantially more on your raw product – Hampson also sources all her 
food items and condiments from small suppliers local to the Harrogate area – 
inevitably means that profits take a hit. “We could have much better margins if 
we compromised on quality or sourcing, but I don’t want to do that,” says 
Hampson.

It’s not just altruism, she points out. The integrity of Bean and Bud’s 
sourcing is an important point of difference in a crowded market: it prompts 
consumer and industry interest in her cafe and has led to awards. But as an 
entrepreneur determined to grow her business, the tensions it creates keep her 
on her toes, “because there is a ceiling to what you can charge [for a cup of 
coffee] – pricing is really sensitive for us.”

I just wondered, what would this group of young women be capable of doing if 
they had a period of support
Rachel Clacher 
In Wrexham, the co-founder of telephone answering service Moneypenny 
<https://www.moneypenny.com/uk/>, Rachel Clacher, used her company’s emphasis 
on recruiting and developing people with superb communication skills as the 
springboard for an idea that has consumed her time and energy for the past 
three years: a training and mentoring project for young women aged 18-25 who 
have experienced mental health problems, grown up in care, or are trying to 
rebuild lives after contact with the youth justice system.

“I just wondered, what would this group of young women be capable of doing if 
they had a period of support,” Clacher says.

She was no longer running Moneypenny day-to-day when she came up with the 
project concept, but Clacher’s continuing involvement with her now successful 
enterprise meant she could ask the board if it would help. Luckily the answer 
was “yes”. Moneypenny now pays all the administration costs of the Moneypenny 
Foundation, which runs six-month traineeships for between eight and 10 young 
women a year. Its staff also volunteer as coaches for the trainees, who do work 
placements in the care sector, retail, customer services and hospitality.

Not all the young women make it, but of those who have, almost all are now in 
work or education. One is even about to embark on a degree. Clacher admits that 
the project has consumed her. “For the first year, I didn’t sleep. I was 
overwhelmed by the vulnerability of these young women, and by the lives that 
they had survived so far.”

Passing on skills
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tngc%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tngc%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e6a23fb3a269e50dbc5a55d34f4a3d0f58c2d8a%2F0_23_2812_1687%2F2812.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20entrepreneurs%20are%20embracing%20social%20responsibility&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tngc%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+entrepreneurs+are+embracing+social+responsibility&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tngc%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e6a23fb3a269e50dbc5a55d34f4a3d0f58c2d8a%2F0_23_2812_1687%2F2812.jpg>
 Charity Leap Confronting Conflict supports vulnerable young people and has 
been supported by Emma Harvey’s company Seven Consultancy. Photograph: Slater 
King 
Emma Harvey, founder of the communications specialist Seven Consultancy 
<http://www.seven-consultancy.com/>, gives at least one day a month, plus some 
of her staff’s time and expertise, to the charityLeap Confronting Conflict 
<http://www.leapconfrontingconflict.org.uk/>, which supports vulnerable young 
people, many of whom have grown up in care, display violent behaviour, or are 
caught up in the criminal justice system. Having observed that large companies 
tend not to focus their social responsibility work on smaller charities, she 
decided to look for “those smaller organisations that are making a big impact 
but could have the potential to do even more with some extra support and 
resource”.

The pro-bono work Seven provides Leap with is worth an estimated £2,000 a 
month, but there is considerable payback. “It feels good to be part of a 
charity that I care about and for the skills that I’ve developed over the years 
to be used in a positive way,” Harvey says. She also believes that positive 
associations with the right charities and offering them free services, 
motivates her staff and “drives a sense of pride in the organisation”.

Entrepreneurs with a conscience sometimes spring from the unlikeliest of 
places: David Farr was a broker in the City of London who got fed up of the 
grinding Underground commute, and after developing a taste for biking his way 
into work, co-foundedNipNip  <https://www.facebook.com/nipnipUK/>with his 
brother. Their mechanics now mend and service bikes for the thousands of 
workers who brave the capital’s busy streets on two wheels every day.

It was a case of wanting to do something meaningful at the same time as 
wanting to make as much money as possible
David Farr 
Providing jobs

As a newbie cyclist, Farr explains, he met a homeless man named Glen who was a 
fellow bicycle enthusiast. Glen was also an ace bike mechanic and three years 
ago when Farr and his brother set up NipNip, he was one of their first 
employees.

“Glen inspired me to realise that we could tie in a commercial business with a 
social purpose,” says Farr. The next step was a meeting with the homelessness 
charitySt Mungo’s <http://www.mungos.org/> to see if there was the potential to 
help others in the same situation.

All of NipNip’s 300 corporate customers – many of them bluechip companies – 
have their employees’ bikes serviced by senior mechanics, some of whom are now 
accompanied by homeless clients of St Mungo’s who train on the job. They also 
get two days a week of intensive tuition at NipNip HQ. At the end of five 
weeks, trainees know how to strip down, service and rebuild a bike, and receive 
the model they have been practising on for free. Some are now employed by 
NipNip, and are supported to work their way up to becoming expert mechanics.

Farr says that running this side of the business takes “between 25% and a 
third of my time. My brother has told me off for spending too much time on it. 
We’ve now reached a good balance, but it has taken three years.”

Why take the trouble? 

“I get a lot out if personally,” says Farr, simply. “It was a case of wanting 
to do something meaningful at the same time as wanting to make as much money as 
possible.” The proof that the model is a success, he says, can be measured in 
NipNip’s growth. “We’ve gone from no clients to 300 clients in three years,” he 
says. “I think there’s a feel-good factor.”

For KIA, corporate social responsibility (CSR) has been on the business’s 
agenda for the last 30 years. On a global level, the company started theGreen 
Light Project <http://www.kiapressoffice.com/Release/38403> to supply vehicles 
and people to carry out building work in Africa. In the UK, staff volunteer 
their time to the Walton Charity to help disadvantaged people in the local 
area. There are also numerous other initiatives that their factories in Korea 
and Slovakia are involved with, and charities that the company raises money for.

“We see involvement in CSR projects as good for our people and good for the 
causes they and the company support,” says Elizabeth Williams, one of the CSR 
coordinators for the business. “Effective and positive CSR is about doing what 
is right – both for the organisations a company supports and for the company 
itself. It’s not just about writing a big cheque.”

Content on this page is paid for and produced to a brief agreed with Kia Fleet 
<http://www.kia.co.uk/kia-business-fleet-cars.aspx>, sponsor of the Guardian 
Small Business Network Accessing Expertise 
<http://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/accessing-expertise> hub.
