
Last year, Jeremy Hunt told a local government audience that families should 
take more responsibility for the care of their loved ones 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/health-and-families/health-news/jeremy-hunt-calls-for-national-debate-about-caring-for-the-elderly-10356475.html>
. It was a statement that offended many and the recent Carers UKState of Caring 
<https://www.carersuk.org/news-and-campaigns/state-of-caring-survey-2016> 
report makes plain why: the price paid, physically, psychologically and 
financially is huge.

There are many of course who don’t have a family – findings from the Beth 
Johnson Foundation and Ageing Without Children highlighted that as many asone 
in five people 
<https://www.bjf.org.uk/blog/2016/05/our-voices-report-is-published> aged 50 
and over have not had children. The question must then turn to formal care 
services. Will there be enough good quality care to support those without 
families in their old age? Will it meet their needs and lifestyles?

There is undoubtedly a growing fear in the care home sector that a major 
provider will collapse 
<http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/jan/09/care-home-provider-fail-southern-cross>
. Certainly the news has been bleak –Moody’s has downgraded its ratings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/05/four-seasons-health-care-likely-taken-over-creditors>
 on bonds issued by both Four Seasons, the UK’s largest care home provider, and 
Care UK. According to research by Opus Business Services forBBC Radio 4s You 
and Yours Programme <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-36200855>, one in four care 
homes – that’s around 5,600 – could go bust within three years.

Earlier this month, care home leaders lobbied the Department of Health about 
the continued squeeze on fees and warned that thenational living wage 
<http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/apr/12/national-living-wage-adult-social-care>
 would lead to many care businesses struggling with cashflow and facing 
bankruptcy.

Meanwhile, the Treasury thinks it’s fixed – or at least eased – social care 
funding 
<http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/nov/27/osborne-spending-review-social-care-council-tax>
, with the introduction of the adult social care precept. The trouble is that 
the precept yields its best returns in the areas where the care home market is 
more buoyant because of the higher rates of occupancy by self-funders. Those 
areas most dependent on the precept will raise the least and still be dependent 
on state funding.

Of course there must be questions about the opaque and complicated financing 
arrangements of some care home operators. Two years ago I worked with a group 
of industry experts to conduct a major review of thefuture of residential care 
<http://www.demos.co.uk/project/the-commission-on-residential-care/>. We raised 
concerns that the care home market was dividing in two, one for the self-payers 
and one for the rest. We warned of the dangers of this bifurcation for quality 
and stability.

The report recommended a wide range of actions. We argued that the question of 
what care you need should be separate from the choice of where you live, and so 
should the regulation.

Registered managers were highlighted as being worth their weight in gold. We 
called for more to be done to connect registered managers with one another to 
offer mutual support. Programmes like the City University basedMyHomeLife 
<http://myhomelife.org.uk/> is a good example of this.

The Heights in Buckinghamshire was named an outstanding care home after its 
unannounced Care Quality Commission inspection in January. Its registered 
manager, Blesson Thomas, had worked at the home for six years. He had qualified 
as a nurse in India but started at the care home as a cleaner, before rising 
through the ranks to become registered manager in April 2014.

The Heights has not always been rated outstanding. When Thomas took on the 
manager’s job, the home was found to be “non-compliant” with a number of the 
essential standards. According to Thomas, the root of this was very low staff 
morale.

Part of the plan for the sector has to be to unleash the potential in the care 
workforce

On taking on the role, he worked hard to win the confidence of the staff and 
residents by talking to them, learning from them and planning with them. He 
implemented a career progression plan for every member of staff, the 
opportunity to showcase talents to their peers, and the chance to become 
research assistants. Subsequently, staff retention and sickness absence have 
all improved, and the home does not use any agency staff.

I tell this story because it is a sign of hope. It demonstrates the difference 
a registered manager can make and what person-centred practice is all about – 
good relationships. Part of the plan for the sector has to be to unleash the 
potential in the care workforce. To nurture and support more registered 
managers like Blesson Thomas.

Related: Burstow's Key to Care report on homecare: the sector responds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2014/dec/02/paul-burstow-key-to-care-report-homecare-responses>

What we had in mind in our investigation into the future of residential care 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/dec/02/home-care-system-crisis-point-paul-burstow-report>
 was the implementation of a new strategy for the industry. We called on the 
government to provide leadership, rather than simply firefighting.

Since the report was published, many of the issues have not gone away and 
indeed the financial pressures have worsened. Still there is no sign that the 
government realises the need for a plan. In effect, we have an industry that 
urgently needs to restructure to make it fit for the 21st century.

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
