
Campaigners in favour of leaving the EU have claimed 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-eu-referendum-36382197> that not having 
to apply EU procurement rules would enable the UK to save £1.6bn a year in 
procurement costs.

But what are the facts? What impact would a vote to leave the EU have on the 
UK’s£200bn annual public procurement 
<http://researchbriefings.parliament.uk/ResearchBriefing/Summary/SN06029> spend?

In the event of Brexit, the UK would either have to retain the EU directive or 
introduce something similar

The EU procurement directive covers all public sector procurement in member 
states. It defines processes, procedures and standards and is intended to 
ensure that all EU businesses stand a fair chance of obtaining public sector 
contracts in any EU country. It has been introduced formally into UK law 
through parliamentary legislation and through the Scottish assembly, so a 
Brexit vote on 23 June would only change procurement law if the Westminster 
parliament or the Scottish assembly chose to do so.

All large businesses require a clear set of procurement procedures and 
processes. These help protect against fraud, satisfy corporate governance 
requirements, ensure suitable competition to deliver value for money and mean 
suppliers understand the rules of the game and can be confident that they will 
be treated fairly. The same applies to governments.

Public sector corruption deters private investment, misallocates resources and 
generates social grievances. Transparency International’scorruption league table
 <http://www.transparency.org/cpi2015> demonstrates that countries with the 
best reputations have robust procurement legislation. Most of the top 20, out 
of 167 nations, apply the EU procedures and others have equally robust 
procedures. At the bottom end of the scale are North Korea, Somalia and 
Afghanistan.

Good quality public procurement legislation is complex. Public sector 
organisations work with businesses that operate globally and procure products 
and services on a bigger and more complex scale than almost anything the 
private sector procures. Both the public and suppliers need to know that the 
UK’s £200bn spend is managed fairly.

Related: Inside Oakwood prison: the private jail struggling to prove bigger is 
better 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/23/inside-oakwood-prison-supersize-private-jail-g4s-profit>

Outsourcing prisons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/23/inside-oakwood-prison-supersize-private-jail-g4s-profit>
, for example, is complex and the cost of letting a poor contract can be 
immense. At the other end of the scale, there is no reason for procurement 
procedures not to be simple and timescales short, particularly for small 
businesses. But, asthe Commons communities and local government select 
committee has pointed out 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201314/cmselect/cmcomloc/712/71207.htm>
, the UK often operates its public procurement in an unnecessarily bureaucratic 
way, with a lack of consistency in the way regulations are implemented that 
means tendering costs are typically higher in the UK than in other EU member 
states.

In the event of Brexit, the UK would either have to retain the EU directive or 
introduce something similar. In practice, if the UK wished to continue to trade 
with the EU on preferential terms, like the European Free Trade Agreement 
nations, such as Norway or Switzerland, part of the price would be continuing 
to adhere to the EU procurement laws. Changing UK legislation would be complex 
and time consuming due to the number of public sector and industry bodies with 
which consultation would be required.

Moreover, the UK was very influential in the drafting of the latest 
procurement directive, so it largely meets UK requirements. Replacing it would 
be a low priority for any government. There are many ways that public 
procurement can save £1.6bn a year. Abandoning the EU procurement directive is 
not one of them.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
