
Former England and Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> star Dion Dublin was 
reportedly trained for his role as a BBC TV presenter with £50,000 from a fund 
that aimed to boost on-screen ethnic minority representation.

Dublin, who earned tens of thousands of pounds a week in a 20-year career at 
clubs including Manchester United and Aston Villa, is the biggest single 
beneficiary of the BBC’s Diversity Creative Talent Fund,the Sun reported on 
Wednesday 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/tvandshowbiz/1283646/ex-footie-ace-dion-dublin-received-50k-from-bbc-fund/>
.


The 47-year-old then joined the team at daytime show Homes Under the Hammer, 
where hemade his debut in April last year 
<http://www.thisismoney.co.uk/money/mortgageshome/article-3033527/From-pitch-auction-house-Dion-Dublin-makes-Homes-Hammer-debut-says-s-far-daunting-football.html>
.


Related: BBC says Sun's claim that 'Auntie is anti-white' is 'utterly 
ridiculous' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/03/bbc-sun-auntie-anti-white-holby-city>

Despite the BBC <http://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> training, Dublin he got 
off to an inauspicious start, with viewers and critics complaining about his 
abilities.


Early criticism on Twitter prompted Dublin to reply that he would “try and do 
better” in his new career.
— Dion Dublin (@DionDublinsDube) April 23, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/DionDublinsDube/status/591356034112954369> 
Thanks for your kind words, I will try and do better!! https://t.co/TS7qdI01VE 
<https://t.co/TS7qdI01VE>
 <https://twitter.com/DionDublinsDube/status/591356034112954369> 
The BBC’s fund, launched in 2014, provides £2.1m a year to help develop 
potential talent from ethnic minority groups that are under-represented on TV.


“We’re proud the fund has helped develop a significant number of presenters, 
writers and producers from ethnic minority backgrounds to make sure that the 
BBC fully represents the UK,” said a BBC spokesman.

“Money from the fund is used to support training and development of new talent 
– none has gone to Dion directly.”




The BBC was criticised recently for advertising two scriptwriting traineeships 
on Holby City 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/03/bbc-sun-auntie-anti-white-holby-city>
 for ethnic minority applicants only.


Following his retirement from football Dublin worked as an occasional pundit 
and commentator for Sky Sports and has also co-presented 606 on BBC Radio 5 
Live and football highlights show Match of the Day 2.

