
Promote mutual exchange

Mutual exchange – where social housing tenants can effectively “swap” homes – 
is sometimes the only reasonable option available to tenants wanting to move, 
including those affected by the bedroom tax. Inour recent housing mobility 
survey 
<http://www.cih.org/publication-free/display/vpathDCR/templatedata/cih/publication-free/data/Moving_on_findings_from_our_housing_mobility_survey>
, 88% of organisations said they are encouraging more mutual exchanges because 
of the bedroom tax. Effective strategies include allowing tenants in rent 
arrears to exchange, employing a dedicated officer to manage exchanges, 
offering financial incentives towards the cost of a move and organising home 
swap events.

Support all under-occupying tenants

 An overwhelming majority of our survey respondents (90%) told us they offer 
help to all tenants who want to downsize to a smaller home, not just those 
affected by the bedroom tax. Landlords are doing this is by giving priority to 
under-occupiers when they allocate homes and by offering financial help. And 
some are targeting support to specific groups of tenants, such as people who 
want to move from adapted properties which they no longer need, or older people 
who want to move into sheltered housing.

Use the Localism Act

 Only 30% of organisations said they have used the transferring tenant 
flexibilities of the Localism Act, which allow providers to set their own 
policies on transfer requests by tenants who are not deemed to be in housing 
need. We think more organisations could make use of these relatively new 
powers. Those that are using them are doing so in a number of ways, such as 
creating a new band in their allocation scheme for transfer tenants with a good 
tenancy record, allowing all existing tenants with no housing need to register 
on the allocation scheme, and awarding highest priority in the allocation 
scheme to tenants needing to transfer to be nearer work or training.

Help tenants to move to a different area

 Some allocation schemes allow applicants to move to partnering local 
authorities. This is particularly useful in places where employment markets 
span local authority boundaries as it means tenants can move easily between 
areas for work. We think there is a real opportunity for providers to look at 
partnerships which help tenants move across boundaries for economic reasons.

Support existing tenants to buy or rent

 Depending on the affordability and quality of private rented properties and 
the low cost home ownership opportunities available locally, moving to another 
type of tenure can be an attractive option. And for some landlords, helping 
tenants explore other housing options could help free up much-needed social 
housing. Very few organisations offer support to tenants who want to move other 
tenures. There is scope to do more: some landlords have tried employing a 
dedicated officer to help tenants move to shared ownership properties, offering 
a private rented sector bond scheme or offering financial support to those 
affected by the bedroom tax – even if they’re moving to the private rented 
sector.

Use websites to search for a transfer

There are an increasing number of regional and national websites that provide 
a service for social housing tenants who want to move to another area through a 
transfer – rather than a swap – but want to remain in social housing.Tenants 
<http://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/tenants> can register and search 
the database of properties not only in their local area but much further afield 
– if they need to move because they’ve got a new job in a different part of the 
country, for example. Landlords can support their tenants to use this kind of 
service, and can also subscribe themselves to register homes they have found 
difficult to let.

Charlotte Smith is a Chartered Institute of Housing (CIH) specialist adviser. 
To find out more about helping tenants move home, read the CIH’s briefinghere 
<http://www.cih.org/publication-free/display/vpathDCR/templatedata/cih/publication-free/data/How_to_promote_mobility_among_existing_tenants>





Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
Guardian Housing network newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to you 
every Friday. Follow us:@GuardianHousing <https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>

Looking for a job in housing? See all the latest vacancies  
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/housing/>on our Guardian Jobs site
