
If phrases such as “goal refactoring” and “urge propagation” mean nothing to 
you, perhaps it’s time to shell out £2,700 on afour-day workshop 
<http://rationality.org/schedule/> to learn the self-improvement philosophy 
sweeping Silicon Valley:applied rationality <http://rationality.org/>. The 
basic premise is that the human mind is a crappy computer – full of bugs, but 
capable of reprogramming. Take the way you resist checking your bank balance 
because you fear the stomach lurch of finding it lower than you thought. That’s 
a mistake, plain and simple: you’ll be happier (and richer) in the long term if 
you stay aware of how much cash you’ve got. Wouldn’t it be great if we could 
fix such glitches?

Writing recently in the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/17/magazine/the-happiness-code.html>, Jennifer 
Kahn made the workshop sound a bit cultish, but she learned some useful tricks. 
Such as urge propagation – which involves trying to make your life goals as 
emotionally compelling as, say, scarfing down a cheeseburger. Train yourself to 
imagine how glorious it’ll feel to take a hot shower after your workout, and 
you won’t need to “make yourself” exercise; you’ll have the urge to do so.

There’s plenty of evidence that this stuff works. So why do the rationalist 
self-improvers Kahn interviewed – and those I’ve met myself – leave me 
troubled? I think it’s because they’re the people you’d expect to be drawn to 
that outlook. They’re in their 20s or early 30s; they’re intellectually 
brilliant but socially anxious, more comfortable discussing artificial 
intelligence than making small talk. They read a lot of sci-fi, and dream of
conquering death through science 
<http://www.newsweek.com/2015/03/13/silicon-valley-trying-make-humans-immortal-and-finding-some-success-311402.html>
. In short, they’re people who live in their heads, and who see their personal 
problems as engineering challenges. I don’t mean to mock: I like these people. 
(In some ways, I am one.) But it’s hard not to feel they’re precisely the ones 
who should be looking elsewhere for whatever they’re seeking, not doubling down 
on a data-driven, science-first approach.

There might be a more general rule here: that whatever self-improvement 
schemes you’re most attracted to, they’re the ones you should avoid, because 
your attraction could be rooted in fear of the alternatives. Applied 
rationality holds out the promise that self-mastery is possible, and that you 
can control how life unfolds. It assumes we know, roughly, what happiness would 
look like, and just need help making it happen. But if you’re already strongly 
invested in that viewpoint, there’s probably more to be gained from exploring 
the ways in which lifeisn’t controllable, or the possibility that you don’t 
know what’s best, that reasonisn’t always the answer. Put down that rationalist 
handbook and take up yoga, or magic mushrooms, or gardening, or dance, or 
prayer.

Related: Can money buy happiness? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jan/07/can-money-buy-happiness> 

Yet consistency requires I ask the same thing of myself. Why am I so keen to 
believe reason and data can’t be the path to fulfilment? Am I looking for 
excuses not to change, by painting my failings as too mysterious and complex 
for mere rationality to address? I don’t think so. But then I would say that. 
Maybe soon I’ll manage to convince myself that applied rationality is 
completely worthless – which is when I’ll really need that workshop.

 * oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com <mailto:oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com> 