
Few people visit Peru for contemporary culture. Most tourists head straight to 
Cusco and Machu Picchu, with just a stop-off in the capital, Lima. But this 
summer, style magazineDazed and Confused 
<http://www.dazeddigital.com/artsandculture/article/24724/1/10-creative-cities-to-leave-the-country-for>
 described Lima as an “unexpected new art world star”. Next spring, British 
Airways will launch the only direct UK flight to the city, and its food scene, 
at the forefront of Peru’s cultural renaissance for a decade or so, continues 
to be praised globally.

I joined Nora Sugobono, food writer for newspaper El Comercio 
<http://elcomercio.pe/blog/sobremesa>, at Isolina 
<https://www.facebook.com/isolinaperu>, an earthy yet modern restaurant in the 
Barranco district that has been called the biggest opening of the year. It 
serves large bowls of classic Limeño home cooking and is part of a new wave of 
relaxed restaurants offering reasonably priced but impeccably prepared food – 
mains cost around £10. Another is nearbySibaris <http://sibarisperu.com/>, 
opened two years, which also operates a food truck.

And chef Virgilio Martinez, who played an integral role in raising the profile 
of Peruvian cuisine, has just opened a casual restaurant,Nos 
<http://www.nosrestaurante.com/#_=_>, up the road from his chart-topping 
Central restaurant in upscale Miraflores.

“Gastronomy changed the whole city,” said Nora. “And that opened up 
opportunities for fashion, art and more.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c47v%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c47v%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F4%2F1441382885177%2F139203e8-8103-424e-a882-780770f15477-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Newly%20buzzing%20Lima%20vies%20with%20Peru%E2%80%99s%20ancient%20sites%20for%20visitor%20attention&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c47v%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Newly+buzzing+Lima+vies+with+Peru%E2%80%99s+ancient+sites+for+visitor+attention&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c47v%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F4%2F1441382885177%2F139203e8-8103-424e-a882-780770f15477-1020x612.jpeg>
 Modern twist … Isolina, in the barranco district 
In recent years the number of galleries, design shops and indie food joints in 
the Barranco and Miraflores districts has swelled, with boutiqueHotel B 
<http://hotelb.pe/> capitalising on Barranco’s upwards swing and growing 
appetite for local artisan fare. I found locals cramming into gourmet gelateria
BLU <https://www.facebook.com/gelatodelbarrio>for an (excellent) ice cream and 
nearby brewpub theBarranco Beer Company <http://www.barrancobeer.com/>, opened 
two years ago.

Contemporary art fairs ArtLima <http://rdc554.wix.com/artlima> and PArC 
<http://www.parc.com.pe/> are helping develop a new audience for visual arts in 
the city, and Mario Testino’s museum,MATE <http://www.mate.pe/>, which opened 
in 2012, is another symbol of growing pride in Peru (and Lima), from one of its 
best-known creatives. One homegrown artist now enjoying widespread popularity 
is “Peruvian Warhol”Cherman Kino Ganoza <http://www.cherman.pe/>, whose pop art 
prints can be seen everywhere – including boutique B&BCasa Nuestra 
<http://www.casanuestraperu.com/>, in Barranco. His Miraflores gallery/shop, La 
Kasa Roja <https://www.facebook.com/Lakasaroja>, also has work by other local 
graphic artists. Also hanging on walls in Lima, and painted on them too, is 
work by Elliot Tupac, a sign writer whose classic Chicha style has gained him 
international acclaim.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c47v%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c47v%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F3%2F1441281299800%2Fc1c3ee8e-85d6-4cba-85aa-e9ec3aa38fb1-bestSizeAvailable.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Newly%20buzzing%20Lima%20vies%20with%20Peru%E2%80%99s%20ancient%20sites%20for%20visitor%20attention&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c47v%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Newly+buzzing+Lima+vies+with+Peru%E2%80%99s+ancient+sites+for+visitor+attention&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c47v%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F3%2F1441281299800%2Fc1c3ee8e-85d6-4cba-85aa-e9ec3aa38fb1-bestSizeAvailable.jpeg>
 Mario Testino’s MATE photography museum. Photograph: Alamy 
The city has a fledgling cycling scene, too: Lima Fixed Bikes 
<http://limafixedbikes.pe/>, who are poised to open a new shop in run 
Miraflores, run thrice weekly rides around the city that anyone is welcome to 
join (they’ll lend you a bike if you need one and, don’t worry, a fixie isn’t 
compulsory).

That evening I headed out to one of Lima’s leading underground club nights, 
CasaLoCasa <https://www.facebook.com/CasaLocasa>, held that night in an old 
salsa house, a red and white painted colonial building in Barranco. Street 
style isn’t huge in the Peruvian capital, but here fashionable young Limeans 
are queuing for entry; clothes lean towards black, while at least three people 
brighten the queue with neon dyed hair.

Smoking outside was the night’s co-founder Herles Falconi (with green hair and 
green t-shirt under unbuttoned purple shirt) and his girlfriend Elisa, who runs 
arts space La Centralita. When it comes to nightlife, “in the past two years 
Lima has burst culturally,” he told me, explaining how more and more events are 
now booking international DJs and producers.Vao Vao 
<https://www.facebook.com/vaovaopartey?fref=ts> and Bulbo 
<https://www.facebook.com/proyectobulbo?fref=ts> are among the nights to check 
out, and local duoDengue Dengue Dengue <http://www.denguedenguedengue.com/> – 
who combine tropical bass with performance and visual arts – now have a reach 
way beyond the city.

Herles’ girlfriend, Elisa, says this creative confidence is causing a buzz in 
Lima: “Cultural manifestations that we’ve neglected before are getting more 
consideration now,” she tells me - pointing to the appreciation of work by the 
likes of Chermen and Tupac, as well as wider attention from international 
media. “It was only a matter of time.”

Accommodation was provided by Casa Nuestra B&B (doubles from £32, no phone, 
casanuestraperu.com <http://casanuestraperu.com/>) 
