
University campuses are intended as social spaces, yet their design often 
sends out the opposite message. Designers go for unusual shapes in an attempt 
to portray youth and vibrancy, but these can result in oddly proportioned 
spaces that are difficult to use. Bright colours, liberally splashed about to 
make areas seem lively, can feel jarring, and soon date.

Outdoor spaces can be just as problematic: think of all those walkways and 
squares across which students and staff march on their way somewhere else. Many 
are devoid of communal activity, overshadowed by buildings and lacking 
greenery. When budgets are tight, this is an area that often suffers.

Related: Flashy university buildings: do they live up to the hype? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/sep/21/flashy-university-buildings-do-they-live-up-to-the-hype>

For a social space to function well, the inside and the outside need to be 
considered together during the design and subsequent use. So how can we create 
truly social campuses?

Think about the in-between 

The spaces between rooms need to provide a nurturing environment, rather than 
just a route from A to B. Fruitful conversations and encounters can take place 
where you might least expect them – on a staircase, in a lobby, at an entrance 
– so these areas to be welcoming.

Comfort shouldn’t be neglected: thermal, acoustic and ergonomic design can 
have a huge impact on physical and psychological well-being.Recent studies 
<http://www.building.co.uk/get-happy-wellbeing-in-buildings/5073974.article> 
suggest that hospital patients with views of nature heal more quickly, that 
office workers with a window seat sleep an average of 46 minutes longer per 
night, and that doubling the supply of outdoor air to an office reduces 
short-term sick leave by 35%.

Get in-between spaces wrong at a university, and it’s only a matter of time 
before students lose concentration and focus. Get them right, and you will 
create a calm backdrop to learning, leading to better engagement and 
interaction.

Focus on flexibility

Spaces that can be easily altered and reappropriated are invaluable in busy 
environments like universities.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f973%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f973%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd28dc8860132be0fc840232956c90c7a78590e1%2F0_0_2448_3264%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=All%20together%20now%3A%20how%20to%20build%20a%20social%20campus&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f973%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=All+together+now%3A+how+to+build+a+social+campus&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f973%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd28dc8860132be0fc840232956c90c7a78590e1%2F0_0_2448_3264%2F2448.jpg>
 The well space in the University of Sheffield’s school of architecture 
The “well space” in the University of Sheffield’s school of architecture, for 
example, is one of my favourite locations. Because it is double height, and 
able to accommodate a wide variety of activities, it has become the physical 
and social heart of our department.

 Students can pass in and through as they wish, sometimes participating, 
sometimes observing. It is particularly useful on open days where parents and 
prospective students can see first-hand how the ethos of the school manifests 
itself - the informality helps to break down traditional hierarchies and 
encourage interaction.

Lucien Kroll is an architect who understands the importance of making design 
truly social. Kroll proposes spaces that are loose-fit, flexible and allow 
occupants to take ownership in a fluid and incremental way. His seminal project
la Mémé at the Catholic University of Louvain 
<http://www.domusweb.it/en/architecture/2010/06/30/lucien-kroll-utopia-interrupted.html>
 exemplifies this approach, operating as an antithesis to the shiny corporate 
aesthetic seen in many modern university buildings.

Plan for your community

A sense of community needs to be supported by the design of the buildings., 
but those who work in them need to follow through.

Even the best-designed and equipped spaces can be rendered useless by 
inappropriate timetabling, or restrictive health and safety regulations.

And if time is squeezed at the start and end of teaching sessions, the chance 
for informal congregation and discussion is diminished, reducing opportunities 
for beneficial exchanges.

Open up to the public

Related: The cosmologist who makes beautiful university buildings appear 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/nov/30/the-cosmologist-who-makes-beautiful-university-buildings-appear>

With the rise of social media and the ability to work and learn remotely, the 
boundaries of the campus now stretch far beyond the physical infrastructure. 
But there is no reason that the real estate itself should be available only to 
staff and students.

There is enormous potential to open up facilities to the public throughout the 
year. Universities can become real public buildings for exchange, collaboration 
and celebration in the same way that town halls, libraries and municipal 
buildings once were.

This altruistic offer to citizens would no doubt have positive repercussions 
in relation to engagement, impact, employability and widening participation. 
It’s an intergenerational opportunity that should be embraced by universities, 
a chance to allow all the inhabitants of a community (not just its students) to 
benefit everything an open campus has to give.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. Email article 
pitches to us at highereducationnetwork@guardian.co.uk
