
He looks an unlikely saviour. With his chef's jacket, unruly locks and specs 
on the end of his nose, Shaun Hill has the manner and appearance of a mad 
chemist. However, he's the man bringing new life to the Walnut Tree near 
Abergavenny, the dynamo in the kitchen and the smiling face in the dining room. 
Though I find it hard to see Hill as a dynamo - he always seems much too 
laid-back for that.

For those who are too young to rememember, the Walnut Tree is a. restaurant 
that was raised to iconic status by Franco and Ann Taruschio during their 
quarter-century at the helm. It was loved by locals and critics alike, but 
after they sold the place, it went through an unhappy spell from which it's now 
being rescued. As I sat with Shaun in the dining room, a couple stopped to say 
how lovely it was to see the place "getting back to normal again". They had 
been regulars since the 80s. "It was pushing at an open door," Shaun told me 
after they'd gone. "A load of people want it to be right again."

It wasn't quite what Shaun had planned. When he sold his much-lauded Merchant 
House three years ago, he'd planned a life of playing with his grandchildren 
and restaurant consulting. But he soon realised he wasn't cut out for the 
consulting side of that master plan: "It's hard to have a whole conversation 
with people who don't agree with you without losing your temper." More, he 
missed the adrenaline rush of service and of "doing what I prefer doing and, in 
truth, what I'm better at."

Look at a Hill menu and you see the results of more than 40 years of doing 
what he's better at, immaculate taste and the confidence of a man who knows 
what he likes to cook: smoked haddock boudin with shrimps and dill; calf's 
sweetbreads with wine-braised sauerkraut; lemon sole with salsify and 
watercress beurre blanc; poached veal knuckle in its cooking liquor, salsa 
verde and gherkins. Shaun describes his cooking as "the nice side of coarse. I 
like the spirit of generosity in the grub." This isn't a restaurant review 
(Matthew Norman will be doing that in a week or so), so I won't go into detail 
beyond saying there are few, if any, chefs on this planet whose food, or 
company for that matter, I look forward to more.

The thing is, Shaun Hill is a chef of rare parts. He has cooked high-end food 
and lower-end food. He's cooked for other people. He's cooked for himself. He's 
won Michelin stars for both. He's written books that have won awards, and books 
that explained the mysteries of Roman cooking. With a few others, he helped 
make Ludlow the gastronomic capital of Britain. And now he may be helping to do 
the same thing for Abergavenny. "Around here there's the Foxhunter Inn at 
Nantyderry, the Hardwick on the Old Raglan Road and the Crown at Whitebrook. 
They're all run by seriously talented chefs. It's good for all of us."

He may be one of the grand old men of Britain's restaurant business, and his 
food and his approach to kitchen craft are as far removed from the new 
generation of molecular gastronomes as it is possible to be, but he is 
cheerfully open-minded about the new wave of British chefs. "The man's a star," 
he says of Heston Blumenthal. "I just worry about the imposters without the 
talent who try to imitate him. Anyway, listen," he adds, "I was Heston's 
predecessor at one of the molecular gastronomy conferences at Erice. I gave a 
speech on The Meaning Of Fresh As A Culinary Term. I only did it because I 
failed all my science O-levels - and I was speaking ahead of the Nobel 
prizewinner for physics that year. There's nothing like sticking your tongue 
out at the past."

And Shaun Hill is still sticking his tongue out. He was planning the music for 
his funeral the other day, he said, when he came across a prewar German close 
harmony group singing Happy Days Are Here Again. "That'll do for me," he said.

Where to get it

The Walnut Tree, Llanddewi Skirrid, Abergavenny, Monmouthshire, 01873 852797, 
thewalnuttreeinn.com <http://www.thewalnuttreeinn.com>

Â· This article was amended on Saturday April 19 2008. Shaun Hill, chef at the 
Walnut Tree restaurant in Abergavenny, mentioned the Crown at Whitebrook, not 
the Swan. This has been corrected.
