
In the time it takes you to read this sentence, nearly 10,000 lbs of fish will 
be stolen from the world’s oceans. Illegal fishing, which accounts for up to26m 
tons of seafood annually 
<http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0004570>, 
robs legitimate fishers and governments of revenue, undermines the accuracy of 
fisheries’ stock assessments and threatens the stability of coastal communities 
that rely on the legal trade.

Related: Off the hook: can a new study in the Pacific reel in unsustainable 
fishing? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/may/01/palau-sustainable-fishing-protect-endangered-marine-life>

Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing occurs in all the world’s oceans 
and takes many forms, from operating without a license and falsifying documents 
to using banned gear, exceeding quotas and fishing in marine protected areas. 
These activities are especially prevalent in areas such as West Africa, 
Southeast Asia, South America and Antarctica, where local authorities lack the 
resources to sufficiently patrol marine territories. Illegal activities account 
for up to one in five wild-caught fish taken from oceans – worth up to$23.5bn 
<http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0004570> in 
stolen seafood each year.

But what if illegally caught fish couldn’t be moved to market and sold, 
thereby eliminating any financial motive to continue the practice?

On 16 May 2016, six countries – Dominica, Guinea-Bissau, Sudan, Thailand, 
Tonga and Vanuatu – ratified thePort State Measures Agreement 
<http://www.fao.org/fishery/psm/agreement/en> (PSMA), a United Nations treaty 
designed to stop illegal fishing by strengthening inspection protocols for 
foreign-flagged fishing vessels coming into their ports.Governments that have 
ratified the PSMA 
<http://www.pewtrusts.org/en/multimedia/data-visualizations/2014/psma> must 
enact legislation specifying how they will enforce the agreement, including 
procedures on what to do with an illegal cargo, the crew and the vessel.

With the recent additions, 30 governments have now ratified the PSMA, five 
more than are needed to bring the treaty into effect. Now, suspected illegal 
fishers calling on ports in 29 countries, plus those inside the European Union, 
face a higher risk of being turned away or having their catch and vessels 
seized.

This is a major step forward. Almost all fish caught in the ocean must come 
through a port on their way to market. Trying to find and confront illegal 
operators on the water is dangerous, expensive work. By comparison, at-port 
policing, when done correctly, is efficient, cost effective and safe.

Under the PSMA, captains of foreign-flagged vessels must provide advance 
notice when approaching a port. If officials have any reason to suspect illegal 
activity – due to, for example, a vessel’s history, licensing discrepancies or 
intelligence from authorities of a neighboring country – they can order an 
inspection of the boat’s documentation and catch.

The results of that check will determine whether the ship is refused entry, 
held for further inspection, seized or cleared to offload its cargo. The pact 
also empowers port officials to deny services, such as refueling, to operators 
found to have broken the law.

Related: A sustainable fishing experiment in the Pacific – in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/gallery/2016/may/01/sustainable-fishing-photography-marine-wildlife-ocean-conservation-palau>

If a vessel under suspicion is turned away, officials must notify nearby 
ports, in their own and neighboring countries, that it may be carrying illegal 
fish. This way, it is more likely that, even if a suspected crew is allowed to 
leave with its catch, it will be forced to spend large amounts of time (and 
money) searching for another port to unload fish and obtain the refueling, food 
provisioning and other services that are necessary to continue fishing.

The PSMA also helps consumers ensure that they are buying legally caught 
seafood. The agreement gives processors and retailers another way to track 
their supplies and buy fish that comes through a port covered by the treaty.

While the PSMA presents a great strategy to stop illegal fishing, it’s not the 
only way. Countries with rich fishing grounds are banding together to identify 
common challenges and share enforcement and other resources. One example is the
Central America Fisheries and Aquaculture Organization 
<http://www.fao.org/fishery/rfb/ospesca/en>, whose members include Beliz, Costa 
Rica, Guatemala, Nicaragua and Honduras. In southeast Africa, an eight-country 
coalition calledFISH-i Africa <http://www.fish-i-africa.org/> – which includes 
Kenya, Mauritius, Seychelles, Somalia and Tanzania – also coordinates its 
members’ enforcement efforts. It hasprevented a boat operator 
<http://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/analysis/2013/04/19/major-tuna-vessel-is-denied-port-landing-because-of-evidence-of-illegal-fishing>
, Premier, owned by Dongwon Industries in South Korea, from profiting off its 
illicit catch and chased others out of the western Indian Ocean.

The PSMA will become an even more powerful tool if it gains support from 
additional nations. Countries that have signed on but are yet to ratify include 
Russia, Indonesia, Canada, Brazil, Peru, Kenya, Ghana, Sierra Leone and Turkey. 
We must work on expanding the treaty’s reach, ensure that it is effectively 
enforced and make the cost of illegal fishing so prohibitive that it’s no 
longer worth the effort.
