
Although many British observers look to Scandinavia as the paragon of advanced 
welfare states, we in Norway actually owe a huge debt to the NHS. It was while 
our government was in exile in Britain during the second world war that it was 
inspired to create auniversal health system 
<http://www.dnms.no/index.php?seks_id=136413&a=1> free at the point of use, as 
outlined in the 1942Beveridge report <http://gu.com/p/3qke6/stw>, which paved 
the way for the NHS.

Today, most Norwegians are very proud of our health service. We spend roughly 
9% of GDP on health, whichis about average for OECD countries 
<http://www.oecd.org/els/health-systems/Briefing-Note-NORWAY-2014.pdf>. But in 
a country of 5.2m people, this translates to more than $6,000 per capita – 
almost double the spend-per-person in the UK.

Our system has undergone immense change in recent years. Until the 1970s, 
Norway operated ahighly decentralised health system 
<http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.597.1654&rep=rep1&type=pdf>
 funded by local authorities. An act of parliament in 1970 made the state the 
main funder, and since then a growing proportion of the government’s budget, 
swelled by oil revenues, has gone into health. In 2002,the government took over 
ownership of all hospitals 
<https://www.duo.uio.no/bitstream/handle/10852/30303/HORN_2004_1.pdf?sequence=1>
 in the country.

How is this relevant to the NHS? Well, against a backdrop of similar systems 
in both countries, the past few years have seen a concerted attempt to 
centralise health services inNorway <https://www.theguardian.com/world/norway>.

In essence, this has meant concentrating certain types of surgery in fewer, 
higher-volume hospitals to improve patient outcomes. On the ground, this has 
meant the downgrading and closure of smaller hospitals and longer journeys for 
some patients. In a country like ours, with a population density that is 17 
times lower than the UK, this is significant; one extremeexample 
<http://www.fremover.no/helsevesen/sykehus/unn/ma-reise-dit-de-far-behandling/s/5-17-47252>
 saw elderly patients having to make a 260km round trip for orthopaedic 
treatment.

There have been public protests in many places, not to mention a political 
storm. The Norwegian minister of health and care services, Bent Høie, was even 
accused of being“eager with the scalpel” by a national newspaper 
<http://www.dagsavisen.no/oslo/mener-h%C3%B8ie-er-ivrig-med-skalpellen-1.470183>
 for his apparent enthusiasm for cutting services from smaller hospitals.

Høie has pointed out, however, that Norway would need an extra 44,000 health 
professionals 
<http://www.aftenposten.no/nyheter/iriks/Norge-vil-ikke-klare-a-skaffe-nok-leger-og-sykepleiere-8251706.html>
 over the next 25 years to keep pace with rising demand from an ageing 
population, without the reconfiguration of services.

As professionals working in the Norwegian health service, we firmly support 
the rationale for centralisation of more advanced services. Put simply, it’s in 
the best interests of patients.

It just isn’t possible to provide consistently high-quality procedures in 
rural centres with low volumes. In part, this is due to the greater 
specialisation in surgical training – the days of generalist surgeons operating 
on everything from hernias to knees are gone. We’ve also found that hospital 
recruitment in very small rural areas can be a major challenge.

The scientific evidence base indicating a correlation between higher volumes 
and lower mortality is complex and varies across procedures and conditions. 
However, most medical professionals would accept the principle that the more 
you do something, the better you get at it.

One study by researchers at Haukeland University hospital in Bergen found that 
30-day death rates from kidney cancerwere significantly lower in centres that 
treated more than 40 cases per year 
<http://eaumunich2016.uroweb.org/wp-content/themes/eau16/scientific-programme/pdf/session.php?id=7588&q=1455028043.1532>
.

We work for the South-Eastern Norway regional health authority (Helse 
Sør-Øst), which serves around half of the population of Norway. In 2008, plans 
were drawn up for the creation of seven hospital catchment areas, each serving 
between 300,000-500,000 people. These were to be established through merging 
smaller local hospitals. The long-term plan for each area is to replace the 
smaller, older hospitals with one big hospital. So far, three new hospitals 
have been opened in two catchment areas and two smaller local hospitals have 
closed.

One service that has been centralised is coronary angioplasty. All ambulances 
in our region are fitted with ECG equipment, allowing staff to take a scan 
which is sent to a cardiologist. If the coronary artery is completely blocked 
by a blood clot, patients are sent – by helicopter if necessary – to a centre 
that offers the surgery. The system is working well – we’ve been able to 
concentrate angioplasty in just four centres serving 2.8 million people.

Through our participation in Dr Foster’s Global Comparators 
<http://www.drfoster.com/tools/global-comparators/> international health 
benchmarking network, we have access to around 40m data records from hospitals 
around the world. We can see that our outcomes are among the very best globally.

Other international data such as the OECD’s Health at a Glance 
<http://www.keepeek.com/Digital-Asset-Management/oecd/social-issues-migration-health/health-at-a-glance-2015_health_glance-2015-en#page27>
 report also supports this. In 2013, the latest available year, Norway’s 
mortality rate 30 days after suffering a heart attack was just 7.6 deaths per 
100 adults aged 45+, compared to the UK’s figure of 9.1.

The NHS England chief executive, Simon Stevens, has stated his opposition to 
what has been termedmass centralisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/may/30/nhs-england-mass-centralisation-simon-stevens>
, while “viable smaller hospitals” are named as a new care model in theFive 
Year Forward View 
<https://www.england.nhs.uk/wp-content/uploads/2014/10/5yfv-web.pdf>. How do 
you go about judging whether a small hospital is viable?.

With the enormous changes planned for the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> over the coming few years, 
centralisation is a subject that won’t go away. Our experience in Norway shows 
that if you follow the data and the evidence, you can make decisions that use 
resources more effectively and deliver excellent outcomes for patients.

Dr Ole Tjomsland is director of quality at the South-Eastern Norway Regional 
Health Authority (Helse Sør-Øst). Stein Bruland is chief medical officer at 
Østfold hospital trust. They are participants inGlobal Comparators 
<http://www.drfoster.com/tools/global-comparators/>, a not-for-profit network 
established by the healthcare data analysis company Dr Foster. The programme 
brings together 40 hospitals in 12 countries to benchmark performance and work 
on shared projects.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.


