
Manchester is the university which most students and graduates identify as 
being equal to their own, according to a Datablog survey.

Over 1,700 people told us the universities that they thought were of the same 
quality as where they are or were studying 
<http://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2014/jul/08/which-universities-good-as-yours>
. Some of the results are surprising, some unrealistic and some simply play up 
to the stereotypes.

For the purposes of accuracy (although this is by no means scientific) we 
excluded institutions where fewer than five people answered. That means in 
total we had full answers from students and graduates of 49 different 
universities.

Take a look below at the interactive we have put together, to explore the 
results for yourself.

Those from the University of Cambridge 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/cambridgeuniversity> were less likely 
than those from Oxford to say that their fellow Oxbridge university was their 
equal.

Students and graduates from the two universities both identified each other as 
their closest match but while 84.8% of those from Oxford selected Cambridge, 
that was true for just 76.7% of those from the latter. The two universities 
came second and first respectively inthe Guardian’s 2015 league table 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/ng-interactive/2014/jun/02/university-league-tables-2015-the-complete-list>
.

The majority of University College London (UCL), Imperial College and London 
School of Economics and Political Science (LSE) survey respondents said they 
were on a par with Oxbridge. However, the best any of them did, the other way 
around, was 27.8% of those from Oxford considering Imperial as a match - none 
of the others got more than 20% from either Oxbridge institution.

That’s not where the discrepancies end though. Exactly 60% of those from Aston 
university, which came 22nd in the Guardian’s table, identified Birmingham as 
their peer. Fittingly, the two institutions are based in the same city. Exactly 
zero of those answering from Birmingham said the same thing about Aston.

The list of universities that the London Metropolitan University chose were on 
average 55 places above them in the Guardian league table, making them the most 
aspirational in our list. To be fair though, the university, which was 
temporarily banned from admitting international students in 2013, did come 116 
out of 116 in the Guardian league table.

The University of Manchester and King’s College London were also among the 21 
universities whose students and grads tended to aim higher when making their 
selections.

Surprisingly, the average difference between the university at which the 
respondent was studying at or had graduated from, and the one they chose was 
just two places (the median difference was four).

People who spent time studying at University of Glasgow seemed the most astute 
- the average difference between the institution's own league table ranking and 
those of the universities they chose was zero.

Almost nine out of 10 (87.5%) of Sheffield students/graduates identify 
Manchester as the university they are on par with - the closest match of any in 
the list. A similar affinity is felt by University of Liverpool students, 81.5% 
of whom selected Manchester.

Geography seems to play a part in some of the closest matches - Liverpool and 
Manchester, UCL and Imperial College, as well as Bath and Bristol all get a 
match of over 75%.

What does Manchester have to say about all this? Its closest match is Leeds 
with 50.6% while Liverpool gets 39.1%.

As well as being the university with the closest match, Manchester is the one 
most picked by other institutions. Out of the 49 universities where we got five 
or more answers, the north west base of Professor Brian Cox and formerly Alan 
Turing was selected by at least one person from 43 of the institutions.

In terms of raw numbers 412 people involved in the study selected Manchester.

Also popular were Leeds (41), Bristol (40) and Nottingham (39). 
Unsurprisingly, Manchester, Leeds and Nottingham are all among the biggest in 
the UK when it comes to student numbers.

Judge for yourself whether this is snobbery or if it is simple logic for the 
universities with the highest proportion of survey responses which did not 
select anywhere as their equal.

Included in the list is the University of Arts London (28.6%) and SOAS 
(18.2%), known for specialising in subjects. Cambridge (17.9%) is first in the 
Guardian League Table and London Met (16.7%) is last. There are fewer excuses 
for the rest of this bunch.

Follow this link and explore the interactive visualisation of the university 
data 
<https://public.tableausoftware.com/profile/grbarnett#!/vizhome/universityrankings/Dashboard1>
 to see if you agree with your peers. To open up our methodology, we've put a 
graph below showing how many responses we got from each institution involved in 
the exercise.

This piece was amended on July 24. It previously included Portsmouth and 
Plymouth in a list of local rivals.

More open data

Data journalism and data visualisations from the Guardian 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/data>

Development and aid data

• Search the world’s global development data with our gateway 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/data-store/global-development-data/search?q=>

Can you do more with this data?

• Contact us at data@theguardian.com <http://mailto:data@guardian.co.uk/>

• Follow us on Twitter <http://twitter.com/guardiandata>

• Like us on Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/pages/Guardian-data/155291341187950>
