
“If you don’t put a value on yourself, no one will.” This was the advice I 
received from my friend this week about my latest offer of a casual university 
teaching job. It’s for one term and it pays by the hour.

Value. That’s a big buzzword in academia today and we are all under 
instruction to provide it. Yet the result seems to be a devaluation of the 
whole university system, with casualised staff on the sharp end. But we are not 
the only ones whose value is on the wane: the needs of permanent staff and 
students are being disregarded too.

Related: Jo Johnson won't fix teaching, he'll just make life harder for 
academics 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/nov/10/jo-johnson-wont-fix-teaching-hell-just-make-life-harder-for-academics>



Since my temporary contract ended last summer, I’ve been repeatedly asked to 
work at the same institution as an hourly-paid lecturer, rather than as a 
member of staff. I’m either making up for a shortfall in temporary staff, or 
filling in for permanent staff on leave.

There would be outrage if an employer, say a manufacturer, terminated their 
workers’ contracts and then hired them back to do the same job for less money. 
This is normal in universities. University unions are fighting management over 
zero-hours contracts –and winning 
<https://www.ucu.org.uk/socc_bristolucu-shows-how> – but the rights of casual 
workers are too often debated in isolation.

When I’m asked to fill in as an hourly-paid tutor for a permanent member of 
staff, everyone’s labour is devalued. Imagine you’re an academic with a really 
busy teaching term. You know from higher educationsurveys that overwork is 
endemic 
<https://www.timeshighereducation.com/features/best-university-workplace-survey-2015-results-and-analysis/2018272.article>
, so you resign yourself to weeks of exhaustion.

Now imagine being told that this term the teaching is going to be done by a 
casual worker. Me. I will do this same work in just two days a week. By the 
way, I’m working with no office and in a work environment that, as aGuardian 
survey has found 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2014/may/08/work-pressure-fuels-academic-mental-illness-guardian-study-health>
, directly contributes to depression and other mental health issues. A member 
of staff might well feel devalued when they discover their management believes 
their work can be adequately done in so much less time and with far fewer 
resources.

Then there are the students. You’d think that their value would be on the up, 
now they bring in tuition fees. Universities know that the quality of the 
“student experience” is a factor in attracting new fee-paying students. And 
planned university reforms will link the ability to charge higher tuition fees 
with providingvalue for money for students.

And yet, as pressure mounts on tutors to boost university revenue through 
research grants, students are being fobbed off with the cheapest teaching 
universities can provide.

Related: University lecturers on the breadline: is the UK following in 
America’s footsteps? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/nov/17/university-lecturers-uk-us-casual-posts-food-stamps>

 Soon, students will have difficulty finding their tutor once a week, let 
alone building a relationship with them over the three years of their degree.

Students do, and should, criticise their university for employing unsupported, 
part-time casual labour when they fill in thefinal-year National Student Survey.
 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/aug/13/the-national-student-survey-should-be-abolished-before-it-does-any-more-harm>
 The same economic logic that turned them into customers dictates that they get 
a cut-price education.

This of course should be where I announce that I’m done with academia and its 
short-sighted hiring practices. But that really would be allowing others to put 
a value, and a very low one at that, on me and all the other terrific staff and 
students at universities.

We just need to realise that our worth is interlinked. There’s no face-off 
between staff and students, or between casual and permanent staff. And I can do 
no better than repeat – to university decision-makers at every level – the 
advice my friend gave me: value yourself.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
