
In the battle of the brands, small and mid-sized businesses are often pitted 
against it each other, with smaller organisations seen as the underdog. In 
part, this is true. Research shows that despite their flexibility and nimble 
ways of working,over half 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/sponsored/business/sense/12043842/why-arent-smes-exporting.html>
 of all SME retailers in the UK are not expanding internationally.

This is set to change. Now, new technology means that mid-sized businesses are 
becoming equipped with the tools they need to grow. Performance marketing in 
particular is one way for these companies to compete with larger counterparts 
on a global level, at a relatively low cost of entry.

Making the most of a moment

An effective performance based approach is moment marketing. Moment marketing 
is about understanding that customer-centric marketing is not just about 
targeting the right people, but targeting them at the right time. Seasonal 
moments such as Valentine’s Day and Mother’s Day, for example, have become 
annual consumer shopping peaks. Criteo’s own internal data shows that sales of 
health and beauty products were up by 51% on the Sunday prior to Mother’s Day 
in 2015, and in the week prior to Valentine’s Day there was a 115% uplift in 
sales of flowers and gifts. With propensity to spend so high in these moments, 
they are the perfect time for marketers to develop campaigns to drive sales.

Knowing your customer inside out

While moment marketing is driven by seasonal hooks, it is important that 
retailers keep their customers at the centre of campaigns. Marketers need build 
customer personas, helping them get a better understanding of who is buying on 
the other side of the screen. Understanding a customer means not only knowing 
their age and gender but also what their challenges and pain points are, what 
success looks like for them and what keeps them up at night. From here, 
marketers can find patterns in consumer behaviour and, ultimately, predict what 
they want to buy next.

Once predictions have been made they can then be transformed into creative 
campaigns. Crucially for mid-sized retailers, these campaigns do not need to 
involve big budgets but should focus instead on creativity. Smaller businesses 
can use email retargeting or social media, for example, to bring campaigns to 
life.

Mobile ready

Personas are important, but after making predictions, campaigns are only as 
strong as the channels used.


Mobile is vital for reaching customers on the go. This is particularly 
important during holidays or public days when consumers are most likely to not 
be at a desk or at home to access a PC. During Christmas 2015, over 30% of 
online sales in the UK were made through mobile devices. Last year, average 
mobile activity during the week of 21st December was higher than any other week 
of the holiday season. In fact, itpeaked at 59.7% of all e-commerce traffic 
<https://www.internetretailer.com/2016/01/06/mobile-devices-deliver-holiday-e-commerce-sales>
 versus 40.3% for desktop.

Ignoring mobile is no longer an option for mid-size businesses. As competitors 
become increasingly sophisticated in this area, it is important that smaller 
retailers keep up and benefit too.

Measure success, not cost

All businesses, no matter their size, need to keep an eye on costs.

However, to make smart assessments of marketing spend, marketers should move 
away from thinking about budgets and look at cost of sale instead. When it 
comes to performance marketing, this is simple. Because costs are designed to 
performthey will, ultimately, pay for themselves. This means that as long as 
performance targeting is working and generating profitable conversions, 
advertisers should continue to invest to see positive ROI.

The future is bright for mid-sized businesses. The retail market has 
recognised that smaller organisations are a smart option and rewarded them 
accordingly. In fact,88% of small businesses 
<http://www.smeinsider.com/2015/09/18/the-future-looks-bright-as-number-of-sme-growth-doubles-in-2015/>
 reported growth in revenue in 2015. To build on this, mid-sized businesses now 
need to make intelligent choices about the technology on offer to them and 
invest in marketing. By borrowing tools that have worked for giants in their 
sectors and making them their own, mid-sized businesses can steer themselves to 
success in 2016 and beyond.

You can follow Criteo on Twitter @criteo <https://twitter.com/criteo>

This advertisement feature is brought to you by Criteo 
<http://www.criteo.com/products/?gclid=CNqz8-6Up80CFZcy0wodTRMBAw>, which 
supports the Guardian Media & Tech Network’sDigital Marketing hub 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media-network/series/digital-marketing>. 
