
Recently, the social critic Barbara Ehrenreich 
<http://www.theguardian.com/profile/barbaraehrenreich> wrote an essay 
criticising the fashionable notion of gratitude as a path to happiness 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/03/opinion/sunday/the-selfish-side-of-gratitude.html>
. This prompted an amusing spectacle:the proponents of gratitude 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/10/opinion/sunday/two-sides-of-gratitude.html> 
attemptedto demolish her argument 
<http://greatergood.berkeley.edu/article/item/what_barbara_ehrenreich_gets_wrong_about_gratitude>
 without seeming, well, ungrateful that she’d made it. Too often, Ehrenreich 
thinks, gratitude serves dubious ends. Should a Walmart worker really feel 
grateful for a $1 pay rise, when the Waltons are America’s wealthiest family? 
And isn’t it narcissistic for the well-off to focus on “feeling grateful” 
rather than, say, campaigning to improve the working conditions of the poorer 
people on whose labour they rely? Gratitude merely makes us feel less bad about 
injustice, Ehrenreich concluded, when what’s required is “a far more muscular 
impulse… solidarity – which may involve getting up off the yoga mat”.

I’ve long espoused the benefits of gratitude; cheesy as it sounds, the science 
behind keepinga gratitude journal 
<http://sonjalyubomirsky.com/wp-content/themes/sonjalyubomirsky/papers/LSS2005.pdf>
 seems solid. But Ehrenreich has a point, which echoes the one levelled at 
Buddhistloving-kindness meditation 
<https://thebuddhistcentre.com/text/loving-kindness-meditation>, a practice for 
developing compassion. (Unless you believe in some weird physics, your warm 
thoughts aren’t improving anyone’s lives, and may serve to substitute for real 
action.) The problem with this kind of criticism is that you can apply it to 
almost everything: it’s hard to think of any beneficial activity that can’t be 
twisted into narcissism, or co-opted by capitalism. Consultants and TED talkers 
now preach the benefits of mindfulness; or squeezing more value from your 
workforce by letting them get more sleep; or using compassion to get ahead.

But the lesson here isn’t that mindfulness, sleep, compassion or gratitude are 
bad; it’s that we don’t have the luxury of neatly dividing such practices into 
good or bad, so you can pick the good ones, discard the bad, then run life on 
autopilot. Instead, you have to make the call yourself, every time. Does 
keeping a gratitude journal makeyou more pro-social, or a complacent, status 
quo-supporting bastard? Only you can tell (and the answer might change). Does 
meditation make you a slightly better human, or are you using it to check out 
of life? And so on – for all alleged techniques of self-improvement.

One eye-opening exercise <http://audiodharma.org/talks/audio_player/6168.html>
, from the Buddhist teacher Nikki Mirghafori, is to try finding reasons to be 
grateful for anything that happens, however seemingly awful. Crucially, her 
point isn’t that youought to feel grateful for terrible events, it’s that 
experimenting with the possibility is useful. It jolts you into realising how 
glibly we tend to assume that events “are of two distinct types – good or bad – 
and that this goodness or badness is determined by how welcome it feels when it 
happens”, asthe blogger David Cain explains 
<http://www.raptitude.com/2016/01/be-lucky/>.

Related: What’s the secret of good writing? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/11/column-change-life-very-expensive-secret-good-writing-oliver-burkeman>

Yet doesn’t everyone have a tale of how an apparent setback (an illness, a job 
loss) proved their salvation? This kind of experimental gratitude enables you 
to question assumptions. I’d say that makes it radical. But as for whether 
gratitude per se is good or bad: how grateful are you for a piece of string?

 * oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com <mailto:oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com> 