


 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evx2%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evx2%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446742742384%2F80bad6f0-2712-4dba-99c7-fa1191f1fb53-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eureka!%20From%20Gone%20Girl%20to%20the%20selfie%20stick%20%E2%80%93%20how%20one%20great%20idea%20can%20change%20your%20life&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evx2%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eureka%21+From+Gone+Girl+to+the+selfie+stick+%E2%80%93+how+one+great+idea+can+change+your+life&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evx2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446742742384%2F80bad6f0-2712-4dba-99c7-fa1191f1fb53-1360x2040.jpeg>
 It started with a door ... Gillian Flynn. Photograph: Peter Hoffman 
Gone Girl

Gillian Flynn

I always take walks in the middle of my writing day. I remember one day I came 
home and looked at my front door and thought how nice and safe it was. Then I 
thought: what if I came home and the door was open in the middle of the day? 
That was the moment.


At the time, I had a slightly awful addiction to true crime shows. The bad guy 
was often the husband. And so I thought, what if a husband came home from work 
and saw his front door wide open, and realised his wife wasn’t just taking out 
the garbage: that there was something ominous about it. And what if the husband 
wasn’t the bad guy – at least not all bad.

No story comes to you in full form. Gone Girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gone-girl> changed hugely when I was writing 
it. I actually had to reverse engineer Amy. I wrote the whole first part of the 
book from Nick’s point of view and Amy’s voice wasn’t there. The “cool girl” 
section at the beginning started out as a writing exercise when I was trying to 
figure out who Amy was. I went through several different endings in my head – 
should the drifters from the Ozarks recognise Amy and come back to get her? 
Should someone kill her? In the end, I felt that Nick and Amy deserved each 
other and were sort of addicted to each other.

All first drafts are jagged and wrong, but working as a journalist for 10 
years demystified the writing process for me. I never expected some muse to 
come down and fix everything. I knew I had to figure it out myself. There are 
plenty of people who are great writers who are not published only because they 
get discouraged by that first draft – and I promise you, they are all bad.

I had tonnes of doubts with Gone Girl. I had written a book with no one to 
root for, about two very twisted people in a twisted love affair. It’s 
unconventional – you find out who did it in the middle instead of at the end. I 
liked the story and luckily my editors did too, but none of us were entirely 
sure people would flock to it. We definitely didn’t feel: we’ve got this made, 
we can just sit back and watch it go.

Booksellers are a great indicator because they read everything, and from very 
early on we knew they were liking it. In the end, it entered at number two on 
the New York Times bestseller list, and within a week hit number one.

I’m wary of trying to repeat my success. I’m going to write other great books, 
but there’s never going to be another Gone Girl. That was just pure lightning 
in a bottle and I was lucky to be there for it.As told to Becky Barnicoat

The Grownup by Gillian Flynn <https://www.theguardian.com/books/gillian-flynn> 
is out now




 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evx2%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evx2%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F4%2F1446655571734%2Fe872de9f-aae5-4417-a33a-aa6990e76bc1-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eureka!%20From%20Gone%20Girl%20to%20the%20selfie%20stick%20%E2%80%93%20how%20one%20great%20idea%20can%20change%20your%20life&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evx2%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eureka%21+From+Gone+Girl+to+the+selfie+stick+%E2%80%93+how+one+great+idea+can+change+your+life&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evx2%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F4%2F1446655571734%2Fe872de9f-aae5-4417-a33a-aa6990e76bc1-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Tania Alexander, producer of Channel 4’s Gogglebox. Photograph: Graeme 
Robertson 
Gogglebox

Tania Alexander


The idea for Gogglebox came out of something our head of development said 
about watching his family’s reaction to the London riots in 2011. We talked 
about how interesting it would be to get households around Britain to react to 
the week’s telly and news. I remember thinking “God, it’s really simple”. I 
could immediately picture how the whole thing would look, like a screengrab of 
the Royle Family. Harry Hill’s TV Burp was coming off air and I thought, 
imagine blending those two shows and using real people, who are often a lot 
funnier than anything scripted.


Usually it takes me a while to work something out. I go through about a 
thousand questions in my head and there’s a lot of “yes, but” conversations. 
But with Gogglebox, I could see exactly how it would work right from the start.

We pitched it to Channel 4. We hadn’t worked loads on it but we had this sense 
that it was a neat idea. Afterwards, the head of factual programming stuck his 
head back round the door and said: “If no one else is interested in that 
people-watching-telly idea…” They gave us the money to shoot a pilot and away 
we went.

That’s when we started to realise what we had. One of the producers asked a 
daughter in the pilot: “What does the BBC stand for?” meaning, what do you 
think its values are? But she replied: “I dunno. Is it, like, British 
Broadcasting Incorporated?” You couldn’t have scripted it.

It could still have been an absolute disaster. Before the first show aired, 
the papers were saying things like “Channel 4 has run out of ideas” and “Is 
this the end of civilisation as we know it?” It was being pulled apart on 
Twitter. The secret is the casting. The people we’ve got are extraordinary. A 
lot of the time you cast people for their back story but with this I knew the 
only thing that mattered was how they reacted to TV. So we’d walk into 
hairdressers’ or bridge clubs (which is where we found Leon and June) and hold 
up pictures of David Cameron or a Daily Mail headline and see how they’d react. 
It instantly revealed the dynamics: who was the loudmouth, who rolled their 
eyes. We try to keep the cast as normal as possible. Once they become 
celebrities in their own right and start showing up at film premieres, you lose 
the integrity.

When we started, we had around 700,000 viewers. The first episode of the 
current series pulled in around 7.5 million. People love it because at its 
heart, it’s a warm show. We’re not nasty. The rule is: don’t have a go at each 
other, celebrities are fair game and say what you want about politicians. And 
it works.As told to Rosie Ifould



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evx2%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evx2%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446740516793%2F9f64978f-0d94-47ef-9dae-2323bede7c31-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eureka!%20From%20Gone%20Girl%20to%20the%20selfie%20stick%20%E2%80%93%20how%20one%20great%20idea%20can%20change%20your%20life&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evx2%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eureka%21+From+Gone+Girl+to+the+selfie+stick+%E2%80%93+how+one+great+idea+can+change+your+life&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evx2%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446740516793%2F9f64978f-0d94-47ef-9dae-2323bede7c31-680x1020.jpeg>
 Mike Miller, “the Knork dork”. Photograph: Mike Miller 
The Knork

Mike Miller

Teenage embarrassment gave me the idea. I was 14 and had just finished a 
basketball game, and a big group of us had gone out for pizza. I realised that 
if I picked up my pizza, I risked spilling sauce down myself in front of the 
girls. The only alternative was to use the cheap plastic fork I’d been given. I 
tried turning it on its side and pressing down on the crust but all I ended up 
with was smushed-up pizza.


I could see the chef in the kitchen had one of those big pizza cutters, and 
that’s when the idea of the Knork was born. I went home and lay in bed with a 
notebook, writing down my ideas and sketching a fork with a thin, rounded, 
“rocking” edge and a “finger platform” allowing the user to apply pressure 
without discomfort. The name came to me that same night – I’d invented 
something that combined a knife and a fork.

In those days, it was difficult to check if someone had come up with an idea 
before. So I wrote it down and posted it to myself in case I ever needed to 
provide dated proof I’d come up with it – a “poor man’s patent”. I still have 
the unopened envelope.

It wasn’t until years later that I returned to the idea. I was at university 
studying medicine but I often spoke about my invention, to the extent that 
classmates referred to me as “the Knork dork”. Eventually, I thought: “I don’t 
want to be that guy who has an amazing idea and never does anything about it,” 
so I quit university and started to work on it, using the remaining money in my 
college fund to help pay for it.

I made a series of prototypes, adjusting the design of my mother’s regular 
forks using car body filler and sandpaper. I spent a lot of time studying 
people eating. I’d order food in a restaurant and then sit and take notes, 
trying not to get noticed. I was amazed at how many different ways there were 
to hold a fork.

I took my first order in 2003 and everyone who used the Knork became an 
instant convert. 12 years on, it’s a multimillion dollar company and we sell 
all over the world. I see no reason why the Knork won’t become the standard 
fork design, in time – it really does feel like the next stage of evolution.As 
told to Chris Broughton



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evx2%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evx2%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446741508197%2F2b5be42b-791e-4b49-a382-edc02f709e3b-2060x1959.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eureka!%20From%20Gone%20Girl%20to%20the%20selfie%20stick%20%E2%80%93%20how%20one%20great%20idea%20can%20change%20your%20life&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evx2%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eureka%21+From+Gone+Girl+to+the+selfie+stick+%E2%80%93+how+one+great+idea+can+change+your+life&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evx2%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446741508197%2F2b5be42b-791e-4b49-a382-edc02f709e3b-2060x1959.jpeg>
 The Tangle Teezer Photograph: Tangle Teezer 
Tangle Teezer

Shaun Palfrey

I’d been working as a hair stylist and over the years I had mastered 
detangling hair, but when I tried to teach other people my technique they found 
it difficult. I sat down and tried to work out how I was using the brush and 
the comb differently, and when I did that I realised I needed a product that 
was the complete opposite of what was already out there. It needed to be like a 
brush and comb in one.


At the time, I wasn’t thinking “I’ve got a multimillion-pound vision for a 
business”. All I was thinking was “I’ve got an idea for a brush”. I went down 
to four days a week at the salon and spent the rest of my time in coffee shops 
or at the British Library researching things like polymers and manufacturers. I 
was extremely single-minded about it. It still took me two years and around 
£98,000 of my own money to get it to market. I remortgaged my flat. It was a 
lot of hard work but I don’t think I faltered once, I just knew I had to keep 
going. My mum was very ill at the same time, so in a way I think her battling 
that illness put all my worries into perspective.

The first prototype worked better than anything I could have imagined. From 
there it just grew and grew.

Being rejected on Dragons’ Den gave it a bloody good kickstart in terms of the 
recognition – as soon as the show aired the website crashed from the number of 
orders. But it was at the first trade fairs that I really knew it was going to 
be a success. People were stealing the demo brushes. We now sell 750,000 a 
month – that’s about 19 a minute.

It’s all very well having a good idea but if you want success, you’ve got to 
have the confidence to make it a reality. I left school with no qualifications 
but I’ve always had that drive to push myself.CB



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evx2%2Fsfb%23img-6&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evx2%2Fsfb%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446741408788%2F44d3f086-6af2-4300-824d-213a9b2b4c5f-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eureka!%20From%20Gone%20Girl%20to%20the%20selfie%20stick%20%E2%80%93%20how%20one%20great%20idea%20can%20change%20your%20life&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evx2%2Fstw%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eureka%21+From+Gone+Girl+to+the+selfie+stick+%E2%80%93+how+one+great+idea+can+change+your+life&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evx2%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446741408788%2F44d3f086-6af2-4300-824d-213a9b2b4c5f-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Snap happy ... selfie stick creator, Wayne Fromm. Photograph: Johan 
Hallberg-Campbell 
The selfie stick

Wayne Fromm 

I’ve been fascinated with photography since I was a kid. I used to develop my 
own prints and experimented with Polaroids and early video cameras.

In 2002 I took my daughter on holiday to Italy. I wanted photos of us together 
but if you take it yourself you always end up with a head off centre. In the 
end, we’d wait for a passerby who looked savvy enough to use my digital camera, 
then explain what we wanted usually without a common language. Then we had to 
deal with people walking in front of us while the photo was being taken. I just 
thought: “There has to be an easier way.”

 It took about 100 prototypes to get it right. Every pin, spring, lever and 
gear had to be up to the job. I wanted each one to last 20 years and be able to 
withstand use under the sea or in the heat of the Sahara.

It wasn’t the first time someone had come up with the idea of sticking a 
camera on the end of a pole – the BBC claims to have unearthed a picture 
showing a couple using a selfie stick in the 1920s. Originally, I called it The 
Quik Pod Extendable Monopod – we only started using the term “selfie stick” 
when it became part of the lexicon. The first take-up happened in the extreme 
sport community – it was really popular with skiers, paragliders and divers.

Sales have grown every year since launch but one of the problems I’ve 
encountered is cheap, rip-off selfie sticks – it’s too time-consuming to go 
after any but the most blatant copycats.

But money was never my main motivation. I’m far more interested in creating a 
world where families have good pictures in which everyone is present. In 
earlier decades, one of the parents tended to be the “designated photographer” 
and was often all but invisible in their photo albums. Now, for the first time, 
everyone can always be present.CB
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evx2%2Fsfb%23img-7&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evx2%2Fsfb%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446742363495%2F258ffddc-b661-4185-a969-1d7720ea3b04-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eureka!%20From%20Gone%20Girl%20to%20the%20selfie%20stick%20%E2%80%93%20how%20one%20great%20idea%20can%20change%20your%20life&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evx2%2Fstw%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eureka%21+From+Gone+Girl+to+the+selfie+stick+%E2%80%93+how+one+great+idea+can+change+your+life&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evx2%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446742363495%2F258ffddc-b661-4185-a969-1d7720ea3b04-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Aleksander the meerkat. Photograph: Compare the Market 
Aleksandr the meerkat 

Darren Walsh


The original idea came from an A4 piece of paper sent to me from the ad 
agency, which outlined a very tenuous premise. Essentially, it was, “If you say 
Compare the Market in a dodgy Russian accent it sounds a bit like meerkat”.


I jumped on it. I thought, “This has the potential to be completely off the 
wall and hilarious”. I started coming up with the back story for a Russian 
meerkat, Aleksander, a real Hugh Heffner-type show off. In the first script, 
the last word was just ‘simple’, but Simon Greenall who does the voice turned 
it into ‘simples’ with the little squeak at the end. It’s now in the Oxford 
English Dictionary.

Competitors in the industry quickly followed suit by creating their own 
characters. A successful campaign like this brings new pressures. Everyone 
wants to repeat the experience, but really it was a happy accident.RI



 “Very simple” ... emoji. 
Emoji

Shigetaka Kurita

It was the 1990s, and we were designing a new online language to use in text 
messages. Before mobile phones in Japan, we used to have pagers called Pocket 
Bells. They were cheap and really popular among young people, partly because 
they had a heart symbol. I knew that symbols absolutely had to be part of any 
texting service.


The original emoji were black and white and very simple. 
 I drew inspiration from symbols used in weather forecasts. At first there 
were 200, for things like food, drink and feelings – including the heart, of 
course. Now there are over 1,000.

I didn’t think emoji would spread and become so popular internationally. When 
I’m introduced as the man who invented emoji, people are taken aback. Emoji is 
incredibly useful because it transcends language – sometimes a single emoji can 
say more than words.As told to Justin McCurry



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evx2%2Fsfb%23img-8&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evx2%2Fsfb%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446741787194%2F93f1417b-5a49-4a6c-a3ba-e4f5bb69d827-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eureka!%20From%20Gone%20Girl%20to%20the%20selfie%20stick%20%E2%80%93%20how%20one%20great%20idea%20can%20change%20your%20life&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evx2%2Fstw%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eureka%21+From+Gone+Girl+to+the+selfie+stick+%E2%80%93+how+one+great+idea+can+change+your+life&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evx2%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446741787194%2F93f1417b-5a49-4a6c-a3ba-e4f5bb69d827-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Banagrams. 
Bananagrams

Rena Nathanson

My whole family loves to play games. We make games out of everything: “Will 
that piece of cucumber float? Get a bowl, let’s find out.” My mother is a prop 
and stage designer, and we grew up in a very creative environment.


We love word-based games but wanted something that all three generations could 
play together. We came up with this idea for a fast-paced game where you race 
other players to see who can use up all their letters by making grids of words. 
Everyone got involved. It was my dad who said, “This game is driving me 
bananas.” And so the name stuck. My mother designed the banana pouch, based on 
the old pencil case we’d been using to hold the letter tiles in.

We started playing Bananagrams with friends and family, and they were all 
saying: “You guys should do something with this.” The first 500 prototypes went 
instantly. I said to my dad: “Why don’t we go to a games fair and see what 
happens.”

The response was crazy. It helped that our stall was fun and loud, and we were 
all playing Bananagrams. As soon as other people started playing they loved it. 
We could see it was special.

We’ve sold around seven million games so far. I don’t think any of us are 
thinking that we’ll come up with the next Bananagrams. I always ask myself: 
“How did we get so lucky?”RI
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evx2%2Fsfb%23img-9&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evx2%2Fsfb%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63569b54e9f82f789971721e73a9fd0098f1f349%2F0_0_2803_4200%2F2803.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eureka!%20From%20Gone%20Girl%20to%20the%20selfie%20stick%20%E2%80%93%20how%20one%20great%20idea%20can%20change%20your%20life&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evx2%2Fstw%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eureka%21+From+Gone+Girl+to+the+selfie+stick+%E2%80%93+how+one+great+idea+can+change+your+life&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evx2%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63569b54e9f82f789971721e73a9fd0098f1f349%2F0_0_2803_4200%2F2803.jpg>
 Cronut crazy ... Dominique Ansel. 
The Cronut

Dominique Ansel

I started in kitchens when I was barely 16. My parents didn’t have much money 
but I found a cookery school. I spent some time in the military and then I 
worked for the French bakery Fauchon, and Daniel Boulud in New York, before I 
opened my own bakery in Soho in 2011.


Someone pointed out that we didn’t have any kind of donut on the menu. I said 
OK, let’s try it. But I’m French, I don’t know about donuts. Let me work with a 
texture I grew up with – the croissant. I spent the next two months 
experimenting. The dough itself is not croissant dough, there’s a different 
ratio of ingredients. I wanted it to be light but I didn’t want to change the 
flavour. When I finally found the right balance, it had the perfect texture – 
the crunch on the outside, the flaky layers within. The team always tastes new 
recipes together. They said: “Yeah, it’s good. It should go on the menu.”

After that everything happened really fast. By chance, a blogger for Grub 
Street (New York magazine’s restaurant blog) came into the shop and tried the 
Cronut. He put it on the blog. Then he called me – overnight, there had been 
more than 140,000 links to his blog post. He said: “I think you should make a 
few more.”

The first day I made 30. The next, 45. By the third day we had more than 100 
people queuing and the craze began. The line stretched back over four blocks. 
The enthusiasm is still as strong. Most days we have a line of between 100-180 
people, no matter the weather. We serve them hot chocolate while they’re 
queuing.

I don’t take this success for granted. We have auctioned Cronuts to raise 
thousands for food banks and food charities here in New York.

I believe in creativity and in innovation. We’re always thinking about how we 
can impress, how we can touch people with food, so we never stop inventing. I 
get inspired by all kinds of things – by art, by painting. Recently I was 
looking at nail art on Instagram. The details, the colour, the mix of 
techniques are fascinating. Maybe some day I will glaze a cake and be reminded 
of those details.

Baking’s still pretty much the same wherever you go: bakeries are mostly 
French, Italian or German. It’s not like cooking, where you have chefs from all 
kinds of backgrounds fusing different foods. So this is just the beginning. 
There’s plenty of room to grow. RI



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evx2%2Fsfb%23img-10&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evx2%2Fsfb%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446742290002%2F6c13c070-30fc-4a92-87f6-4677d3c360ae-1020x1008.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eureka!%20From%20Gone%20Girl%20to%20the%20selfie%20stick%20%E2%80%93%20how%20one%20great%20idea%20can%20change%20your%20life&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evx2%2Fstw%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eureka%21+From+Gone+Girl+to+the+selfie+stick+%E2%80%93+how+one+great+idea+can+change+your+life&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evx2%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446742290002%2F6c13c070-30fc-4a92-87f6-4677d3c360ae-1020x1008.jpeg>
 High flyer ... the aerobie. Photograph: Aerobie 
Aerobie

Alan Adler

I wasn’t in the toy business – I was an electronics engineer and what you 
might call a casual Frisbee user. I’d occasionally throw one and I always 
thought: “This could be so much better.”


I had to spend a lot of time studying the physics of flying and spinning 
objects. That’s one of the most fun parts of inventing – you don’t need to be 
an expert, you just learn the science to make a project work.

The first flying ring I produced was called the Skyro and was inspired by a 
Punjabi weapon called a chakram. Testing the prototype was a jaw-dropping 
moment – the ring spun away from me and just kept going.

I knew I could do better, though, and in 1984 I unveiled the Aerobie. It could 
fly much farther – in 2003, one was thrown 1,333 feet (405m), a record that 
remains unbroken to this day.

That’s a problem I haven’t overcome – people throw them too far. A guy I know 
once climbed a tree in Palo Alto to retrieve his Aerobie and while he was up 
there he found two more. Perhaps that accounts for the high sales figures? An 
old friend came up to me and said: “Alan, those rings of yours are great. I’ve 
lost 10 of ‘em.”CB
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evx2%2Fsfb%23img-11&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evx2%2Fsfb%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe486ea914affb01e1806329fdf7765ef12723b1c%2F2457_185_1276_1916%2F1276.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eureka!%20From%20Gone%20Girl%20to%20the%20selfie%20stick%20%E2%80%93%20how%20one%20great%20idea%20can%20change%20your%20life&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evx2%2Fstw%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eureka%21+From+Gone+Girl+to+the+selfie+stick+%E2%80%93+how+one+great+idea+can+change+your+life&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evx2%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe486ea914affb01e1806329fdf7765ef12723b1c%2F2457_185_1276_1916%2F1276.jpg>
 Loving it ... Tinder co-founder, Sean Rad. 
Tinder

Sean Rad

I had been thinking for years about how humans communicate. I kept thinking 
about the fact that when you want to meet somebody new you don’t know if they 
want to meet you back. You have to walk up to them and you don’t know if you’ll 
get rejected. When we launchedTinder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/tinder>, users clicked on a red “x” to 
dismiss or green “heart” to select potential matches. Jon, my co-founder, came 
up with the swipe a couple of weeks later. He was inspired by the action of 
dealing a pack of cards. It is the way people act in the real world – you look 
at somebody in a room, they look at you back and you take it from there. People 
got it straight away.


The best ideas come about as part of a group. If you come up with an 
interesting idea, I’ll tell you it sucks or it’s great and here are the reasons 
why – I can’t do that on my own.CB

And the best of the rest ...

Joy Mangano, the Miracle Mop 

A mop that can be wrung out without getting your hands wet might not sound 
much of a miracle but it turned out to be one for its inventor, Joy Mangano. 
She sold 18,000 mops in her first 20 minutes on QVC in 1992 and was making more 
than $1m a year from mops by 1995. Now Jennifer Lawrence is playing her in a 
forthcoming biography, Joy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evx2%2Fsfb%23img-12&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evx2%2Fsfb%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446743886740%2F8db0a58d-0a7d-4c39-bb3e-8951684b87ae-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eureka!%20From%20Gone%20Girl%20to%20the%20selfie%20stick%20%E2%80%93%20how%20one%20great%20idea%20can%20change%20your%20life&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evx2%2Fstw%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eureka%21+From+Gone+Girl+to+the+selfie+stick+%E2%80%93+how+one+great+idea+can+change+your+life&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evx2%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446743886740%2F8db0a58d-0a7d-4c39-bb3e-8951684b87ae-680x1020.jpeg>
 Lonnie Johnson. Photograph: Thomas S. England/The LIFE Images Collection/Getty 
Lonnie Johnson, the Super Soaker

Water fights turned into full-scale wars in 1991 when the Super Soaker went on 
sale. The ultimate water pistol – which uses air pressure generated by 
arm-pumping to shoot further and faster – was invented by Nasa engineer Lonnie 
Johnson. He sold 2m water guns in the first year, total sales now top $1bn – 
and it was Michael Jackson’s favourite toy.

Cheong Choon Ng, Loom Bands

Ng, a Malaysian immigrant working as a Nissan engineer in Detroit, made some 
rubber bracelets to impress his daughters. They were such a hit at school the 
family invested their entire savings ($10,000) into rubber bands and tools. A 
year later they had sold $40m-worth of loom bands, which have been seen on the 
wrists of William and Kate, David Beckham and Pope Francis. Rachel Dixon




How to have a million dollar idea of your own

By Roy Judkins

Creativity matters because it brings us pleasure. We all enjoy the theatre, 
cinema, games and TV. It adds a deeper dimension to our lives. But it also 
helps humans to advance – medical innovations, for example, require creative 
thinking.


There are no rules for when people are at their most creative. You have to 
find what suits you. Some people get up at 5am and work for two hours every 
day. That’s not right for everyone but it’s true that many people are at their 
best first thing in the morning.

Always be prepared

We get ideas at strange moments, often when we are not directly thinking about 
the idea – while driving or having a bath perhaps. A serious inventor will 
always carry a notebook with them to jot down inspiration. Any exposure to art 
forms can help with creativity, especially if it’s a medium you’re not used to. 
You see what other people have done, then try to push it further. For example, 
Pablo Picasso and Georges Braque had nearby studios and often visited each 
other, spurring each other on.

Trust yourself – and others

You don’t have to be full of self-belief or convinced that you’re going to 
have a brilliant idea. Many artists wrestle with self-doubt.David Bowie lacked 
self-confidence 
<http://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2012/sep/09/observer-profile-david-bowie>
 but that was his energy source – he was motivated by a need to prove himself. 
It can be useful to work with others to get the ball rolling. In groups of two 
or three, one person will come up with an idea and the others will add to it. 
In advertising, the art director and copy writer will often work together, 
bouncing ideas off each other.

Take chances

Randomness can be important. Mozart numbered some random bars of music, one to 
50. He threw a dice to select two bars and then set himself the task of writing 
music to connect them. Giving himself a problem to solve energised him and made 
him work in a different way. Think how you can bring randomness into your 
routine, or see if you can create a problem and solve it using randomness.

Think laterally

If you’re feeling stuck, make a list of three things you’re interested in and 
bring them to your idea, however unrelated they might seem. Philippe Starck was 
interested in animal anatomy and space rockets, and he put elements of both 
into his iconic lemon squeezer.

Break up your routine. If you live by a daily routine, you start to think in a 
routine way. Even just travelling to work by a different route or mode of 
transport can help to open your mind. Mitchell Feigenbaum lived by a 26-hour 
clock, making him move in and out of sync with the rest of the world – 
sometimes he’d be getting up in the middle of the night. He became a pioneer in 
the study of chaos theory.

When James Dyson was vacuuming, he thought of the cyclone extractor fan in his 
factory. Why not combine the two to make a more efficient vacuum cleaner? This 
is true of a lot of inventions: they are simply combinations of things that 
already exist.

Try anything

Salvador Dali was open-minded in his approach. As well as painting, he 
designed furniture, jewellery, the Chupa Chups lollipop logo and appeared in 
television ads. Not being an architect didn’t stop him designing buildings. If 
someone asked him, he’d do it – he wasn’t at all snobbish. Sometimes it didn’t 
work – but sometimes it did. Try to cultivate this open-minded attitude and 
dabble in all sorts of fields.

Stay on course

Lots of artists and designers write a manifesto. It can remind you of your 
values and what matters most to you. Try writing three manifesto sentences to 
stick up around your computer/house/office/studio. Rothko is said to have 
written: “I’m for rough, not smooth.” It’s not a set of rules, more like a 
signpost that stops you going in the wrong direction.

As told to Rachel Dixon

The Art of Creative Thinking by Rod Judkins is available from the Guardian 
Bookshop <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/art-of-creative-thinking.html>, £7.99
