
 Three of Jeremy Corbyn’s shadow ministerial team have endorsed calls for the 
party to focus its energies on attacking the Conservative government amid 
speculation of an imminent reshuffle.

Lilian Greenwood, shadow transport secretary, and Jon Ashworth, the shadow 
cabinet minister, have backedcomments made by Michael Dugher 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/30/not-very-jedi-rumours-of-revenge-reshuffle-by-corbyn-dismissed>
 warning that a “revenge reshuffle” would drown out the party’s attacks on the 
government.

The reshuffle, widely expected to take place next week when MPs return to 
parliament, has dominated the festive break. Reports claim that the Labour 
leader is expected to sack Hilary Benn, the shadow foreign secretary, andMaria 
Eagle <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/maria-eagle>, the shadow defence 
secretary.

Related: New year reshuffle by Jeremy Corbyn could spark further Labour 
conflict 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/28/new-year-reshuffle-jeremy-corbyn-could-spark-further-labour-confllct>

Others reportedly in the frame are Maria’s sister Angela Eagle 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/angela-eagle>, the shadow business 
secretary, and Dame Rosie Winterton, the chief whip. Any such move could lead 
to resignations, which might leave some of Corbyn’s most popular colleagues in 
a position to plot against him.

Shadow ministers have started to urge Labour to focus on the Tory challenge 
instead of their own internal changes. Dugher, a former spin doctor for Gordon 
Brown, wrote earlier this week thatLabour 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> “should be focused on getting 
after the Tories. This is a lousy Tory government and we need to keep exposing 
the fact.”

On Thursday, Greenwood endorsed Dugher’s column as “spot on”, before adding 
that Labour should “expose Tory failure” and explain how Labour offers a 
credible alternative.

Ashworth has also called for the party to concentrate on the Tories. “I am 
sure everyone will want to come back in January and be entirely focused on 
winning those elections facing the country and not the internal issues facing 
the Labour party,” he told Radio 4.

On New Year’s Eve, the shadow international development minister, Diane Abbott,
wrote in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/31/jeremy-corbyn-labour-peter-mandelson>
 that Corbyn is entitled to change his team and that those who complain are 
being “hysterical”.


“There has been a lot of hysterical talk by Jeremy’s opponents of a ‘revenge 
reshuffle’,” she wrote. “But other Labour leaders have been allowed to 
reshuffle their team in their own way and in their own time. Why isJeremy Corbyn
 <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> the only Labour leader of 
modern times not allowed a reshuffle?”

Related: When are Labour party ‘moderates’ going to do more than just moan? | 
John Harris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/01/labour-party-moderates-jeremy-corbyn>

 She was responding to a column in the Guardian by Lord Mandelson 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/31/jeremy-corbyn-wreck-labour-chances-mandelson>
 which claimed that Corbyn had allowed reshuffle rumours to fester to 
destabilise his shadow cabinet enemies.


There is a desire among Corbyn’s allies for a change in personnel to ensure 
greater alignment over international and defence policy, but no decisions are 
believed to have been made as yet over who might be moved or how soon it will 
go ahead.


They believe Corbyn’s mandate as leader gives him the right to change 
ministers to ensure the cabinet reflects the views of the party’s members and 
not just its MPs, who tend to be more rightwing.

Many in the parliamentary party will be looking to the deputy leader, Tom 
Watson, to act as a link between the leader’s office and the parliamentary 
party over the next week. Hetold the Guardian on Tuesday 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/29/mcdonnell-refuses-to-back-hilary-benn-in-labour-reshuffle>
 he knew nothing about a reshuffle.

“I have not been made aware that a reshuffle is due,” he said. “What I have 
seen is that there has been much speculation over Christmas.

“Any reshuffle is for the leader of the Labour party. It is a very lonely job. 
I’m sure that if there is going to be one he will let me know. Leaders have to 
pick the team they want and I will make my views clear.”
