
The fate of hundreds of youths imprisoned under controversial “joint 
enterprise” laws could be decisively rewritten this month when the first test 
cases come before the criminal court of appeal.

The hopes of those who believe they are victims of a miscarriage of justice 
have been bolstered by anextraordinary supreme court victory 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/feb/18/joint-enterprise-law-wrongly-interpreted-for-30-years-court-rules>
 in February, which declared that judges had been misinterpreting the law for 
30 years.

Whether that ruling translates into releases of large numbers of inmates, 
however, may soon become clear as a succession of hearings starts on Tuesday. 
The panel of judges, led by the lord chief justice, Lord Thomas of Cwmgiedd, 
will examine individual cases affected by the so-called foresight principle, 
technically known as “parasitic accessorial liability”. Under this rule, 
someone could be convicted of a crime committed by an associate if it was 
judged they had foreseen the accomplice might commit it.


The court will focus on the facts of each individual case and test whether 
defendants – who were mostly young and often from black or minority ethnic 
backgrounds – should have been convicted on such a low evidential threshold.

The grassroots organisation Joint Enterprise Not Guilty By Association (Jengba 
<http://www.jointenterprise.co/>) has led the campaign to overturn convictions, 
securing the support of the Commons’ justice select committee, the playwright 
Jimmy McGovern and senior lawyers such as Lord Hooper, a retired appeal court 
justice.

The cases of at least six men convicted under joint enterprise laws will go 
before the court of appeal on Tuesday. They include Tyler Burton and Nicholas 
Terrelonge, who were convicted of murdering Ashley Latty outside a birthday 
party in Dagenham in May 2014.

The judges will also hear arguments on behalf of Asher Johnson, his brother 
Lewis, Jerome Green and Reece Garwood, who were all convicted of murdering 
Thomas Cudjoe on a garage forecourt in Ilford in November 2012.

Many of those jailed under joint enterprise rules for secondary roles in 
crimes have been handed extremely long sentences because judges’ ability to 
exercise discretion in individual cases was curtailed by the imposition of 
mandatory life tariffs for murder under the 2003 Criminal Justice Act.

The law of joint enterprise, also known as “common purpose”, where someone 
acts in conjunction with the killer but does not strike the blow that causes 
death, dates back to at least the 16th century. It was later developed to deter 
duelling by making seconds and doctors liable for murder.

In 1984, Sir Robin Cooke, a senior judge, decided an appeal case from Hong 
Kong in the judicial committee of the privy council declaring that foresight 
alone of what an accomplice might do was sufficient to prove guilt.

His ruling, lowering the threshold of proof, set a precedent that was followed 
throughout British common law jurisdictions. Over the past decade the legal 
principle has frequently been used to thwart gang violence.

In February, however, five supreme court justices ruled that courts had 
misinterpreted the foresight rule. In a damning assessment, Lord Neuberger, 
president of the supreme court, said that the line of legal reasoning 
introduced in 1984 had been in “error”. Foresight of what someone else might do 
is merely part of the evidence. “It is for the jury to decide on the whole 
evidence,” Neuberger added, “whether [a secondary party] had the necessary 
intent.”

That ruling, on the case of Ameen Jogee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/feb/18/joint-enterprise-law-wrongly-interpreted-for-30-years-court-rules>
, did not result in mass releases but concluded that disputed cases would have 
to go back before the court of appeal to have the specific facts of the each 
conviction re-examined. Jogee’s conviction was quashed and he will face a 
retrial.

Jengba estimates there may be as many as 700 individuals whose cases need to 
be reviewed under the revised foresight rule. Some cases had already come back 
to the court of appeal and been dismissed under the old rule, some are being 
reconsidered by theCriminal Cases Review Commission ( 
<http://www.lawgazette.co.uk/law/practice-points/joint-enterprise-wrong-turn-in-common-law/5054584.fullarticle>
CCRC).

The CCRC has received 35 new applications for miscarriage of justice since the 
Jogee decision, is considering the decision’s impact on 70 other applications 
and has reopened 20 previously closed cases. The Crown Prosecution Service has 
issued “interim guidance” on joint enterprise cases to all prosecutors and 
plans to revise it following the court of appeal hearings next week.

The supreme court judgment has already had an impact. Two defendants charged 
with murder have been formally acquitted, mid-trial, at the Old Bailey, and an 
eight-handed murder trial in Bristol has been postponed for the prosecution to 
reconsider its case.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ydd7%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ydd7%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F953f8b795a2257efc8f3d235c31e8663f7841cf4%2F0_237_5468_3281%2F5468.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Appeal%20court%20to%20hear%20first%20'guilty%20by%20association'%20test%20cases&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ydd7%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Appeal+court+to+hear+first+%27guilty+by+association%27+test+cases&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ydd7%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F953f8b795a2257efc8f3d235c31e8663f7841cf4%2F0_237_5468_3281%2F5468.jpg>
 The court of appeal will focus on the facts of each individual case and test 
whether defendants – who were mostly young and often from black or minority 
ethnic backgrounds – should have been convicted on such a low evidential 
threshold. Photograph: Alamy 
One part of the supreme court ruling frustrated campaigners. The judgment 
declared that convictions can only be set aside by seeking exceptional leave to 
appeal to the court of appeal out of time but that to do so requires 
“substantial injustice” to be demonstrated not “simply because the law applied 
has now been declared to have been mistaken”.

Simon Natas, a joint enterprise expert at the law firm ITN Solicitors, advises 
Jengba. Under the foresight rule, he said, people were convicted who “did not 
intend anyone to be seriously injured let alone killed, yet they are still 
[deemed to be] a murderer”.

He added: “It set a very low bar. It creates real difficulties for defendants. 
It was much too easy to get convictions and for prosecutions to be used as a 
dragnet. Groups of young people were labelled as gangs...

“That means that the dragnet policy – intelligence-led prosecutions of gangs – 
will end and prosecution resources will be concentrated on key perpertrators. 
Joint enterprise was targeting black and minority ethnic young men.”


Gloria Morrison, one of the organisers of Jengba, became involved after her 
son’s friend, Kenneth Alexander, was convicted of murder for a disputed role in 
a fight. She visits prisons to talk to those convicted under joint enterprise.

“Many of the young people don’t see the legitimacy of being in prison,” she 
said. “People don’t understand joint enterprise because it’s so awful. They 
don’t want to believe that in the UK we send children to prison for life even 
though they are not guilty.

“People just see the headlines of ‘Feral Youths’. We are giving police and 
prosecutors sledgehammers [to tackle gangs]. Juries don’t know about mandatory 
life sentences. The average sentence for murder in 2006 was 15/16 years. Now 
it’s 24 years.”

After six years lawyers can destroy files, Morrison said, meaning that vital 
evidence may have been lost. “Not everyone is going to get a golden key [to 
their freedom],” she added. “I’m very frightened about what the next stage will 
be. Everyone’s hopes are up. We will have to wait and see what the court of 
appeal does.

Sophie Walker, director of the Centre for Criminal Appeals 
<http://criminalappeals.org.uk/>, a nonprofit law firm taking on joint 
enterprise appeals cases, said: “After tireless campaigning by families, a few 
prisoners whose lives have been ruined by this ill-applied doctrine will 
finally be getting a chance at justice in front of the court of appeal.

 “We remain concerned that legal aid cuts and chronic underfunding of the 
Criminal Cases Review Commission – whose role it is to refer unsafe joint 
enterprise convictions to the court of appeal – will hinder this change in law 
from translating into real progress.”



Cases

Michael Hall and Laura Mitchell

Michael Hall, then 22, an electrician, had been with his girlfriend Laura 
Mitchell, also 22, outside a Bradford pub in January 2007 when a fight broke 
out over who had booked a taxi. During the initial scuffle, Hall said, he 
pulled the eventual victim, Andrew Ayres, 50, off Mitchell. She was later seen 
wandering around the car park; she said she was simply trying to find shoes, 
which had been lost.

Both Hall and Mitchell, who has a young son, insisted they were unaware that 
two of their co-defendants had allegedly gone to a nearby house, armed 
themselves with CS spray, knuckledusters and ball and chain mace and returned 
for a more serious fight. One of the assailants was seen stamping on Ayres’ 
head. All four – Hall, Mitchell and the two other men – were sentenced to a 
minimum of 13 and a half years in prison for murder. Hall’s case goes before 
the court of appeal this month. Jengba says that neither Hall nor Mitchell were 
aware of, or witnessed, Ayres being kicked to death by the man who did plead 
guilty to the murder.


Andrew Feather
One of the first joint enterprise cases to go before the court of appeal will 
involve new evidence as well as claims that the joint enterprise law was 
misapplied. Andrew Feather, 26, was convicted for being the get-away driver in 
the murder of a Bradford man, Barry Selby, who died in October 2013 after 
intruders smashed their way into his home, shot him in the leg and poured acid 
over his body. Feather was never alleged to be in the house at the time of the 
attack. He was convicted of murder and given a 26-year sentence. His lawyer, 
Simon Pook of Robert Lazar Solicitors, will help present fresh material 
challenging the timings on CCTV recordings relied on by the police.

“In one of the CCTV images used in the original trial there’s a van from a 
poultry firm which we managed to trace,” Pook explained. “We looked at its 
tachograph – which relies on GPS satellite timings – to show that the police 
calibration of the CCTV evidence was out by between six or 12 minutes.

“That shows that Andrew’s car was elsewhere. The prosecution say he was on the 
estate [at the time of the killing] but we are satisfied we can place 
significant doubt [on that claim]. We say Andrew didn’t take any part in this. 
He wasn’t there. We can place him in another part of Bradford [at that time].”

Feather’s mother, Michelle, visited him in prison earlier this month. “He was 
fairly confident of what the outcome will be. He has always protested his 
innocence. He knew a couple of the others [who were involved] but he did not go 
around with them. He had his girlfriend in the car. The prosecution said they 
didn’t know where he was [that evening] but still said he was part of a joint 
enterprise.”

Asher and Lewis Johnson 
Two brothers, Asher and Lewis Johnson, were convicted of murder and each 
sentenced to serve 16 and a half years minimum in prison after a fight on a 
garage forecourt in Ilford, Essex. Both brothers, then aged 24 and 21 , had 
withdrawn from the scene, according to Jengba, to distance themselves from any 
further trouble as more people arrived. The victim, Thomas Cudjoe, was stabbed 
to death as he was trapped in the driving seat of his car. CCTV evidence 
recorded Asher and Lewis moving away from the scene before the knife was 
produced. Their case is due to be heard by the court of appeal on 21 June.


The joint enterprise law

There are three categories of joint enterprise crimes. Not all revolve around 
the question of foresight. They are:
 1) Where all the accused are joint principals, participating, for example, in 
the violence of a street robbery.
 2) Where an accessory assists or encourages someone else to commit a crime, 
for example acting as a look-out for a burglary or providing someone with a 
weapon for a stabbing.
 3) Where at least two people cooperate in a crime but then the principal 
commits a further offence. If the first defendant is deemed to have had 
foresight of the second crime then under the old rules he or she can be found 
guilty of both offences. This is known as “parasitic accessory liability”. It 
is the category of joint enterprise which, the supreme court said, has been 
repeatedly misinterpreted and over-extended to the point where the threshold 
for proving guilty has been lowered too far.



