
I’ve set myself a challenge: to fill a vase of flowers each week until autumn. 
It’s partly because the cut flower industry is notorious for its less-than-rosy 
ethical and environmental credentials: cheap flowers often mean cheap labour, 
high pesticide and fertiliser usage, and hefty air miles.

Related: Orchids: Sow, Grow, Repeat Winter 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/audio/2016/feb/06/orchids-sow-grow-repeat-winter>

Thankfully, there are a number of Fairtrade schemes for cut flowers (listen to 
the Guardian’s Sow, Grow, Repeat podcast on cut flowers 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gardening-blog/audio/2015/may/14/sow-grow-repeat-podcast-flowers>
 for details) and a growing body of British flower farmers who are providing a 
year-round celebration of seasonable blooms. But there’s nothing to say that 
you can’t grow your own. There are a number of mail-order seed catalogues known 
for cut flowers:Sarah Raven <https://www.sarahraven.com/>, Higgledy Garden 
<http://higgledygarden.com/shop/> and Seedaholic <http://www.seedaholic.com/> 
all have lists to dream about, while all the major seed houses offer cut flower 
ranges.

You need to buy seeds now, partly because the best varieties run out; and 
partly because some half-hardy and tender annuals (cosmos 
<https://www.sarahraven.com/flowers/seeds/cosmos>, bells of Ireland 
<http://higgledygarden.com/2013/01/17/sowing-molucella-bells-of-ireland-seeds/>,
cleome <http://higgledygarden.com/2013/06/12/growing-cleome-from-seed/> and 
nicotiana <http://www.seedaholic.com/catalogsearch/result/?q=Nicotiana>) need 
to be started off under heat; wait until the end of the month to do this. Sweet 
peas can also be started indoors now, or direct sown outdoors by late March to 
April.

Consider seed that is either certified organic or pesticide free. If starting 
seedlings on a windowsill seems a little too much hassle, then go for hardy 
annuals that can be sown direct, or in seed trays outside. The biggest failure 
with these flowers comes from sowing too early. I tend to stick to around the 
second week of April before I get going outside, and then sow in batches into 
mid-May, so I get a longer picking season. Sowing direct can be incredibly 
satisfying, but you’ll waste a lot of seed if you just scatter into a bed 
largely filled with plants. Yes, there are lots of gaps now, but there won’t be 
later in the year, so your seeds are just going to get shaded out.

Related: Alys Fowler: variegation isn’t always a bad thing 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/30/alys-fowler-variegation-isnt-always-bad-thing>

Self-seeders like calendulas, nasturtiums and poppies will happily find their 
niche, but in the beginning, particularly if you don’t want to grow in straight 
lines, it makes sense to either raise your seedlings in a seed bed or in trays, 
and plant out where you have definite spaces. Larger annuals, such as 
sunflowers, hate root disturbance, so it’s wise to start these off in large 
pots (3in square pots are ideal) and plant them out well before you can see any 
roots poking out.

You’ll need compost to start seedlings off (try New Horizon peat-free), and if 
you’re starting seedlings off inside, get hold ofa windsowsill propagator set 
<https://www.dobbies.com/products/gardening/plant-care-and-growing/seed-trays/dobbies-windowsill-propagator-set/>
. These have everything you need: a drip tray, 5x6 cells for starting seedlings 
off, and a clear propagator lid.

 * We’d love to see what homegrown blooms you’re showing off in a vase this 
week. Tweet your pictures to @guardiangardens using the hashtag #InMyVase. Next 
week: inexpensive bulbs and tubers that make excellent and easy cut flowers. 
 * Alys Fowler has curated a series of Guardian Masterclasses covering garden 
design, foraging,growing cut flowers 
<http://www.theguardian.com/guardian-masterclasses/2016/feb/11/celebration-how-to-grow-your-own-wedding-event-flowers-course>
 and fruit and vegetables. Find out more and book your place now at
theguardian.com/masterclasses <http://theguardian.com/masterclasses> 