
Can begonias ever be rescued from the pit of uncool, my editor asks. The 
bedding sort with flowers that look like ra-ra skirts from the 80s? I doubt it. 
Anything bred with that sort of flounce is going to be hard to elevate.

And why bother, when you can grow the species types? These wild begonias from 
Brazil, Bolivia, India, Japan and China (begonias get everywhere) are 
effortlessly cool, with striking architectural forms and elegant foliage 
perfect for shady corners where other plants struggle. They make wonderful 
container plants for patios, courtyards, basement gardens and shady balconies. 
Some of these begonias are truly hardy, surviving well below freezing, as long 
as their soil requirements are met; others are more borderline and will need to 
be treated as houseplants over winter.

Begonias are fragile things that are hard to transport, so any mail-order 
plants will be large plugs at best. It is up to you to get them to a good 
stature. Large, luxurious begonias like to be moist, but not soggy. Mix two 
parts compost with one part perlite or grit to create free-draining but rich 
conditions, and feed regularly through the summer with liquid feed or use 
slow-release pellets. Outside, they do best in humus-rich woodland conditions 
in part or full shade – if too dry, they will look weedy and often get mildew 
issues. Leaf mould, well-rotted homemade compost and fine bark mulch will 
improve thin soil under trees. Or grow them in pots under the canopy so they 
don’t have to compete with thirsty tree roots.

Crûg Farm Plants <http://www.crug-farm.co.uk/> offers the best choice for 
hardy types.Dibleys Nurseries 
<http://www.dibleys.com/dibleys-shop/Begonias.html>’ tender begonias are 
equally wonderful.Suttons 
<http://www.suttons.co.uk/Gardening/Flower+Plants/Popular+Flower+Plants/Begonia+Plants/list.htm>
 also offers well-grown plugs, if you can wade through the flouncy stuff to 
find the elegant.

Begonia luxurians <https://www.shootgardening.co.uk/plant/begonia-luxurians> 
has to be one of my favourites, because it is rather unexpected. It’s a 
cane-type begonia with tall stems that can reach up to 2m, with tiny, white, 
highly scented flowers and palmate leaves like long, elegant fingers. They need 
to be warm to grow tall, and prefer high humidity, so nestle them among other 
plant pots. Feed regularly and keep out of direct sunlight.B. boliviensis 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Begonia_boliviensis> is a corm-type, which means 
it dies back over winter. It has long, arching stems and brilliant orange 
flowers and looks best grown in a container on a plant stand so the flowers 
drop elegantly. Put it somewhere frost-free over winter.

Related: How to grow perfect potatoes | Alys Fowler 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/16/how-to-grow-perfect-potatoes>

B. grandis subsp evansiana 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/95775/Begonia-grandis-subsp-evansiana/Details?returnurl=%2Fplants%2Fsearch-results%3Fs%3Ddesc(plant_merged)%26query%3Dbegonia%26form-mode%3Dfalse%26context%3Db%25253D0%252526hf%25253D10%252526l%25253Den%252526q%25253Dbegonia%252526s%25253Ddesc%25252528plant_merged%25252529%252526sl%25253Dplants%26page%3D4%26aliaspath%3D%252fplants%252fsearch-results>
 is by far the hardiest, and can be successfully used under trees and in 
woodland conditions. It will die back in winter – but, before that, it drops 
lots of bulbils that will spring forth the following year, so it will spread. 
It grows to 90cm tall, and has large palmate leaves with striking red 
undersides, prominent red nodes on the stem and sprays of tiny pink flowers. A 
smaller choice would beB. sinensis 
<https://www.mailorder.crug-farm.co.uk/default.aspx?pid=9971> at a more modest 
30cm.
