
Some free schools catering for children with behavioural difficulties have 
received hundreds of thousands of pounds per pupil from the taxpayer, 
government data has revealed.

Five “alternative provision” free schools received in excess of £100,000 per 
pupil in 2013-14, with the two highest-funded – the Acorn free school in 
Lincoln and Continu Plus academy in Kidderminster, Worcestershire – given 
£430,000 a pupil each. This is more than 10 times the fees of Britain’s most 
expensive boarding schools.

In total, 18 alternative provision free schools received £26m in 2013‑14: that 
is, £59,000 per pupil on average. By contrast, England’s 839 local authority 
special schools received £22,000 per pupil.

The figures are disclosed in Department for Education data 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/income-and-expenditure-in-academies-in-england-2013-to-2014>
. Per-pupil funding rankings are heavily influenced by the fact that those 
seemingly most lavishly resourced on this measure have just come into operation 
and are listed in the data as having tiny numbers of pupils: the Acorn, for 
example, is recorded as having just two students while receiving government 
grants of £860,000.

By contrast, the Acorn’s accounts for 2013-14 [pdf] 
<http://www.theacornschool.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/Acorn-final-accounts-dated.pdf>
, its first year of operation, say it had reached its capacity of 24 pupils by 
July 2014. The DfE data citing only two pupils was based on a “snapshot” of the 
number educated in January 2014. Continu Plus academy is listed in the DfE 
tables as having five pupils and grants of £2.1m.

We investigated the figures after a critic of the funding of the alternative 
provision free school run by Everton football club in Liverpool raised concerns 
about it receiving £36,000 per pupil – not at the top of the league for 
funding, according to the DfE, by any means. Richard Knights, a teacher and 
Everton fan, said: “£36,000 per pupil is still an awful lot of money; other 
schools would love to have that amount”.

The DfE said alternative provision was more expensive than mainstream 
schooling and that many pupils using it for short periods would not be counted 
in the data as they would still be registered as attending a mainstream school. 
It added that, using similar calculations, 11 pupil referral units or 
alternative schools in the local authority sector were funded at £400,000 per 
pupil or higher, though it could not direct us to the source of this data.

The debate over whether ministers are favouring their free school scheme with 
extra cash is likely to continue.

Academy sponsor uses ‘tax deferral’ scheme


Related: School’s out for Harris academy teachers in turnover that ‘should 
ring alarm bells’ 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/oct/13/schools-harris-academy-teachers-ofsted>

The multimillionaire sponsor of an academy chain is a member of a “tax 
deferral” scheme that has reportedly been under investigation by HM Revenue and 
Customs, Education Guardian has learned.

Michael Dwan, sponsor of the Stockport-based Bright Tribe trust, which runs 
seven schools, has invested in a scheme run by the Invicta Film Partnership. 
Other high-profile figures have been caught up in what has been described as a 
wider £7bninvestigation into tax avoidance 
<http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/news/uk_news/National/article1516677.ece?shareToken=7dce6c941e3af81d49a201a58a2a1d60>
.

A circular sent to members of the scheme last year said it was subject to an 
HMRC inquiry. Dwan is also a director of a publishing company set up by a 
trustee of Bright Tribe, Professor David Hopkins. Last week, we revealed that
Hopkins was paid £140,000-£145,000 in 2013-14 by Bright Tribe 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/oct/13/schools-harris-academy-teachers-ofsted>
.

Concerning the Invicta Film Partnership, a spokesman for Bright Tribe said: 
“Mr Dwan is not a public figure and will not provide any comment on matters 
which he considers to be private.”

HMRC offered no comment on the investigation.

Ofsted flaws revealed by serious case review 


New insights have been provided into the failings of Ofsted when it inspected 
a private special school, after the publication of a serious case review. 
Ofsted was forced into an overhaul of the way it assesses schools’ safeguarding 
arrangements afteradmitting basic flaws 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/jul/31/ofsted-apologises-girls-special-school>
.

A 2012 inspection of Stanbridge Earls school near Romsey, Hampshire, failed to 
consider child protection concerns that had been raised with Ofsted and the DfE 
by a parent, even though it was this complaint that had led to the inspection 
being ordered by the DfE. Stanbridge Earls then retained its “outstanding” 
rating from Ofsted.

The report [pdf] 
<http://www.hampshiresafeguardingchildrenboard.org.uk/user_controlled_lcms_area/uploaded_files/Final%20SES%20Report%202%20October%202015.pdf>
 published this month by the Hampshire Safeguarding Children Board found Ofsted 
had decided the parent’s concerns should not be the focus of its report as “the 
inspector had been advised that this was being investigated by the police” and 
the local authority.

Related: Ofsted apologises to parents of girls abused by male pupils at 
special school 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/jul/31/ofsted-apologises-girls-special-school>

The serious case review says: “This does seem to be a fundamental failing in 
an inspection specifically sparked by allegations that children were not safe.”

The inspectorate started to issue negative inspection findings on the school, 
in what the case review describes as a “volte-face”, only after an independent 
special needs tribunal raised a string of concerns about child safety.

The serious case review reports that the police did investigate an allegation 
of rape but no criminal charges were brought. The tribunal awarded £86,000 to 
the parents.

Stanbridge Earls closed in 2013 because of low pupil numbers. However, the 
serious case review documents a split between parents, with some saying the 
school did a good job.

An internal review [pdf] 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/379566/Stanbridge_20Earls_20School_20Review_20Report.pdf>
 of the case by Ofsted produced 20 recommendations for change, including better 
internal information sharing, better quality assurance of inspections and 
retraining on safeguarding matters for staff. The serious case review said 
Ofsted had “learned lessons”.

Missing minutes are a transparent failure


Finally, we were intrigued by reported comments that the current review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/11/the-guardian-view-on-the-freedom-of-information-commission-a-very-british-farce>
 of freedom of information law represents part of the government’scommitment 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/freedom-of-information-new-commission> 
to be the most “transparent in the world”. Given this promise, it’s a bit 
surprising that, at the time of writing, Ofsted had published no minutes of 
board meetings since January, and Ofqual had not done so since February. 
Meanwhile, the DfE’s most recentboard minutes [pdf] 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/416112/Summary_minutes_for_publication_-_January.pdf>
, which date back to January, will make amusing reading for open government 
fans – running, as they do, to just two sentences. Under “note of discussions”, 
the minutes say: “The board held discussions on the work of the department 
during parliament”. Transparency in action.
