
“Women warned after Gainsborough assault 
<http://www.gainsboroughstandard.co.uk/news/local/women-warned-after-gainsborough-assualt-1-7517367>
.” “Police warn women walking alone afterriverside incident 
<http://www.northdevonjournal.co.uk/Police-warn-women-walking-riverside-incident/story-28012677-detail/story.html>
.” “Serial sex attacker strikes again as ninth victim is assaulted andpolice 
warn women 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3299166/Serial-sex-attacker-Clapham-strikes-NINTH-victim-assaulted.html>
 to be on their guard.” “Police issue warning to women not to walk or travel 
alone after woman grabbed inlatest incident 
<http://www.scunthorpetelegraph.co.uk/8203-Police-issue-warning-women-walk-travel-woman/story-27990456-detail/story.html>
.” “Fugitive rapist: womenurged not to walk alone 
<http://www.manchestereveningnews.co.uk/news/greater-manchester-news/fugitive-rapist-manchester-airport-women-10363005>
 as chilling footage at Manchester airport released.” These headlines represent 
five cases in the past month alone where UK police have reportedly warned women 
to adjust their routines or behaviour because of crime in a particular area.

Many people reading these articles would nod approvingly and suggest that this 
is simply a common sense measure, given the risk. Of course the police are also 
doing all they can to catch the perpetrator in each case – they aren’t 
suggesting women should take sole responsibility for dealing with the problem. 
And yet, how absurd it would seem if we were to apply similar logic to any 
other type of crime …

“Police warn motorists not to drive after speeding drivers cause crashes in 
local area.”

“Police warn residents not to have garden sheds made out of wood after spate 
of arson cases.”

The idea of advising women not to walk or travel alone in an area where there 
has been a sexual assault might seem straightforward at first glance, but not 
everybody has the luxury of a car. Many people are dependent on walking, 
whether for their whole journey or to the nearest bus stop. As simple as it 
might sound to suggest travelling with a friend or family member, the reality 
of women’s daily lives means that it would be near-impossible for most to 
arrange this and keep to their own busy schedules.

Surely, this is obvious. Nobody is really expecting women in Clapham to 
venture out only in groups of three, armed with rape alarms and baseball bats. 
So what is the impact of issuing such advice? It starts to suggest to the 
general public that, specifically in cases of sexual assault, victims should be 
taking responsibility for their own safety and, implicitly, may be partly to 
blame if they are attacked.

If you think this is an exaggeration, just look at the first sentence from one 
of the articles 
<http://www.northdevonjournal.co.uk/Police-warn-women-walking-riverside-incident/story-28012677-detail/story.html#ixzz3qVyDuo9z>
: “Women are being asked to take more care while walking around alone at night 
after an incident involving a man who reportedly tried to grab a woman on a 
riverside path.” Imagine reading this sentence as a recent victim of assault, 
as you deliberate whether or not to report what happened last night when you 
hurried home from work on your own in the dark.

The way we approach and discuss these topics matters. It has a huge impact. 
Surveyed in 2014 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/crime/11409210/Drunk-or-flirty-rape-victims-often-to-blame-says-survey.html>
, more than one third of the British public – from whom rape trial juries are 
drawn – insisted that sexual assault victims bear partial responsibility for 
their attack if they have been “flirting heavily” beforehand, and more than one 
quarter believed they are partially responsible if they are drunk. This kind of 
police advice can only compound such attitudes.

The notion of telling women to take responsibility for their own safety from 
sexual violence is as old as it is ridiculous; from women-only train carriages 
(which suggest male violence is inevitable and so women’s behaviour and freedom 
must be altered and constrained to accommodate it), topolice campaigns 
<http://www.womensviewsonnews.org/2013/02/another-dire-anti-rape-poster/> 
suggesting it is a victim’s job to try to avoid being raped.

It sends an insidious message, reinforcing attitudes that blame victims and 
allow perpetrators (cast as a blurry, inevitable evil rather than determined, 
deliberate criminals) off the hook. And, of course, as women’s campaigners 
shout ourselves hoarse repeating, such advice makes no logical sense. Women of 
all ages are raped in a huge variety of places wearing all sorts of clothing. 
We know that around90% of rapes are perpetrated by people known to the victim 
<http://rapecrisis.org.uk/statistics.php>, which blows out of the water any 
suggestion that women somehow provoke an unplanned attack by drinking alcohol 
or wearing short skirts.

Perhaps most worryingly of all, these messages are coming from the 
institutions that are supposed to be tackling criminals, not policing victim 
behaviour. The past week also saw “banter” about rapebetween members of the 
public and the official Merseyside police Twitter account 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/01/merseyside-police-apologise-tweets-made-light-of-rape>
; an exchange that was retweeted nearly 1,000 times. It comes hot on the heels 
of revelations about officers wholeft an abusive voicemail 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/women/womens-life/11957145/Domestic-violence-British-police-voicemail-called-victim-a-slag.html>
 on the phone of a woman who had reported domestic abuse, calling her a 
“fucking slag” and a “bitch”.

Now look back at the recent figures revealing that more than a quarter of all 
sexual offences (including rape) reported to the police are not even recorded 
as crimes 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/womens-blog/2014/nov/21/police-letting-rape-victims-down-too>
, and ask yourself how important attitudes towards sexual violence victims are.

This is a desperate situation, and demands active measures such as training at 
all levels to counteract rape myths and victim-blaming attitudes among those on 
the frontline of law enforcement. We know that85,000 women are raped and 
400,000 sexually assaulted 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/214970/sexual-offending-overview-jan-2013.pdf>
 in England and Wales each year. We know that only around15% of victims feel 
able to report to the police 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/an-overview-of-sexual-offending-in-england-and-wales>
. Isn’t it time we started asking why?
