
The unusual Phellodendron amurense (amur cork tree) is particularly 
spectacular thanks to its interesting branch structure that stands out against 
winter fog

Many evergreen herbs such as lavender and rosemary are revealed as everything 
else dies down. The silvery grey of their foliage is enhanced by frost and dew

On winter days when it isn't frosty, the terracotta urn and matching paving 
have an affinity with the copper leaves of the hornbeam and the brown stems of 
the faded perennials

This garden takes the contemporary attitude towards perennials; instead of 
cutting them down by mid-November, seedheads are left standing, benefiting 
wildlife and the look of the garden

A hornbeam hedge is best pruned in late summer, and will hang on to some dead 
foliage through winter, increasing its visual bulk

Winter lays bare the bones of a garden and so is a good test of the strength 
of its design. This frosty scene at the herb garden at RHS Wisley in Surrey 
allows us to see the various components that make up the garden without all the 
distracting frills of colour and contrast that fill it in summer.

Garden design is about controlling the eye, forcing it to see what you want it 
to see, and consequently this vista is very successful. The large tree makes a 
backdrop, arresting the eye and keeping it focused on the garden and not the 
view beyond. The hornbeam hedge in front is one of a number of horizontal 
elements, including a low box hedge behind the terracotta pot and the 
peninsulas of frost-laden perennials. These swing in from the sides, 
interlocking with each other and showing how a garden can be built up in 
layers. They also force the eye to explore the entire view, switching from side 
to side as it traces its way along the path between the blocks of perennials, 
past the urn and on to the bench and finally the tree.

The verticals of the faded perennial stems, the trunks of the individual 
hornbeam plants and the upright branches of the trees contrast with the 
horizontals, moving the viewer's gaze from the foreground all the way to the 
back (rhs.org.uk <http://www.rhs.org.uk>).
