
Just over two years ago, in February 2014, I left the local authority where I 
worked as a social worker 
<http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog/2015/jan/30/left-social-work-care-agency>
. My mission was to set up and run an outstanding care provider. Having seen 
poor practice in the homecare sector, I felt I needed to try and make a change. 
And now the Care Quality Commission (CQC) has ratedClarkeCare, the service I 
run in Bury St Edmunds, as ‘outstanding’ 
<http://www.cqc.org.uk/location/1-2446541389>.

Related: The outstanding Yorkshire care home: 'We aim to give people the care 
we'd want' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/mar/01/outstanding-care-home-cqc-older-people>

Andrea Sutcliffe, chief inspector of adult social care at the CQC, said: “The 
quality of care which our inspectors found here was exceptional and I am very 
pleased that we can celebrate the service’s achievements. An outstanding 
service is the result of a tremendous amount of hard work and commitment. I 
would like to thank and congratulate everyone involved”.

Has it been easy? Absolutely not. I’ve worked 60+ hours every week to make it 
the kind of care service I would happily have care for my mum. It has taken 
dedication, hard work, compassion and bucket loads of energy to make this a 
successful care service and maintain the high standards we have set. Recruiting 
the right people, marketing the business, training and caring all take up a 
huge amount of my time.

Despite the long days, I wouldn’t change a thing. The great feedback you 
receive from knowing you are delivering safe, effective care makes it such a 
rewarding job. Clients told the inspector: “They’re there for the whole 
family”; “Going above and beyond”; “Extremely attentive, look at the whole 
family set up, call me and ask how I am getting on.” That is why we do what we 
do – to make clients and families feel well cared for and to see the care 
service they are receiving as vital to their health and wellbeing.


We need to work together to encourage more people into a caring role. It’s a 
fantastically rewarding career.

I have always want ClarkeCare to raise the profile of care as a professional 
career. Just as nurses are respected for their role, I want great care workers 
to be shown the same regard. Programmes highlighting abuse of older people are 
of course a way of raising the importance of safeguarding the most vulnerable 
people in our society. However, great care workers need to have a light shone 
on their work.

More people should know about the compassion that they show day in, day out. 
Homecare <http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/homecare> workers 
provide a vital service which is a fundamental foundation of the health 
service. Hospitals are bursting with people who could be supported at home 
instead. So why aren’t they at home?

But there aren’t enough great care providers and care workers to meet the 
demand. We need to work together to encourage more people into a caring role. 
It’s a fantastically rewarding career, and with our growing ageing population, 
good care workers will never be out of a job.


Related: How care home at centre of TV investigation was turned around 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/jun/09/care-home-tv-investigation-panorama-turned-around>

Now we have our outstanding rating, my aim is to continue building a team of 
care professional assistants who love what they do and aren’t ashamed to say 
they work in care. I have strived to motivate my team and make them proud of 
what they do. They are very much part of the building of the business and the 
care planning with clients. They are shown respect for their ideas, and we say 
“thank you” a lot.

One of my care workers told the inspector: “I just love going in ... I do 
everything as I would like it done to me. I ask [the person] if I could do 
anything different, I always ask.” Another said: “The managers are approachable 
and friendly. They listen to us and respond to us. I feel valued as a member of 
the team.”

To know the team is happy makes me so proud and gives me the motivation to 
continue driving this outstanding service forward.


Running any business has its ups and downs, but there are far more highs than 
lows in ClarkeCare. We laugh a lot, celebrate achievements and all love what we 
do. I’m hugely grateful to the CQC for recognising how hard we work to provide 
this vital service. So many people have contacted me saying they would like to 
start their own care agency, which is fantastic. The more outstanding agencies 
we have out there, the better.

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
