
Political cartoons play an important role in newspaper comment pages in 
getting to the heart of an issue in a humorous or satirical way. AsAndrew 
Rawnsley <http://www.theguardian.com/profile/andrewrawnsley> noted in 2007 in 
the foreword to the Riddell at the Observer exhibition: "His [Chris'] cartoons 
combine political intelligence with instant accessibility. Chris is not the 
most brutally caricaturing of cartoonists. For sure he does savage, but he does 
so with a sophistication, a wit and a charm that makes it all the more 
effective in satirising hypocrisy and lampooning folly."

Chris Riddell became the Observer's political cartoonist in 1995. Prior to 
this, he had produced illustrations and cartoons for various periodicals 
including theEconomist <http://www.economist.com>, Independent 
<http://www.independent.co.uk>, the Literary Review 
<http://www.literaryreview.co.uk>, the New Statesman 
<http://www.newstatesman.com> as well as the Business section of the Observer. 
He studied art at Brighton Polytechnic where one of his teachers wasRaymond 
Briggs <https://www.theguardian.com/books/raymond-briggs>.

Sir John Tenniel is a hero of Riddell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jan/11/my-hero-john-tenniel-chris-riddell>
 and is one of the reasons he became an illustrator. Tenniel joinedPunch 
<http://www.punch.co.uk> as a political cartoonist in 1850. His work was 
spotted by Charles Dodgson who approached him to illustrate his book Alice's 
Adventures Underground, which he published under his pseudonym Lewis Carroll as
Alice's Adventures in Wonderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jan/20/100-best-novels-alice-wonderland>
 (1865). Tenniel also illustrated the second bookAlice Through the Looking-Glass
 <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/dec/30/fromthearchives.lewiscarroll>
(1871).

A Riddell cartoon in the archive collection highlights this influence. 
Published on 11 May 2003 it depicts the then Prime Minister,Tony Blair 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> and Chancellor of the Exchequer,
Gordon Brown <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/gordon-brown> as if they were 
the fighting brothers Tweedledum and Tweedledee from Alice Through the 
Looking-Glass. Just as when Alice meets them in the woods they are identically 
dressed in school uniform with their names on the collars. A rhyme pops into 
her head about them fighting over a rattle, the first verse of which is in the 
cartoon. The broken head of TweedleBlair's Euro rattle lies on the ground and 
TweedleBrown is holding a hammer with which he broke it – the five economic 
tests.
 TweedleBlair and TweedleBrown cartoon, 11 May 2003 Cartoon: Chris Riddell for 
the Observer 
The issue of whether the UK would join the single European currency, the Euro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/euro>, had been an issue of tension between 
the Prime Minister and Chancellor since 1997. Blair was keen to join the Euro. 
Blair agreed with Brown in the autumn of 1997, soon after Labour's election 
victory, that entry to the Euro would be dependent on a series offive measures 
of the economic strength 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2000/sep/29/emu.theeuro4> as judged by 
the Treasury and Chancellor. The economy, at that time, was not deemed to have 
passed these tests and it was agreed to put the decision on hold until Labour's 
second term in office. At the time of the cartoon Brown was due to make a 
statement highlighting that the five tests necessary for entry to the Euro had 
not been passed, thwarting Blair's hopes. Andrew Rawnsley's comment piece,How 
Gordon fixed Tony, <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2003/may/11/euro.eu> 
which sat opposite the cartoon in the Observer, highlights the ongoing 
political battle between Blair and Brown over UK Euro entry.

TweedleBlair and TweedleDum cartoon, Chris Riddell, Sunday 11 May 2003 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1393585918367/GNM-Archive-Chris-Riddell--.pdf>
TweedleBlair and TweedleBrown, cartoon, Chris Riddell – Observer, Sunday 11 
May 2003, page 29 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1393492160570/EC-Riddell-Cartoon-11-May-p.pdf>
Andrew Rawnsley: How Gordon fixed Tony – Observer, Sunday 11 May 2003, page 28 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1393492334537/EC-Andrew-Rawnsley-Article-.pdf>

A second prescient cartoon, from June 2007, in the Archive's collection 
highlights the issue of Global warming. A polar bear is depicted standing 
precariously on a shrinking piece of ice, surrounded by sea. At the G8 
countries summit in Germany, that week, the world's top leaders signed up in 
principle, to reduce carbon dioxide emissions by 50% by 2050 – however this was 
a non binding agreement. This lack of compulsion is reflected in the polar 
bear's speech bubble. It appeared above the Observer leader piece summing up 
the implications of the conference.

Observer leader page with Chris Riddell's G8 polar bear cartoon, Sunday 10 
June 2007, page 32 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1393492408375/EC-Observer-leader-page-10-.pdf>

Chris Riddell usually draws and paints his weekly cartoon on a Friday. He used 
to travel in from his home in Brighton, thinking about possible topics and 
sketching on his train journey into the office, where he liaised with the 
editor and composed the cartoon. There he would draw out the chosen sketch, ink 
it in, paint it with watercolour and then dry it with a hair dryer. It would 
then be scanned for Sunday's newspaper. In the last few years he has been able 
to do this process at home and email the cartoon in.

He talked about ideas and demonstrated how he creates a cartoon when he was 
filmed caricaturing the new Deputy Prime Minister as Little Clegg Riding Hood 
in July 2010 <http://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2010/jul/18/nickclegg>. 
He discusses his style and motivation: "One can be more devastating by being 
gentler and kinder. It's one of those more in sympathy rather than in anger 
approaches which can be something that politicians find harder to combat. They 
can take hate, they can take vitriol but they can't take pity quite as well."

The full cartoon Little Clegg Riding Hood's electoral reform fairytale 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/cartoon/2010/jul/04/nick-clegg-electoral-reform-chris-riddell>
 was published on the Observer comment pages on 4 July 2010.Peter Preston 
<http://www.theguardian.com/profile/peterpreston> also discussed  cartoonists' 
recent portrayal of Nick Clegg 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/jul/18/nick-clegg-cartoon-caricature>
, two weeks later.

You can see Chris Riddell's latest Observer cartoon here 
<http://www.theguardian.com/profile/chrisriddell>.

A catalogue of Chris Riddell's cartoons is available to search online and the 
collection can be consulted in theGNM Archive 
<http://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive> reading room in London by appointment.

Past teaching resources of the month from the GNM Archive 
<http://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/series/resource-of-the-month>

More teaching resources can be found on our resources for teachers 
<http://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/resources-for-teachers> page.
