
Every night, classical music blares from garbage trucks in Taipei, summoning 
people from their homes. In their hands, they clutch bags or buckets of kitchen 
scraps, which they dump into a bin on the truck. From there, the food travels 
to farms, where it helps ensure a good supply of one of Taiwan’s food staples.

Farmers have fed leftover food to livestock for centuries, but Taiwan is one 
of a handful of countries that have institutionalized the practice. About two 
thirds of the island nation’s overall food waste, which totaled 610,000 tons 
last year, goes to help feed the country’s 5.5m pigs – thetop meat source 
<http://www.statista.com/statistics/440264/taiwan-per-capita-meat-consumption-by-type/>
 for the country’s 23.5 million people.

The practice reduces the amount of garbage that goes to landfills or gets 
burned, while helping farmers lower their production costs.

Related: The Pig Idea: use food waste as animal feed rather than crops, say 
celebrity chefs 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/food-blog/pig-idea-food-waste-feed-tristram-stuart-thomasina-miers>

“We realized there was a lot of kitchen waste and that if we put it in 
incinerators it would hamper incineration because it’s wet,” said Chiang 
Tsu-nong, deputy inspector general with the government’s Bureau of 
Environmental Inspection. “And Taiwan’s land is limited, so if you build a 
landfill or an incinerator people will protest.”

Taiwan’s program reflects the approach by many countries that look at animal 
feed as a promising channel for diverting food waste, which has become a 
weighty environmental and policy issue. According to the United Nations, as 
much asone third of the food produced 
<http://www.fao.org/food-loss-and-food-waste/en/> globally goes to waste; 
meanwhile, about 795 million people <https://www.wfp.org/hunger/stats> are 
underfed.

Currently, most animal feed is composed of grains – more than 80% of the 
soybeans 
<http://www.sciencemag.org/news/2015/10/feature-why-insects-could-be-ideal-animal-feed>
 grown globally are used for animal fodder. Uneaten food is cheaper and, some 
argue, less costly and carbon intensive. AUniversity of Cambridge study 
<http://www.cam.ac.uk/research/news/feeding-food-waste-to-pigs-could-save-vast-swathes-of-threatened-forest-and-savannah>
 published in January shows that feeding food waste to pigs could save 1.8m 
hectares of farmland worldwide and recycle an estimated 102.5m tons of 
leftovers produced within the European Union per year.

The practice is already common in some Asian countries. Japan, for example, 
diverts 35% of its food waste 
<http://www.cam.ac.uk/research/news/feeding-food-waste-to-pigs-could-save-vast-swathes-of-threatened-forest-and-savannah>
 to pig farms, preserving some of the leftovers by cooking them at high 
temperatures and adding lactobacillus, a bacteria used in the production of 
yogurt. The farms that use this feed can then market their products as 
eco-friendly pork, which enables them to charge higher prices.

Western countries are also struggling with the food waste problem. The US, for 
example, set its first national goal to reduce food waste 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/oct/01/us-cut-food-waste-kellogg-nestle-hungry-landfill>
 last September and hopes to cut its food waste in half by 2030. But recycling 
leftover food isn’t popular in Western countries. The UK, for example, 
prohibited the use of animal parts in livestock feed in 1996 after the 
emergence of mad cow disease, an epidemic that was spread by farmers feeding 
diseased animal bits to livestock.

Similarly, after an outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease in pigs, the European 
Union prohibited the use of all food waste except for certain byproducts of 
food production, such as hops from breweries and whey from dairies. The US has 
no federal law regulating feeding scraps to pigs, but22 states have banned 
<http://conservationmagazine.org/2016/01/this-is-how-much-land-can-be-saved-by-feeding-food-waste-to-pigs/>
 the practice.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hzf4%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hzf4%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f18696874c16f40adc97dd4c75ad1fe705554fd%2F0_0_3944_2368%2F3944.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20Taiwan%2C%20leftover%20food%20scraps%20help%20farmers%20sustain%20porky%20appetites&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hzf4%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In+Taiwan%2C+leftover+food+scraps+help+farmers+sustain+porky+appetites&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hzf4%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f18696874c16f40adc97dd4c75ad1fe705554fd%2F0_0_3944_2368%2F3944.jpg>
 Taipei residents dump food scraps into waiting garbage trucks. Taiwan is one 
of a handful of countries that have institutionalized the practice of turning 
food waste into animal feed. Photograph: Ralph Jennings 
A messy beginning

For its first four years, Taiwan’s food recycling program struggled due to a 
lack of compliance and enforcement. Sometimes, pickups were delayed, and 
residents left piles of waste on curbsides, where they stank up the streets. 
Some households refused to properly separate their food scraps from other 
trash, an oversight that rendered their waste unusable.

After 2005, enforcement picked up. Workers on garbage trucks began turning 
away trash that was improperly separated and inspectors began fining homeowners 
for not separating food waste correctly. Residents have since grown so used to 
sorting waste and meeting the garbage trucks at the curb at night that some see 
the trip outside as a chance to socialize with neighbors.

Eva Tsai, 51, stores scraps in her refrigerator for two days to avoid stinking 
up her flat and then makes a garbage truck run at 8.30pm, when a truck stops 
daily in her neighborhood. She has followed this practice for 15 years.

“It’s not just good for the environment, but a help for Taiwan’s pig farmers,” 
Tsai said. “I don’t think it’s any trouble at all. You can get know your 
neighbors and get a little exercise as you go.”

Related: Cutting food waste by a quarter would mean enough for everyone, says 
UN 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/12/cutting-food-waste-enough-for-everyone-says-un>

Hitting peak pork


To use food waste, farmers must order it from the government, pay for it and 
then cook it at high heat for an hour to kill any viruses. Many of the island’s 
7,983 pig farmers also add protein or other nutrients to kitchen waste before 
feeding their livestock, Chang said. But, as troublesome as the 
government-produced slop might be, pig farmers who buy it can save about 30% 
over the cost of commercially produced pig feed.

The healthy demand for food waste helps to manage urban waste disposal, noted 
Chang Sheng-chin, the secretary general of Swine ROC, Taiwan’s association of 
pig farmers. The food donated to Taiwan’s pigs ultimately comes back to the 
donors. The country’s $17bn pig farming industry accounts for 16% of its total 
agricultural output, Chiang said. But despite the appetite for pork – which 
makes up about half of all of the meat eaten inTaiwan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/taiwan> – pig farming has declined slightly 
over the past year because of pressure from pork imports, Chang said.

At the same time, Taiwan’s food recycling program is having problems of its 
own. Waste disposal has become too complex and time consuming for many of 
Taipei’s citizens, and the amount of recycled waste has essentially plateaued 
since 2008, Chiang said. Firms hired to handle garbage from apartment buildings 
have been known to inadequately sort kitchen waste, and garbage truck 
inspectors aren’t always diligent about checking to make sure the food scraps 
are mixed with other types of trash.

“The announcements on when you can take trash and to what curbside locations 
aren’t (always) clear,” said Chang Yu-an, 40, a Taipei dweller and government 
worker who has taken his family’s kitchen waste to the curb every couple of 
days for 10 years.

“If you don’t know where they are, you can end up making idle trips.”
