
Germany’s finance minister, Wolfgang Schäuble, has slammed the door on Britain 
retaining access to the single market if it votes to the leave theEuropean Union
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>.

In an interview in a Brexit-themed issue of German weekly Der Spiegel, the 
influential veteran politician ruled out the possibility of the UK following a 
Swiss or Norwegian model that would allow it to enjoy the benefits of the 
single market without being an EU member.

“That won’t work,” Schäuble told Der Spiegel. “It would require the country to 
abide by the rules of a club from which it currently wants to withdraw. If the 
majority in Britain opts for Brexit, that would be a decision against the 
single market. In is in. Out is out. One has to respect the sovereignty of the 
British people.”

Related: A reverse Maastricht would be legal and politically feasible | 
Michael White 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2016/jun/06/reverse-maastricht-legal-politically-feasible-eu-referendum-brexit>

The German conservative’s intervention seems to rule out the “reverse 
Maastricht” 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/06/pro-eu-mps-could-mount-guerrilla-campaign-to-reverse-brexit-decision>
 option floated privately by some British MPs and government sources, whereby 
pro-remain MPs in Westminster could use their parliamentary majority to retain 
access to the single market after a British exit from the EU.

Their first target is likely to be to try to ensure that despite a Brexit the 
UK could remain in the single market by joining the European economic area, of 
which the non-EU countries Norway, Lichtenstein and Iceland are currently 
members.

The single market – to which Switzerland also has access despite not being a 
member of either the EU or the EEA – guarantees thefree movement of people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2016/jun/02/national-borders-exist-to-pen-poor-people-into-reservations-of-poverty>
, goods and services inside the bloc.

Supporters of the British leave campaign argue that it is in Germany’s 
economic interest to maintain barrier-free trade relations with the United 
Kingdom. Britain is the third-largest export market for German car 
manufacturers and the destination of around 7% of total German exports.

In a debate on the BBC, Nigel Farage, the Ukip leader, went even further than 
the official leave campaign and suggested getting rid of tariffs on goods 
traded with all countries.

This was condemned by the remain campaign, who said it was a “reckless” plan 
that would “decimate our domestic industries”.

“People would be able to sell in to the UK market for free, but our exporters 
would face tariffs selling in toEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>,” a spokesman said.

Commentators in Germany point out that Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> has more to lose from a Brexit than 
a segment of its export market and that the government was able to sideline 
economic interest to diplomacy in its relationship with Russia.

Until recently, the assumption in Berlin’s political circles had been that 
Schäuble’s finance ministry was more open than others to the idea of keeping 
open a back door for renegotiating some form of associate membership for 
Britain after an out vote.
Referendum explained: Norway 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/05/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=norwegian>
But the interview in Der Spiegel, which will be published on Saturday but has 
been seen by the Guardian, indicates a less flexible stance. “Europe will also 
work without Britain if necessary,” Schäuble said. “At some point, the British 
will realise they have taken the wrong decision. And then we will accept them 
back one day, if that’s what they want.”

The Christian Democrat, seen as the key actor behind Germany’s hardline stance 
towards Greece at the height of the eurozone debt crisis, said he and his 
counterparts in the eurozone would “do everything possible to contain these 
consequences …We are preparing for all possible scenarios to limit the risks,” 
he added.

While warning that it would be a “miracle” if there were no economic drawbacks 
for Britain following a withdrawal, Schäuble also admitted that a Brexit could 
have dramatic consequences for the rest of the European Union.

The 73-year-old said it could not be ruled out that other countries could 
follow Britain’s lead after the referendum on 23 June: “How, for example, would 
the Netherlands react, as a country that has traditionally had very close ties 
to Britain? It is important for the EU to send the message that it has 
understood the vote and is prepared to learn from it.”

Schäuble also poured cold water on suggestions that France and Germany would 
react to Britain’s departure from the 28-member bloc with a leap towards 
accelerated integration. On the contrary, he said, it was important that the EU 
needed to show that it could learn from the British referendum.


“In response to Brexit, we couldn’t simply call for more integration,” he is 
quoted as saying. “That would be crude; many would rightfully wonder ­whether 
we politicians still haven’t understood. Even in the event that only a small 
majority of the British voters reject a withdrawal, we would have to see it as 
a wake-up call and a warning not to continue with business as usual. Either 
way, we have to take a serious look at reducing bureaucracy in Europe.”

Leading figures in the campaign to leave the EU, including Michael Gove, the 
UK justice secretary, want to officially withdraw from the single market to 
stop freedom of movement. But Matthew Elliott, its chief executive, said in 
response to Schäuble: “The eurozone economies are dependent on trade with the 
UK. We are the fifth largest economy in the world, while many of them are in a 
desperate state due to the failing single currency. There is no question about 
it, Britain will still have access to the single market after we vote leave. It 
would be perverse of the eurozone to try to create artificial barriers – and 
would do far more damage to them than to anyone else.

“One thing that will change if we vote leave is that we will be able to forge 
trade deals with the economic powerhouses of the future – the emerging markets 
– which we are currently forbidden from doing by the EU. That’s why we will not 
only be stronger and more secure if we vote to leave the EU, we will also be 
more prosperous.”

However, George Osborne, the UK chancellor, who has played a leading role in 
the remain campaign, tweeted:
— George Osborne (@George_Osborne) June 10, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/George_Osborne/status/741232348923068416> 
Major intervention from Germany: UK would have to accept free movement and pay 
in to EU to continue to access tradehttps://t.co/jIAPPXM6hT 
<https://t.co/jIAPPXM6hT>
 <https://twitter.com/George_Osborne/status/741232348923068416> 
Peter Mandelson, the former EU trade commissioner and ex-business secretary, 
said Schäuble’s comments “finally knocks on the head the leave campaign’s claim 
that we can leave the EU and still enjoy the benefits of the single market”.

“We cannot leave the club and continue to use its facilities,” the Labour peer 
said. “Being outside the single market wold be a hammer blow to the UK economy. 
Our future trade [would] be hit and our manufacturing sector, which relies on 
the single market’s free movement of goods and people, [would] be at risk. This 
is the cold reality of Brexit that the British people must face. If we leave we 
lose the economic gains of being the world’s largest free-trade zone, putting 
jobs and livelihoods at risk.”

Iain Duncan Smith, the former work and pensions secretary, said of Schäuble’s 
comments: “To quote Mandy Rice-Davis, he would say that, wouldn’t he? … What I 
call the realpolitik underneath the surface is that they don’t want to get into 
spats. Of course they don’t. We’re a friend, we cooperate in Nato, the G8 and 
G20. Mr Schauble’s bound to say what he said. Come on. Don’t tell me that Mr 
Osborne hasn’t been on that line to him almost permanently for the last few 
weeks …


“You’ll probably get a load of these statements. Every finance minister in 
Europe is going to line up. They’ve probably got them every day between now and 
the referendum.”

The leave campaign has said it does not want to be in the single market, 
because it would not want the UK to have free movement. But its leading 
advocates, including Boris Johnson and Gove, dismiss the idea that Germany or 
other EU countries would impose trade tariffs given they sell the UK more in 
manufactured goods than they buy.


Schäuble’s comments were made on the same day that the German chancellor, 
Angela Merkel, repeated her hope that Britain would vote to remain in the EU. 
Speaking on Friday to a group representing family-owned businesses, Merkel 
said: “From my point of view, Great Britain remaining in the European Union is 
the best and most desirable thing for us all.

“We have very close cooperation on many questions with Great Britain and would 
of course like to continue this within the framework of the European Union.’’
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fhow-would-brexit-affect-you-eu-referendum-video-explainer&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fhow-would-brexit-affect-you-eu-referendum-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20would%20Brexit%20affect%20you%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fhow-would-brexit-affect-you-eu-referendum-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+would+Brexit+affect+you%3F+%E2%80%93+video+explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fhow-would-brexit-affect-you-eu-referendum-video-explainer&media=>
How would Brexit affect you? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jun/07/how-would-brexit-affect-you-eu-referendum-video-explainer>
Der Spiegel, which sells around 800,000 copies per issue, has upped its 
circulation in the UK for Saturday’s special bilingual edition and reduced the 
cover price from £5.20 to £2. The cover carries the headline in German and 
English: “Please don’t go!”

In an editorial, the magazine argues that while it is too late “to convince 
the British to love the EU, perhaps we should use this opportunity to mention 
how much the rest of Europe admires them. It’s unbelievable that they don’t 
seem to see how much they’ve shaped the continent, how much we value them here, 
how close we Germans feel to them”.

“Germany has always looked across the Channel with some degree of envy,” it 
adds. “On our emotional map of Europe, the Italians were responsible for love 
and good food, the French for beauty and elegance and the Brits for nonchalance 
and progress. They have an inner independence that we Germans lack, in addition 
to myriad anti-authoritarian, defiant tendencies. A lot of what happened in 
Britain spilled over to us sooner or later, reinforcing our cultural ties.”

In a homage to British cultural exports ranging from “James Bond to Twiggy’s 
haircut”, the magazine’s staff writers said they wanted to offer Britain a 
“firm handshake, coupled with an honest, straightforward appeal: remain”.
