
It is now more than 12 months since the implementation of the Care Act 
<http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/apr/28/-care-act-2014-quick-guide>
, a legislative success many years in the making. The act spoke of fair and 
equal access to support services, vibrant and diverse care provider markets and 
of people having information about how and when to access services. It was to 
be a fundamental change in the foundations of social care.

In the run up to its implementation, local councils focused on what the act 
would mean for them. Directors and professional leaders sought to ensure their 
colleagues understood how services would need to change and momentum built 
behind the changes.

Related: Too many councils are failing to meet their Care Act duties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/feb/01/care-act-social-care-councils>

Stalled progress

A year later, there is a real risk this momentum has stalled. Instead of 
surveying a diverse care market, we read headlines about providersconsidering 
an exit from the sector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/05/four-seasons-health-care-likely-taken-over-creditors>
. Council websites are filled with pages about getting recycling bins or 
parking permits, but little about how to have a grab rail installed so you can 
stay in your home safely. For now, the vision of the Care Act largely feels 
just that: a vision rather than a reality.

 It would be a real shame if that remained the case. The idea of councils as 
responsive organisations, guiding people to the best care, is the correct one. 
It is not only right for the wellbeing of our population, it is right in 
todayâ€™s financially constrained public sector. Fewer resources are forcing 
councils to consider making more radical changes to care, in the same way as 
they have already changed other services.

Councils should strike a new deal with local people, making it clear both 
sides have a responsibility to maintain independence and wellbeing. That means 
everyone acting quickly when long-term care starts to be needed. People have to 
raise the issue before reaching the point where they need care at home, and 
councils need to respond with accurate advice about local services.

The need for digital

To do that, councils must raise their digital game. People need to be able to 
visit a council website and find details of all the services available: 
voluntary, health and social care. Some councils have done a good job of 
building directories. But often, they build portals that redirect users to 
other sites rather than offering immediate information and advice.

Related: A quick guide to the Care Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/apr/28/-care-act-2014-quick-guide>

Convening power

All of this costs money. Councils can raise some from a council tax precept 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/20/osborne-plans-to-allow-2-council-tax-rises-to-plug-social-care-holes>
, but that will not be enough to sustain the existing care system. A good place 
to start would be to bring all major local care providers together into one 
room; not to drive prices even lower but to work out how to help providers 
thrive, support new services coming to market and create a digital platform 
offering access to these new services.

To promote a sustainable care system councils could invest in training for 
specific staff groups, building investment in health technology into their 
economic growth plan, or working with schools to develop better ways to keep 
young people healthy. The solutions are not necessarily expensive, but the 
benefits could be huge and lasting. They could be the foundation of the new era 
promised by the Care Act.

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
