
The conversation I’d really like to eavesdrop on in the wake of Jeremy 
Corbyn’s shadow cabinet reshuffle is one betweenTony Blair 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> and his old flatmate and 
erstwhile fellow moderniser, Lord Charlie Falconer. What a hoot that would be. 
“Charlie, how could you …”

In case you missed it, Falconer has survived both the voluntary exit of 
offended colleagues from the frontbench and the cull of enemies made by the new 
regime.He’s now shadow justice secretary 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/15/corbyns-shadow-cabinet-reasons-to-be-cheerful-or-fearful>
 and is occasionally caught on TV lookingas jolly as Chubby Charlie did before 
he started that crash diet 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/oct/26/lord-falconer-stone-diet-coke-apples>
.

I can’t believe Blair will be anything other than puzzled and cross by this, 
unless he regards Charlie as the Special Branch did one in three IRA men, 
namely as an informer (that’s why the IRA was forced to the negotiating table, 
Jeremy). Me, I think Charlie’s too straight to be a stool pigeon. We’ll come 
back to him.

There are plenty of other curiosities in the new line-up, though I share Polly 
Toynbee’s view 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/15/jeremy-corbyn-labour-mps>
 this week that it is best to be positive. So I thought that Kate Green, a 
Class of 2010 MP, now shadow equalities minister, sounded very level headed and 
mature in therisky Radio 4 Today spot at 7.10am 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/16/labour-in-disarray-over-benefits-cap>
.

Related: Corbyn's shadow cabinet: reasons to be cheerful or fearful? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/15/corbyns-shadow-cabinet-reasons-to-be-cheerful-or-fearful>

She fielded the tricky questions about welfare policy: it’s still being formed 
and Jeremy is collegiate, she answered, and was frank aboutthe mini-row over 
whether or not Corbyn should have sang the national anthem 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2015/sep/16/jeremy-corbyn-and-the-national-anthem-a-press-chorus-of-disapproval>
 at the Battle of Britain service. A mistake, she conceded, mildly but without 
hesitation or prevarication.

Good for her. A pity that the BBC itself joined in making too much of it.

Myself, I felt his silence, if that is what it was (the point is disputed), 
was a trivial omission by Corbyn, but discourteous both to the occasion and the 
gallant dead. He’s a polite man and should have thought it through better. Who 
knows, media excess may recoil in his favour. But he’d better get it right at 
the Cenotaph on Remembrance Day.Ask the donkey-jacketed ghost of Michael Foot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jul/23/archive-portrait-michael-foot-labour>
!

Back to the shadow cabinet. Is it right to refuse to serve under a leader with 
whom a colleague may have a fundamental disagreement? Or does a senior MP’s 
duty lie in rallying to the party and doing one’s honest best both to modify 
the dafter side of Corbynism (leaving Nato or “people’s QE”?) and to help make 
Corbyn PM?

I think both positions are sustainable – it depends on the politician’s 
temperament, on the scale of their disagreements and, dare I add, their 
personal calculation about future ambition. That’s OK too. Sensible people (I 
name no names) ducked out of the 2015 contest even before Corbynmania swept 
over it. That was a good judgment call.

On balance I think the case for staying on board is the better one. Andy 
Burnham and Hilary Benn 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/11/labours-new-shadow-cabinet-lineup>
, both decent people, obviously thought so too, though Burnham dithered a bit, 
as he tends to. He came second in the leadership ballot, but a poor second – it 
must hurt.

Yvette Cooper, plucky Liz Kendall and several others whose names don’t always 
spring to my ageing mind as easily as they should, decided otherwise. That’s OK 
too, being a refusenik may or may not prove fatal to their careers. They can 
use their new freedoms to do useful work, both as backbenchers and as searchers 
for new political directions.

A glance at recent history, not famous for principled resignations, shows that 
Ken Clarke refused shadow office after losing the Tory leadership to William 
Hague in 1997, went off to make some money (he had been a minister for 18 
years), lost twice more (so did the public which liked him) but took shadow 
office (2009) and later a cabinet post (2010-12) under David Cameron.

Michael Heseltine, who walked out of the Thatcher cabinet in 1986 and brought 
her down in 1990, came back as DPM under John Major – and still loves the 
battle in his 80s. Ditto Iain Macleod in an earlier generation.

When the 14th Lord Home succeeded Harold Macmillan as PM in 1963 (no 
leadership contests then) he and Enoch Powell refused to serve. Macleod who 
denounced the “magic circle 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2015/aug/10/what-past-party-elections-reveal-next-labour-leader-success-jeremy-corbyn>
” in a famous article –here it is 
<http://archive.spectator.co.uk/article/17th-january-1964/5/the-tory-leadership>
 – returned as Ted Heath’s chancellor for a tragic six weeks in 1970. He died 
suddenly, the great what-if of the Heath regime: stubborn Ted might have 
listened to him, if to no one else. Powell took the populist road to martyrdom. 
“All political careers end in failure,” as he wrote himself.

So whether principle or calculation is the motivating force for resignation 
(it’s usually both), there’s no guarantee how it will work out. In 1886 
ambitiousLord Randolph Churchill 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lord_Randolph_Churchill> (Winston’s dad) 
resigned as Salisbury’s Tory chancellor, thinking he was irreplaceable. His job 
went to a nonentity calledGeorge Goschen 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/George_Goschen,_1st_Viscount_Goschen>. “Ah, I 
had forgotten Goschen,” he admitted.

All ambitious politicians, starting with you, David Davis, and you John 
Redwood, should remember that story. There is always a Goschen.Jeremy Corbyn 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> may turn out to be one. 
It’s far too soon to tell.

By my calculation two-thirds of the 30-strong shadow cabinet – here are their 
Guardian profiles 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/14/jeremy-corbyn-labour-shadow-cabinet-in-full>
 – will be largely unknown outside their constituencies (inside too?) and 
professional circles, MPs who have been around for five or 10 years without 
acquiring a high national profile.

Related: Jeremy Corbyn's shadow cabinet in full 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/14/jeremy-corbyn-labour-shadow-cabinet-in-full>

No point in passing judgment on people I don’t know at all well. So I will 
refrain. Among those I do know I am a great fan of Angela Eagle, who has been 
given the business brief when she might have been shadow chancellorin place of 
John McDonnell 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/13/jeremy-corbyn-shadow-cabinet-andy-burnham-labour>
.

As I wrote on Monday 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2015/sep/14/jeremy-corbyn-victory-were-visible-in-2008>
 there is logic in Corbyn appointing his pal, though it is high-risk logic. If 
he crashes quickly, as he may, it will damage Jezza’s standing in both party 
and public opinion. The media will feast aggressively on his colourful record 
and economic views (some will turn out to be useful) and he may be aggressive 
back: it’s his nature.

Eagle is waiting on the bench. She is smart too and has the incalculable bonus 
of being naturally witty, fast on her feet. Her twin sister, Maria, not so 
feisty but also a decent person, gets the defence brief, never as easy for a
Labour <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> politician.

Mike Dugher, John Healey, Rosie Winterton, Lord Steve Bassam, Vernon Coaker, 
Chris Bryant – they are all solid citizens. But like the whole team they lack 
star quality. Does Gloria De Piero or Luciana Berger have it? Yes, potentially, 
but not yet.

The triangle which matters most is between Corbyn, McDonnell and Tom Watson, a 
trade union bruiser who did acquire a national reputation, bravely taking on 
Murdoch over phone hacking, . He alsotackled the issue of child abuse 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/nov/28/tom-watson-interview-no-doubt-one-politician-abused-kids>
, though his judgment was less sure in these even murkier waters.

Watson once told me that the most important quality in a No 2 is that he/she 
doesn’t want the top job. I believe him, whatever the pundits say.

So if he can resist the temptation to resign (he’s done it before), Watson is 
the stayer, the man who can hold it all together in the storm which must come. 
But he will have to work hard as a team player, which may prove difficult. It’s 
a vital ingredient which Corbyn too may find hard at this level. Nice guys 
don’t always come first.

I promised to come back to Falconer and I will. I texted a couple of political 
pals after breakfast to ask why Charlie is still at it when – 64 in November – 
the well-heeled QC could have a comfy retirement. Remember, he’s a right-to-die 
campaigner, not popular among peers or MPs, he loves the political fray, though 
not enough to tell a selection conference 20 years ago that he’d send his kids 
to state schools. That ended his chances of being an MP.

One friend told me: “Charlie enjoys the camaraderie and sense of purpose. He’s 
quizzical, genial and thoughtful, one of the few genuine team players in 
politics.” That sounds like good stuff, though he also gets carried away.

He behaved as if he thought Ed Miliband would win on 7 May 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jun/03/undoing-of-ed-miliband-and-how-labour-lost-election>
 (“Charles has never stood for election,” they murmur) and was party to the 
2005 chaos over the office of lord chancellor. As a lawyer he should have known 
better.

My other pal says: “He’s still there out of a mixture of basic loyalty and 
fascination with being at the heart of it all.” That is believable too.

Wherever Falconer sits we can depend on hearing the sound of laughter. It may 
be needed to break tension in shadow cabinet sessions to come. But also the 
sound of broken glass. He has experience of that too.
