
Just when you thought we had reached peak emoji, an actual – sorry, IRL – 
aubergine arrives in the post, to remind us that the human capacity for doing 
ridiculous things “because internet” knows no bounds. An aubergine, to be 
clear, is the euphemistic emoji for a penis. And it is now possible – or it was 
until Monday – to send a customised “real-life penis emoji” in the post. And 
what the hell is a customised real-life penis emoji? An aubergine with a rude 
message written on it, presumably in permanent marker that won’t wipe off its 
smooth, shiny flesh.

The UK-based eggplantmail.com <https://eggplantmail.com/> – which charges 
users £6.99 to post someone a personalised aubergine – has gone viral and the 
owner of the site is struggling to cope with the success. “I put the site up on 
Friday,” says Jack Kenyon, a PR director, who started Eggplant Mail as a dare. 
“Within days I had tons of emails and 62 orders. I had no idea anyone would be 
interested in buying an aubergine. It was extremely stressful trying to manage 
it all. Last night, I put the site up for sale and I’ve had three bids already.”

Related: When cards won't do the trick, say it with a potato in the mail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/26/mystery-potato-parcel-mail-a-spud>

Many orders were for “strange and graphic” birthday messages and the majority 
came from the US. That’s perhaps unsurprising: last year, the United States 
used the eggplant emoji more than any other nation. “Mailing aubergines from 
the UK to the US is illegal because it’s a fruit,” Kenyon confesses. “I 
organised someone to send them internally, but that fell through.”

Even so, considering you can buy an aubergine for 49p from Lidl, the price is 
a hefty markup. And you can’t eat the thing either because, to quote the site: 
“They have ink on them and can pick up germs during shipping.” So when life 
deals you aubergines, you can’t even make baba ganoush out of them.

It is not the first time we have got a kick out of paying people to send 
perishables in the post to loved (or loathed) ones, and it won’t be the last. 
The novelty potato mailing market made headlines earlier this year, and there 
are nowat least three companies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/26/mystery-potato-parcel-mail-a-spud>
 offering to send spuds withDavid Shrigley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/david-shrigley>-esque messages 
printed on them. Last year, a similar web service, which offered to mail 
envelopes filled with glitter to your enemies, went viral, crashed from the 
demand andended up being sold for $85,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jan/22/ship-your-enemies-glitter-site-sells>
 (£60,260).

Related: Ship Your Enemies Glitter site sells for $85,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jan/22/ship-your-enemies-glitter-site-sells>

So it was only a matter of time before the aubergine entered the gimmick-laden 
arena of people-posting-stuff-for-no-reason. Since 2010, when the eggplant 
emoji made its American debut, the suggestive power of the purple fruit has 
continued to rise and rise.

The banana used to win in the rude fruit and veg stakes, closely followed by 
the turnip, but now the aubergine has exclusive rights on penis representation 
in the world of emoji. It is the Adonis of sexting and has been banned on 
Instagram. So sending one in the post is highly metaphorical, amusing, romantic 
… or creepy.

Eggplant Mail describes itself as: “100% Phallic. 100% Anonymous. 100% 
Disturbing”. Of sample messages provided on the site, one reads: “I watch you 
when you’re sleeping.” Misogynistic aubergine, anyone? It is all about as far 
from an organic veg box as you can get.
