
David Cameron <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> has accused 
Michael Gove of having “lost it” over his comparison of economists warning 
against Brexit to experts in the pay of Nazis.

The prime minister made his strongest attack of the campaign so far on 
Wednesday on the justice secretary, who has long been a very close political 
friend.

Gove had likened those claiming that a vote to leave would lead to a recession 
to scientists paid by Adolf Hitler’s government to come up with the scientific 
results wanted by the state.

“We have to be careful about historical comparisons, but Albert Einstein 
during the 1930s was denounced by the German authorities for being wrong and 
his theories were denounced and one of the reasons of course he was denounced 
was because he was Jewish,” Gove said. “They got 100 German scientists in the 
pay of the government to say that he was wrong and Einstein said, ‘Look, if I 
was wrong, one would have been enough.’”

It is the latest attempt by Gove to dismiss the body of economists warning of 
the consequences of leaving the EU 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/19/eu-referendum-nobel-prize-winning-economists-warn-of-long-term-brexit-damage>
, after previously saying the British public had had enough of experts getting 
it wrong.

Cameron has repeatedly tried to pour scorn on this stance, saying people 
listen to experts when they want their car fixed by a mechanic or they need an 
engineer to build a bridge.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Feu-referendum-lies-myths-and-half-truths-video-explainer&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Feu-referendum-lies-myths-and-half-truths-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20lies%2C%20myths%20and%20half-truths%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Feu-referendum-lies-myths-and-half-truths-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EU+referendum%3A+lies%2C+myths+and+half-truths+%E2%80%93+video+explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Feu-referendum-lies-myths-and-half-truths-video-explainer&media=>
EU referendum: lies, myths and half-truths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jun/15/eu-referendum-lies-myths-and-half-truths-video-explainer>
After Gove’s latest Nazi comments, the prime minister told Sky News: “To hear 
the leave campaign today sort of comparing independent experts and economists 
to Nazi sympathisers – I think they have rather lost it.

“These people are independent – economists who have won Nobel prizes, business 
leaders responsible for creating thousands of jobs, institutions that were set 
up after the war to try to provide independent advice. It is right to listen.”

The EU referendum <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> campaign 
has been marked by a string of second world war comparisons throughout.

Boris Johnson drew criticism for saying the EU’s expansionism was akin to 
Hitler’s ambitions 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/16/german-politicians-criticise-boris-johnson-for-eu-hitler-comments>
 and Nigel Farage’s“breaking point” poster of a stream of migrants crossing a 
border in Europe 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/16/nigel-farage-defends-ukip-breaking-point-poster-queue-of-migrants>
 was condemned by the remain camp and Farage accused of deploying Nazi-style 
propaganda.

Both sides have tried to co-opt wartime prime minister Winston Churchill for 
their campaigns, with leave claiming he would have wanted Brexit and remain 
saying he was an architect of the European project and would have wanted to 
stay.

In their final push of campaigning, with less than 24 hours until the polls 
open, Vote Leave has embarked on a helicopter tour to persuade voters to back 
Brexit.

Addressing a crowd in Maldon, Essex, Boris Johnson, the de factor leader of 
the leave campaign, said: “I do think that we are on the verge, possibly, of an 
extraordinary event in the history of our country and indeed in the whole of
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.”

“It’s all going to be about getting our supporters out to vote and if we do it 
I really think tomorrow can be independence day.”

Cameron made a joint appearance in Bristol with Harriet Harman, the Labour 
former interim leader and Sir John Major, the Conservative former prime 
minister.


In a sombre speech, Major accused the leave campaign of being the 
“gravediggers of our prosperity” and if Britain were to leave the EU, “they 
must account for what they have done”.

Shortly afterwards, Farage gave a speech claiming 100% of the credit for 
having forced the referendum and highlighting the Ukip slogans, policies and 
language now openly used by Johnson and Gove.

These include the Ukip slogan from the general election, Believe in Britain, 
branding Thursday the UK’s independence day, the Australian-style points 
system, loving Europe but hating the EU, and the arguments about still enjoying 
German cars and French wine after Brexit.

“I say with some pride, this would never have happened without Ukip. It is, in 
many ways, our referendum,” the Ukip leader said, pointing out that he has 
fought for this moment for decades.

Related: Jeff Mitchell's best photograph: ‘These people have been betrayed by 
Ukip’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jun/22/jeff-mitchells-best-shot-the-column-of-marching-refugees-used-in-ukips-brexit-campaign>

His campaign has been overshadowed by a row over the breaking point poster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jun/22/jeff-mitchells-best-shot-the-column-of-marching-refugees-used-in-ukips-brexit-campaign>
, but a defiant Farage said he would only apologise for the timing that 
coincided with the murder of Labour MP Jo Cox.

He also deflected accusations of racism and xenophobia, saying people should 
instead be criticising a poster published by Operation Black Vote showing a 
white skinhead shouting at an elderly Asian woman that said everyone’s vote is 
worth the same.

“The one poster that no one seems to talk about, the one really offensive and 
abusive poster in this campaign was put out by an organisation encouraging 
people from the ethnic minorities to vote, showing a skinhead menacing an 
elderly Asian lady and that was an absolute disgrace,” he said.
