
Things get meta pretty quickly when you’re hanging out with the team from 
Google <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google>. I realise this on day 
one of the web giant’s project to map Machu Picchu, as we amble up to a popular 
viewpoint and stare into the thick mountain mist cloaking the citadel. Senior 
staff engineer Daniel Filip has just put on the backpack-mounted Trekker 
camera, the clouds are clearing, and we’re ready to go.

Seconds later we’re spotted by a pair of Australian tourists. “Are you the 
Google guy?” asks one. “It’s Google! It’s him!” He walks up to the Trekker, 
stares into the camera and waves. “Hey mum!” Then he takes a selfie.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d2tg%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d2tg%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75edd892b0512f5a94073b3847c4f51efc390976%2F0_0_1200_800%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Do%20Machu%20Picchu%20from%20your%20sofa%2C%20thanks%20to%20Google%20Street%20View&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d2tg%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Do+Machu+Picchu+from+your+sofa%2C+thanks+to+Google+Street+View&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d2tg%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75edd892b0512f5a94073b3847c4f51efc390976%2F0_0_1200_800%2F1200.jpg>
 The 22kg Trekker comprises 15 high-resolution cameras and takes a photo every 
2½ seconds. Photograph: Hilaea Media/Pilar Olivares 
I’d arrived in Cusco a day earlier, joining the Street View team tasked with 
collecting the panoramic imagery needed to add the Inca site to its 
ever-expanding list of locations. Having mapped more than seven million miles 
of roads in 65 countries,Google Street View 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google-street-view> has turned its 
attention to some of the world’s most spectacular places, creating eye-candy 
for digital travellers. And it’s no surprise that Machu Picchu, one of the most 
popular tourist attractions in the world, has been in its sights for some time.

While most people still associate Google Street View with the small cars 
spotted zipping around cities with a camera on top, the past few years have 
seen Google develop off-road mapping methods. The street view “fleet” now 
includes a tricycle for narrow alleyways, a trolley for the interiors of 
museums and historic buildings, a snowmobile, for, well, snowy places, and the
Trekker <https://www.google.com/maps/about/behind-the-scenes/streetview/treks/>
, which has been used to map sites such asPetra 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/nov/25/petra-tour-google-street-view-jordan>
,Angkor Wat 
<https://www.google.com/maps/about/behind-the-scenes/streetview/treks/angkor/>, 
the Great Pyramids 
<https://www.google.com/maps/about/behind-the-scenes/streetview/treks/pyramids-of-giza/>
,Everest base camp 
<https://www.google.com/maps/about/behind-the-scenes/streetview/treks/the-worlds-highest-peaks/>
 and theGrand Canyon 
<https://www.google.com/maps/about/behind-the-scenes/streetview/treks/grand-canyon/>
.

The team sees the Machu Picchu project – a highlight of its expansion in Latin 
America – as one of its most ambitious. Filip, Google’s first full-time street 
view engineer, is there to make sure it all goes smoothly.

“When I started, I had no idea we could do a project like Machu Picchu,” he 
tells me. “We’ve been working for years to get permission for this.”

From Cusco we travel by train to Aguas Calientes (now officially called Machu 
Picchu Pueblo), an overpriced tourist town in the valley beneath the citadel. A 
bus then takes us up the zig-zag mountain road to the site entrance. We’ve made 
an early start, but tourists are already queuing outside. At 2,430 metres, the 
air is thin and the sun is harsh. It’s not long before I’m out of breath and 
sunburnt, but the view – once the mist clears – makes up for it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d2tg%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d2tg%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61bd0c9018231fb8e26ea1223516460e4cb5431f%2F0_0_3264_2448%2Fmaster%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Do%20Machu%20Picchu%20from%20your%20sofa%2C%20thanks%20to%20Google%20Street%20View&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d2tg%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Do+Machu+Picchu+from+your+sofa%2C+thanks+to+Google+Street+View&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d2tg%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61bd0c9018231fb8e26ea1223516460e4cb5431f%2F0_0_3264_2448%2Fmaster%2F3264.jpg>
 Google Trekker at Machu Picchu 
Surrounded by nauseatingly steep peaks, the stone steps, temples and 
structures of Machu Picchu sit on a grassy plateau as if dropped there from 
above. The Huayna Picchu peak towers behind it like a deep green obelisk.

Our starting point for the “collect” is Machu Picchu’s Sun Gate – the main 
entrance through which those who arrive via the Inca Trail reach the site. We 
march up to it along an ancient stone path, stopping occasionally to look back 
at the citadel. Once at the top (after a rest, some Oreos and a sip ofmate herb 
tea) Filip switches the Trekker on, ready to start its mission.

It will take seven days of methodically crisscrossing the site to complete the 
capture

Google Trekker projects are physical challenges. It will take seven days of 
methodically crisscrossing the site to complete the capture. Doing the bulk of 
this work is 30-year-old Julio Corbacho, a photographer and cameraman from 
Lima. Dressed in a grey hoodie, with thick rimmed glasses and an uncanny 
resemblance to the actor Jonah Hill, Corbacho has lugged the Trekker around 
dozens of Peru’s ancient sites, including Nazca, Tacna and Moquega, since 
January.
 The 22kg Trekker features 15 high-resolution (five megapixel) cameras 
“It’s a fantastic job,” he says, puffing a little already. “They pay you to 
travel to amazing places. And when I started, I weighed 10kg more.”

The 22kg Trekker comprises 15 high-resolution (five megapixel) cameras. They 
capture a photo every 2½ seconds, and these are matched to locations with GPS 
tags and spliced together into panoramas before being published onGoogle Maps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google-maps>. Corbacho’s main job is to 
move at a consistent speed, change the batteries and avoid running into things 
like branches, that can ruin the shots.

A side effect of our toting the Trekker camera is that we become a tourist 
attraction ourselves. In a place like Machu Picchu, which is swarming with 
visitors lost in a frantic orgy of photo taking, the appearance of a novel 
entity proves too much to resist. It becomes impossible to know who’s 
collecting more photos, the Trekker, or the mass of tourists taking selfies in 
front of us.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d2tg%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d2tg%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d1cc5509f358ca82c08f1acc67d93428fc85ec6%2F186_0_2176_3264%2F2176.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Do%20Machu%20Picchu%20from%20your%20sofa%2C%20thanks%20to%20Google%20Street%20View&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d2tg%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Do+Machu+Picchu+from+your+sofa%2C+thanks+to+Google+Street+View&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d2tg%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d1cc5509f358ca82c08f1acc67d93428fc85ec6%2F186_0_2176_3264%2F2176.jpg>
 Sign of the times ... catching the Trekker on a selfie 
And it is a testament to Google Maps’ global presence (it has over a billion 
users worldwide) that most tourists seem to recognise what we’re doing.

“The Google landscape ... er ... the Google Earth map? Is that what it is?” 
asks one man in grey fleece. A younger tourist, slightly more familiar with the 
branding, asks me directly if it’s Google Street View. I nod, and he’s 
impressed. “Cool!”

I expected the Trekker to be viewed with more mistrust, as an invasion of 
privacy, but the response is overwhelmingly positive. Most people seem to be 
excited by the idea.

“I think it’s sweet,” says Australian Ryan Fuller, 23. “You get to see places 
before you go there, and in a couple of years they may not let so many people 
have access here.”

His friend chips in: “And not everyone has the resources to do what we’re 
doing.”

Alex, 22, from London is a bit more cynical. “It doesn’t make me feel 
uncomfortable,” he says, “but I do think it’s better to have a surprise when 
you get there. They don’t have to have everything on Google.”

While the Trekker moves across the site, popping in and out of view as it 
traverses the stone walls and alleys, I catch up with the director of the site, 
Fernando Astete, also known as El Capitan. Silver-haired and dressed in khaki, 
spectacles hanging around his neck, Astete has headed Machu Picchu since 2001, 
through a period of enormous growth as a tourist attraction: the number of 
visitors rocketed from around 100,000 a year in the mid-1990s to over a million 
in 2014.

Related: Top 10 hotels in Cusco and the Sacred Valley, Peru 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/dec/17/top-10-hotels-cusco-sacred-valley-urubamba-peru>

He’s not surprised at the growth: “We knew this was going to happen. Since the 
beginning of the 20th century, people involved in culture and history were 
saying Machu Picchu would be the mecca of tourism. So we were waiting for that.”

Astete is interrupted as a woman asks him take a photo of her. He obliges. He 
is remarkably relaxed about the intrusive level of snapping.

“Technology is a fashion,” he tells me. “These things will happen – people 
coming with bigger cameras, selfie sticks. Soon we’ll probably forbid selfie 
sticks and tripods, which stop the flow of people. But cameras are just part of 
the experience. People will always want a photo to show their friends and 
family, or just to say I was here.”

But his colleague José Bastante, a rather dashing Indiana Jones-esque academic 
in charge of archaeological and interdisciplinary research at Machu Picchu, 
feels the balance could be better: “Machu Picchu is not Disneyland; it’s a 
sacred place and it should be regarded like that. But we understand there’s a 
pressure from tourism. It’s a world heritage site, and people have the right to 
see it.”

Unesco <http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/274> has commissioned a report, to be 
delivered this year, on the way tourism has affected Machu Picchu. Since 2011, 
the number of visitors has exceeded the daily limit of 2,500 set by Unesco, 
which has been pressuring the Peruvian authorities to improve the situation and 
upgrade the facilities. A£27m project 
<http://www.peruviantimes.com/22/the-master-plan-machu-picchu-reconceptualized/24058/>
, to be completed by 2019, will include a new interpretation centre and new 
routes around the site to distribute tourists more evenly. While the number of 
visitors will still increase, they will enter the site in groups of 100, 
hopefully reducing congestion.

Related: Trekking to Choquequirao, Peru’s remote Inca ruins 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/nov/01/peru-choquequirao-inca-ruins-trek>

For Bastante, the interpretation centre is crucial to encouraging respect for 
the sacredness of the site. “My ideal situation in Machu Picchu would be to 
close it for a couple of months a year,” he says. “But people need to 
experience and understand the Incas and the sacredness of this space. A hundred 
educated tourists will do less harm than one uneducated one.”

Does he feel the Google project can support conservation work there? “That 
would be the ideal scenario. If we can use Google Street View to analyse change 
over time.”

Street View has proved useful for this in the past. It was used to compare 
damage before and after a hurricane in Japan, and several Google Trekker 
projects have been completed in conjunction with conservation groups, who use 
it as an opportunity to engage the public. The most recent was a collaboration 
with Samburu national reserve andSave the Elephants in Kenya 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/oct/08/google-street-view-walking-with-elephants-kenya-safari>
 – using Street View to map the park, and the elephants in it to raise 
awareness of the animals and their habitat.

The number of visitors has rocketed from around 100,000 a year in the 
mid-1990s to over a million in 2014

But more comparable to Machu Picchu is last year’s project to map Angkor Wat 
<https://www.google.co.uk/maps/about/behind-the-scenes/streetview/treks/angkor/#map>
 in Cambodia, another vast ancient site and major attraction. As with Machu 
Picchu, it is one of the country’s biggest assets, attracting visitors from 
around the world. According to Unesco’s culture sector, mapping, just like 
aerial photography or satellite images, is essential for the conservation of 
world heritage sites.

The organisation believes that tools such as Google’s Trekker technology are 
valuable, particularly in terms of sustainable tourism, by documenting 
properties too fragile to be opened to the wider public.

For Google, on a mission to map the entire world, the appeal of these projects 
is easy to see. But I ask Filip whether it’s right to invest so much in mapping 
trophy locations while vast swathes of the world – mostly in Africa – don’t 
even have basic GoogleMaps <http://www.theguardian.com/travel/travel-maps> as a 
resource.

Related: Camping around South America 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/nov/14/campsites-tents-south-america-chile-argentina-colombia>

He maintains that they’re not just going for the glory spots. “We’re also 
going to be expanding in Africa,” he says, admitting it’s a hole in their 
coverage. “We just want a completely comprehensive map, and theTrekker loan 
programme <https://maps.google.com/maps/about/partners/streetview/trekker/> 
(where local organisations borrow the equipment to produce their own maps) is a 
good example of that.”

The Google project offers a huge opportunity for countries such as Peru, India 
and Cambodia to promote their world wonders. But as we watch the Trekker 
disappear down the track towards the citadel, I put it to Astete that if people 
can explore these places from home, won’t that ruin the experience of visiting?

“Ruin the moment?” he exclaims. “No! Surely you have seen a lot of pictures – 
do you think it’s the same as real life? The feeling of being here is 
completely different. It’s a feeling you can’t describe.”

MORE SITES FOR DESKTOP EXPLORERS


Angkor Wat, Cambodia
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d2tg%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d2tg%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd6f795e2e95de0083e4189a6387459fd0a0bdd3%2F13_0_1881_1129%2F1881.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Do%20Machu%20Picchu%20from%20your%20sofa%2C%20thanks%20to%20Google%20Street%20View&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d2tg%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Do+Machu+Picchu+from+your+sofa%2C+thanks+to+Google+Street+View&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d2tg%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd6f795e2e95de0083e4189a6387459fd0a0bdd3%2F13_0_1881_1129%2F1881.jpg>
 Photograph: Google Street View 
In a project that used cars, Trekkers and tripods, Google mapped 100 of the 
breathtaking Khmer temples found at Angkor, launching more than 90,000 
panoramic views in April 2014.

El Capitan, Yosemite, US
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d2tg%2Fsfb%23img-6&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d2tg%2Fsfb%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec003da28bccfce9f0fac0a0e2c8b73126f90e26%2F0_0_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Do%20Machu%20Picchu%20from%20your%20sofa%2C%20thanks%20to%20Google%20Street%20View&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d2tg%2Fstw%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Do+Machu+Picchu+from+your+sofa%2C+thanks+to+Google+Street+View&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d2tg%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec003da28bccfce9f0fac0a0e2c8b73126f90e26%2F0_0_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
Some of the world’s best climbers were roped in to help Google create a 
vertical map of the sheer rock face of El Capitan in Yosemite national park. 
Cameras were carried up the granite cliff by climbers including Lynn Hill, Alex 
Honnold andTommy Caldwell 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/nov/26/yosemite-usa-tommy-caldwell-climbing>
 earlier this year.


Petra, Jordan
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d2tg%2Fsfb%23img-7&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d2tg%2Fsfb%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcbd7ed79724a728809da9c4e99945f48d2f5faf%2F0_0_1794_1076%2F1794.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Do%20Machu%20Picchu%20from%20your%20sofa%2C%20thanks%20to%20Google%20Street%20View&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d2tg%2Fstw%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Do+Machu+Picchu+from+your+sofa%2C+thanks+to+Google+Street+View&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d2tg%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcbd7ed79724a728809da9c4e99945f48d2f5faf%2F0_0_1794_1076%2F1794.jpg>
 Photograph: Google Street View 
Launched last week 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/nov/25/petra-tour-google-street-view-jordan>
, one of the latest Trekker projects to hit the internet is a tour of Jordan’s 
most famous ancient site, with commentary provided by Queen Rania of Jordan.

Grand Canyon, US
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d2tg%2Fsfb%23img-8&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d2tg%2Fsfb%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16a5acce63b96a8a364bc86ffe83754a4061451a%2F0_0_5120_3072%2F5120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Do%20Machu%20Picchu%20from%20your%20sofa%2C%20thanks%20to%20Google%20Street%20View&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d2tg%2Fstw%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Do+Machu+Picchu+from+your+sofa%2C+thanks+to+Google+Street+View&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d2tg%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16a5acce63b96a8a364bc86ffe83754a4061451a%2F0_0_5120_3072%2F5120.jpg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
The first official outing for the Trekker camera was in October 2012, when 
Google began collecting imagery along the Grand Canyon. More than 9,500 images 
were taken, documenting two of the canyon’s most popular trails.

Venice, Italy
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d2tg%2Fsfb%23img-9&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d2tg%2Fsfb%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbcaaf4e6cc370d045d23f396649e2c75f9a00936%2F0_186_5176_3102%2F5176.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Do%20Machu%20Picchu%20from%20your%20sofa%2C%20thanks%20to%20Google%20Street%20View&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d2tg%2Fstw%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Do+Machu+Picchu+from+your+sofa%2C+thanks+to+Google+Street+View&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d2tg%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbcaaf4e6cc370d045d23f396649e2c75f9a00936%2F0_186_5176_3102%2F5176.jpg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
It would be impossible to capture the city’s watery byways with street view 
cars, so in 2013 the Trekker camera was loaded on to a gondola to map Venice’s 
canals. The team covered 265 miles on foot and 114 miles by boat.
