
The official campaign to leave the EU fronted by Michael Gove has been accused 
of “stoking the fires of prejudice” after it claimed that continued membership 
would put Britons in danger as a result of a high level of criminality among 
Turkish citizens.

In a potentially incendiary intervention – on the eve of an England v Turkey 
football match in Manchester – coordinated statements from a government 
minister and Vote Leave not only claimed thatTurkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> was about to join the EU, but that 
its citizens posed a threat to national security, as well as to public services.

Related: ‘Why are they making us out to be such a threat?’: Turks react to 
Vote Leave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/21/turkish-uk-anger-vote-leave-immigration-crime-accusations>

An analysis by the Brexit campaign group cited higher levels of criminality 
and gun ownership in Turkey as evidence for their position, which was supported 
by a statement from Penny Mordaunt, a defence minister who backs Brexit.

Vote Leave said: “Since the birthrate in Turkey is so high, we can expect to 
see an additional million people added to the UK population from Turkey alone 
within eight years.

“This will not only increase the strain on Britain’s public services, but it 
will also create a number of threats to UK security. Crime is far higher in 
Turkey than the UK. Gun ownership is also more widespread. Because of the EU’s 
free movement laws, the government will not be able to exclude Turkish 
criminals from entering the UK.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jeqq%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jeqq%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F02b230449f750df147b3f85fa7ce060bae0b325a%2F494_0_3002_1801%2F3002.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vote%20Leave%20embroiled%20in%20race%20row%20over%20Turkey%20security%20threat%20claims&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jeqq%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Vote+Leave+embroiled+in+race+row+over+Turkey+security+threat+claims&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jeqq%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F02b230449f750df147b3f85fa7ce060bae0b325a%2F494_0_3002_1801%2F3002.jpg>
 The controversial Vote Leave campaign poster. Photograph: Vote Leave 
Despite Downing Street’s insistence that Turkey’s accession to the EU was not 
imminent, Mordaunt said in her statement that a vote to remain in the EU on 23 
June was a vote in favour of Turks moving “here freely when they join the EU 
soon”.

A Vote Leave poster will be launched on Monday depicting an EU passport as an 
open door, with footprints leading through it. It will claim: “Turkey 
(population 76 million) is joining the EU. Vote Leave, take back control.”

These developments prompted criticism from a series of high-profile figures, 
includingTrevor Phillips <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/trevor-phillips>, a 
former chairman of the Equality and Human Rights Commission, who claimed it was 
a desperate ploy.

The Observer/Opinium’s latest on-line poll 
<http://ourinsight.opinium.co.uk/survey-results/political-polling-17th-may-2016>
 suggests 44% of UK adults will vote to remain in the EU, while 40% will vote 
to leave and 14% are undecided.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jeqq%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jeqq%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc474fc0dd6e495eeac29524c691fe5e7d377de1d%2F58_101_5614_3368%2F5614.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vote%20Leave%20embroiled%20in%20race%20row%20over%20Turkey%20security%20threat%20claims&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jeqq%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Vote+Leave+embroiled+in+race+row+over+Turkey+security+threat+claims&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jeqq%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc474fc0dd6e495eeac29524c691fe5e7d377de1d%2F58_101_5614_3368%2F5614.jpg>
 Trevor Phillips condemned the Vote Leave poster as a ‘desperate move’. 
Photograph: David Hartley/Rex/Shutterstock 
Phillips said that, while the issue of immigration should be debated, the 
“latest assault from the Leave campaign seems to me to plumb the deepest 
depths”. He said: “There really isn’t any doubt that what they are appealing to 
here is straightforward prejudice. I can’t imagine what the sizeable, 
law-abiding, industrious Turkish community in the UK must feel when they hear 
this.

“This appears to be a straightforward admission that the Leave campaign has 
lost on every rational argument and now it is simply trying to stoke the fires 
of prejudice.”

Europe minister David Lidington said it was “complete fantasy” to suggest that 
Turkey or Albania would become members of theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> within five years. “It is ridiculous,” 
he said.

The shadow justice secretary, Lord Falconer, said he was concerned by Vote 
Leave’s indifference to the damage to community relations caused by its claims. 
“It is dangerous and inflames racism to imply many of the Turks who are coming 
may be criminals with guns,” Falconer said. “I’m really concerned about the way 
the Brexiters appear utterly indifferent to the long-term damage they are doing.

“Argue their case by all means, but don’t descend into the gutter and poison 
good community relationships. Gove is showing no integrity whatsoever in what 
he says in the referendum debate.”

Vote Leave countered that the home secretary, Theresa May, had herself raised 
concerns about Turkish organised crime in April.

The London mayor, Sadiq Khan, will throw City Hall behind the Remain campaign 
on Monday, with a major social media drive, a series of set-piece speeches and 
newspaper advertising. From Sunday, the European Union flag will also be flown 
outside the mayor’s headquarters to symbolise its new position on the 
referendum.

On Friday, Gove, who is justice secretary, argued that Turkey and four other 
countries could join the EU as soon as 2020 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/20/eu-immigrant-influx-michael-gove-nhs-unsustainable>
 and lead to 5.2 million extra people moving to the UK, a population the size 
of Scotland or four cities the size of Birmingham, putting intolerable pressure 
on the NHS.

In Vote Leave’s latest analysis it warns that Turkey will join the EU “in the 
next few years” and that its population is set to hit 82 million by 2020, many 
of whom will seek to come to Britain. It is claimed that, as well as 
threatening the UK’s security, the growing Turkish population in the UK will 
cost NHS maternity services an extra £400m within 10 years of the country 
joining the EU.

Mordaunt said: “We are currently sending over £1bn to Turkey to help it to 
join the EU. We must recognise the huge strain this will place on our NHS as 
more people come here, without giving it any chance of planning for such 
increased demand. Expansion is at the EU’s core. We have to be honest about the 
cost of EU membership for our public services today and in the future: and 
particularly what this will mean for the NHS unless we take back control and 
Vote Leave on 23 June.”

Professor Martin McKee, professor of European public health at the London 
School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, condemned Vote Leave’s claims about 
the future of the NHS. “It is unacceptable for Leave campaigners to keep 
dragging the NHS through the mud,” he said.
