
Now this is how to do Saturday mornings. My first tipple is a Pineapple 
Paradise pilsner, closely followed by a large swig of Black Plague stout, with 
a generous chaser of gingerbread ale to finish.

I’m sampling the nectar of Storm Brewing <http://www.stormbrewing.org/> – a 
dank, dingy but creative independent brewery in Vancouver’s grey industrial 
zone of East Van. Established in 1994, it was the first to champion small-batch 
brewing in this warehouse-packed part of town.

It’s no longer alone. This formerly working class area has become a hub of 
craft breweries – so much so that “Yeast Van” is now a weekend hangout for the 
city’s most eager beer drinkers, who can sample beers from about 10% of British 
Columbia’s 135-strong craft brewery population in a matter of minutes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tx87%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tx87%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd02947b02c6f65065a82fe3445a44e5459d4363c%2F0_50_3264_1959%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20the%20round%3A%20Vancouver's%20craft%20beer%20community&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tx87%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In+the+round%3A+Vancouver%27s+craft+beer+community&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tx87%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd02947b02c6f65065a82fe3445a44e5459d4363c%2F0_50_3264_1959%2F3264.jpg>
 Storm Brewing was the craft beer pioneer of East Van. Photograph: Hannah 
Summers 
Attracting visitors hasn’t always been easy, but a few years back a liquor 
bylaw was overturned, meaning tasting rooms at Vancouver’s craft breweries – 
which had been limited to serving one 12-ounce glass (just over half a UK pint) 
per customer per night – were allowed to serve beer in larger quantities. The 
timing coincided with a general movement against the large brewing 
conglomerates that dominate the Canadian market.

Grabbing a “growler to go” (a large glass bottle filled with my choice of 
ale), I wander down the road toDoan’s <http://doanscraftbrewing.com/>, one of 
East Van’s latest openings. Set up by two brothers who used to make homebrew as 
a hobby, it’s a compact, modern tasting room with a metal-clad brewery out the 
back.

For co-owner Evan Doan, the sense of community makes this area a great 
incubator for craft beer start-ups: “There are tons of mom-and-pop businesses 
and people supporting locals around here.” Existing brewers also 
enthusiastically back new openings, including this summer’s debut ofAndina 
<https://www.facebook.com/andinabrewing/>, a brewery founded by two Colombian 
brothers who’ll be blending Latin American and Canadian flavours. “I can’t wait 
to see what they bring to Yeast Van,” Doan says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tx87%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tx87%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9d9690df1445f7696b05d8075e1906f67adf236%2F0_108_960_576%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20the%20round%3A%20Vancouver's%20craft%20beer%20community&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tx87%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In+the+round%3A+Vancouver%27s+craft+beer+community&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tx87%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9d9690df1445f7696b05d8075e1906f67adf236%2F0_108_960_576%2F960.jpg>
 Callister Brewing Company 
“There will be more brew-club communities coming together and opening 
co-operative breweries like Callister,” says David Perry, president of the 
Vancouver branch of the Campaign for Real Ale. “It’s the most efficient way to 
get breweries off the ground.” He, too, is excited by the support network 
between breweries. Brewers will lend ingredients and are looking at ways to 
share space and facilities.

Callister <http://www.callisterbrewing.com/>, which opened at the end of 2015, 
claims to be Canada’s first collaborative brewery, and calls East Van its home. 
It now offers peer-led support and equipment to four brewers that may otherwise 
have struggled with the tricky logistics of setting up. Swing by its tasting 
room and you can try Burnley Bastard Mild brewed by Real Cask, or Nonsensical – 
an IPA from Brewery Creek.

And with the start of low-cost direct flights from Gatwick to Vancouver with 
WestJet this May, more UK travellers will be able to join the party.

• WestJet 
<http://www.westjet.com/guest/en/home.shtml;WS_SESSION_ID=89018D54577132C362DA9D64B2B495C8>
 will fly Gatwick-Vancouver from about £450 return, starting 6 May



