
Nicola Sturgeon has led a concerted onslaught from senior remain campaigners 
aimed at discrediting Boris Johnson, ina heated television debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/09/eu-referendum-our-panel-on-boris-johnson-and-nicola-sturgeons-tv-debate>
 that saw him attacked for telling “whoppers”.

With just a fortnight to go before the historic referendum that will decide 
whether Britain remains a member of theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>, Johnson was accused on Thursday night 
of misleading the public and putting his own career before the good of the 
country – including by his Conservative colleague energy secretary Amber Rudd.

The Scottish first minister described it as a “scandal” that Johnson’s Vote 
Leave campaign bus still has the controversial claim thatBritain sends £350m a 
week to Brussels 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/reality-check/2016/may/23/does-the-eu-really-cost-the-uk-350m-a-week>
 emblazoned on the side of it.
EU referendum debates: when and where to watch them 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/05/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=referendum_debates>
The figure has been called “potentially misleading” by the independent 
Statistics Authority 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/27/uk-statistics-chief-vote-leave-350m-figure-misleading>
, for failing to take into account the UK’s rebate from the EU. Sturgeon 
accused Johnson – who repeatedly defended the number during the debate – as 
“driving around the country in a bus with a giant whopper painted on the side”.

Labour’s Angela Eagle <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/angela-eagle>, also 
making the case for remain, joined Sturgeon and Rudd on the attack, in another 
of the extraordinary combinations that have characterised the referendum 
campaign. At one point Eagle jabbed her finger at Johnson, saying, “get that 
lie off your bus!”.

Rudd, who is regarded by some in her party as a potential future leader, also 
gave a punchy performance, describing Johnson as, “the life and soul of the 
party, but not the man you want driving you home at the end of the evening”.

She also suggested he was keener on furthering his own career than standing by 
his principles. “We need to look at the numbers – I fear the only number Boris 
is interested in is the one that says No 10”.

However, the former mayor of London appeared unruffled by the attacks on his 
character, and stuck to the line that a vote to leave would “take back control 
of our democracy” – a sentiment that was warmly received by the studio audience.

At one point during Thursday night’s debate, the former mayor of London urged 
the opposing panellists not to “reduce this argument to a lot of personal 
stuff” – and he was applauded by the audience when he hit back at Sturgeon, 
accusing her of being “more keen on being ruled from Brussels than ruled from 
Westminster”.

With Johnson widely regarded as the leave campaign’s strongest advocate, and 
the polls suggesting the result on 23 June will be too close to call, the 
Britain Stronger in Europe campaign, being coordinated from Downing Street, is 
keen to ramp up the pressure on him.



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kpm2%2Fsfb%23img-1&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kpm2%2Fsfb%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6162c2c5288b296d1c1ea01c1f3fb12e6b2ea4a2%2F0_115_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20Sturgeon%20accuses%20Johnson%20of%20telling%20%C2%A3350m%20'whopper'&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kpm2%2Fstw%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EU+referendum%3A+Sturgeon+accuses+Johnson+of+telling+%C2%A3350m+%27whopper%27&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kpm2%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6162c2c5288b296d1c1ea01c1f3fb12e6b2ea4a2%2F0_115_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Boris Johnson has defended the claim that Britain spends £350m a week on the 
EU, despite it attracting accusations of being spurious. Photograph: Stefan 
Rousseau/PA 
Stronger In will be unveiling a deliberately provocative poster on Friday 
morning, picturing Johnson gambling in a casino alongside the justice secretary 
Michael Gove, and with Ukip leader Nigel Farage, clutching a cigar.

Sturgeon offered a strong defence of immigration, saying the free movement of 
people that is a fundamental principle of the EU single market is a “two-way 
street”, which benefits UK citizens who can travel abroad, as well as EU 
migrants who can come to the UK and work.


“Immigration is causing pressure in some areas, Sturgeon said. “But the answer 
to that is to invest in our public services. If you are struggling to access 
public services, blame the politicians not the immigrants.”

She added: “The impact of austerity on our public services is much greater 
than the impact of immigration.”

And while Vote Leave has repeatedly claimed that exiting the EU would free up 
more resources to spend on public services including the NHS, Sturgeon said she 
“wouldn’t trustBoris Johnson <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> with 
the NHS any further than I could throw Boris Johnson”, and said he wasn’t 
interested in protecting Britain’s workers, but only in seizing “David 
Cameron’s job”.

Rudd insisted that tackling immigration was a “complex issue”, for which there 
was no “silver bullet” – but that leaving the EU would hit the economy.

Related: EU referendum: our panel on Boris Johnson and Nicola Sturgeon's TV 
debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/09/eu-referendum-our-panel-on-boris-johnson-and-nicola-sturgeons-tv-debate>

Eagle, the shadow business secretary, also hinted at her own leadership 
ambitions, when Johnson asked whether she could be the first woman leader of the
Labour <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party, warning him to, 
“beware of the blonde bombshell”.


The overwhelming majority of Labour MPs support remaining in the EU, but 
outspoken backbencher John Mann announced on Thursday night that he would back 
Brexit. In an open letter to the Sun newspaper, Mann said Labour is “going to 
get a big shock across the country,” when the referendum result comes in on 24 
June

Iain Duncan Smith, the former work and pensions secretary – who was spinning 
for Vote Leave, told the Guardian he believed the attacks on Johnson during the 
TV debate were carefully scripted.


“Tonight I thought was stark,” he said. “The remain side came on with the 
usual old scare stories about Britain not being good enough but what really 
added to that, was lacing its way through that, was just personal abuse. One 
after another. You could see their heads dip down to read the line: ‘Now time 
to abuse Boris Johnson’.”

In his closing statement, Johnson accused the remain camp of scaremongering, 
by repeatedly highlighting the risks of leaving the EU.

“The last couple of hours and the whole campaign is the contrast between this 
side offering hope and that side offering nothing but fear about life outside,” 
he said.

“They say we can’t do it on our own. We say we are a great country. We say we 
can. They say we have absolutely no choice but to stay locked in the back of 
the EU car driven in the wrong direction, driven in a destination we do not 
want to go.”

Andrea Leadsom, a Conservative who was participating for leave, received a 
warm response when she described Britain’s relationship with the EU as “a 
takeover by an unelected superstate”. A junior minister in the department for 
energy and climate change, Leadsom also had a spiky exchange with Rudd, her 
boss, who criticised her tone on immigration.
