
News and current affairs magazines have bucked downward trends across the rest 
of the magazine market over the last six months, with many showing growing 
combined digital and print circulations.

Figures from the Audit Bureau of Circulations (ABC) showed year-on-year growth 
for combined print and online editions of the two largest players:Private Eye 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/private-eye> and the Economist in the UK, 
which increased circulations by 4.6% and 1.9% year on year and 4% and 1.8% 
period on period, respectively.

The Investor’s Chronicle and Prospect magazine were also among those to show 
increases in combined print and online circulations.

Strong digital performances underpinned the growth, with all of the digital 
editions increasing circulation year on year.

The Economist <http://www.theguardian.com/media/the-economist> in the UK 
recorded the largest rise in online circulation, with a jump of 225.8% between 
January and June this year when compared with the same period in 2014. The 
increase to 70,953 readers also represented a rise of 42% on the second half of 
last year.

The magazine’s Asia-Pacific, continental Europe and Middle East-African online 
editions all show increases between 52.1%% and 77.5% on the first six months of 
last year. The digital version of the Week – which aggregates news from other 
titles – also did well, growing by 17%.

There were fewer success stories in print, where many magazines – including 
the Economist in all territories and the Spectator in Australia – saw declining 
circulations.

However, Private Eye grew by 4%, while the the Spectator outside of Australia 
and the Week also saw modest increases on the first half of 2014 of 1.6% and 
1.4%, respectively.

While it actually recorded a fall, the Economist’s continental Europe edition 
had the highest combined print and online circulation overall, with 243,640 
copies. That was followed by Private Eye, which recorded 228,264 sales. Across 
all territories, the Economist’s combined print and online circulation figure 
was 652,9778.
