
I’ve been married for 34 years, but recently I’ve become sexually fixated on 
an event from my youth. It was during a ferocious cold snap; things took an 
amorous turn, but there was no question of removing winter garb. My younger 
self responded with unexpected vim to the firm touch of my wife’s begloved 
hand. Since that time, and especially recently, no intimate encounter has had 
meaning without a mental replaying of that wintry night.

Your erotic thoughts are your own business, and it is unnecessary to share 
them with anyone else – even a spouse. Many people have a fairly narrow sexual 
script, but you have one wonderfully erotic fantasy to replay whenever you 
want. In my opinion, you should feel comfortable using this scenario privately 
whenever you wish. But, on a more practical note, as people age it is normal to 
need direct genital stimulation as a prelude to strong arousal, so your wife’s 
hand could be providing more than an acting-out of a favourite fantasy.

Perhaps you could help her to understand this, and also to be aware of the 
importance you place on such a fantastically inspiring memory. Express your 
loving gratitude to her for that. If she truly appreciates how much your love, 
attraction and erotic bond with her are associated with that formative moment, 
she may feel more disposed to participate generously. If she does, be sure to 
reciprocate by trying to accommodate her needs and fantasies as well.

• Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a US-based psychotherapist specialising in 
sexual disorders.

• If you would like advice from Pamela Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, 
send us a brief description of your concerns toprivate.lives@theguardian.com 
<mailto://private.lives@theguardian.com> (please don’t send attachments). Each 
week, Pamela chooses one problem to answer, which will be published online and 
in print. She regrets that she cannot enter into personal correspondence.
