
One morning in mid-January 2015, a small, furtive-looking man in a black 
hooded parka stood alone on the Turkish side of the Akçakale border crossing 
with Syria. The weather was sunny and cold, and there was almost no one in 
sight. The man glanced around uneasily, and finally approached a street sweeper 
in a blue jumpsuit. “I want to cross to the other side,” he said. “What can I 
do?” The street sweeper demanded 75 Turkish lira and pointed to a small hole in 
the fence, not far from the main gate. The man paid him but hesitated. He had 
come a long way, and was now barely 10 metres from his destination: the dusty 
brown hills of northern Syria, where theIslamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> began. “What about the guards?” he 
said. “No problem,” the street sweeper replied. “Just go.” The man walked 
towards the hole in the gate. He bent down and squeezed through. On the other 
side, he began to run. One of the Turkish guards saw him and shouted. He did 
not stop.

Related: Why Isis fights | Martin Chulov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/17/why-isis-fight-syria-iraq> 

The newcomer’s name was Abu Ali. He had another name and another life, but 
like most migrants to the Islamic State, he had cast it off. He wanted to be 
born again. In early 2015, Isis was at the height of its power, and was still 
attracting thousands of eager new disciples every month from all over the 
world. The American-led coalition had been bombing Islamic State targets for 
months, without dislodging it from any of its terrain. If anything, it seemed 
to grow stronger. Isis regularly rolled out gruesome videos of public 
beheadings and executions, and trumpeted its practice of selling captured 
non-Muslim women into sex slavery. All this ferocity only seemed to amplify its 
appeal to young and frustrated Muslims.

But some of the true believers who arrived in the Islamic State were 
discovering that life there was not quite the paradise they had imagined. A new 
narrative – of disillusionment, of horror, of black comedy – was slowly leaking 
out from the inside. Abu Ali would become one of its voices.

I met him late last summer in Urfa, a Turkish town near the border. It was 
about three months after he had escaped from Isis, with the help of smugglers 
and a network of sympathetic activists. We spent the day sitting in an outdoor 
cafe in a public park, with Turkish families strolling around under the trees. 
The smell of sweet tobacco drifted by, and we could hear the squeals of 
children playing in a water fountain not far away.

Abu Ali was not an archetypal jihadi: short and bald, with a delicate chin and 
nervous brown eyes. He was 38 years old, and after a lifetime of smoking and 
drinking, he knew he was not cut out to be a fighter. He told me he had joined 
Isis in the hopes of getting a desk job and making himself into a good Muslim. 
He had been born in Kuwait and carried a Jordanian passport, but had spent most 
of his life in Aleppo, the old trading hub in northernSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>. His life there had been a kind of 
parable of old-regime Arab corruption. He worked for his father, who made a 
good living as an expediter –helping Syrians navigate the maze of government 
bribes required to buy a car. Abu Ali helped out with the paperwork. “I’d get 
up about 9am, go to the office, drink coffee and sign some papers for about two 
hours, and then go home,” he told me. “It was corrupt but it was OK with me.” 
He also went to bars and clubs and partied several nights a week, despite his 
wife’s constant haranguing. She was infertile, and the absence of children made 
their days especially empty.

By 2012, Abu Ali’s profligate life began tilting towards despair. His father’s 
government work had stopped after therebel Free Syrian Army entered Aleppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/middle-east-live/2012/jul/27/syria-us-fears-aleppo-massacre-live>
. He was living off handouts from other family members abroad. He had held out 
some hope after the Syrian revolution started in 2011, but now he felt that 
everything was going to hell. He had gone to religious school as a kid in 
Kuwait, and as the war closed in on Aleppo in 2012 he sought refuge in Islamic 
piety (though he could not bring himself to give up booze or cigarettes). One 
of his wife’s brothers was an officer in the Syrian military, and one day he 
told her that her brother was an infidel. That made her furious, and it got 
back to her family. One of her other brothers – a tailor – confronted Abu Ali, 
and after a shouting match, Abu Ali declared that he was divorcing his wife. In 
Islamic law, that’s all it takes. She moved out.

After that, Abu Ali felt he had nothing left to lose. He bought a plane ticket 
to Istanbul, and from there took a bus down to Urfa, in the south. Then it was 
a half-hour trip by minibus to the Syrian border. “My heart was pounding and 
pounding the whole trip,” he told me. “I hesitated a bit. But I told myself, 
it’s the devil trying to change my mind. Don’t listen. Just go.”

After Abu Ali had sneaked through the border fence into Isis territory that 
sunny January morning, he soon saw a group of men with long beards and guns, 
sitting in chairs by a building. He stopped short. “Why are you running?” one 
of them asked. “I am running to you!” he said, between gasps. He gestured 
backward towards the Turkish guards at the gate. The Isis man looked at him and 
smiled. “Relax,” he said. “They are our friends.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t94a%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t94a%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa50a5d0593f73892bb7fa68df8b8b1644a79cb89%2F0_372_2768_1661%2F2768.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20reluctant%20jihadi%20%7C%20Robert%20F%20Worth&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t94a%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+reluctant+jihadi+%7C+Robert+F+Worth&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t94a%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa50a5d0593f73892bb7fa68df8b8b1644a79cb89%2F0_372_2768_1661%2F2768.jpg>
 The Akçakale border crossing into Syria. Photograph: Jamie 
Wiseman/Rex/Shutterstock 
Abu Ali’s arrival must have struck the Isis men as almost comically unlikely. 
Most migrants to the Islamic State work with smugglers and are shepherded from 
place to place by a clandestine network. Abu Ali came alone and totally 
unprepared. Still, they welcomed him warmly, and seemed delighted when he said 
he was Jordanian. “We want Arabs to join us, not just all these foreigners,” 
one of them said. After an hour or so, a car appeared, and another Isis man 
drove Abu Ali to a reception house not far away. It was a large, one-storey 
building with a garden out back, and about a dozen other new arrivals who were 
getting acclimatised.

Only Americans and Europeans were allowed to slaughter the chickens in the 
garden. It was training for killing infidels

“It was like an airport,” Abu Ali told me. “I saw Americans, English, French, 
people from other countries – there was only one Syrian.” For the next five 
days, he slept on a mattress and talked endlessly with the other migrants, who 
mostly spoke English. The Isis officials told them they were investigating 
their backgrounds. The emir in charge was Syrian, a very short, friendly man 
who had lost one of his legs in battle and hobbled around on an artificial one. 
He once caught Abu Ali smoking and gave him a stern lecture, but otherwise he 
was always smiling. “Whatever you asked, they’d say, ‘No problem,’” Abu Ali 
said. “I told them I don’t want to fight, just an administration job,” he said. 
“They said, ‘No problem, but you must do the religious and military training 
like everybody else. You never know when you might need it.’ I said fine.”

There were chickens in the garden out back, and the emir insisted that only 
the Americans and Europeans be allowed to slaughter them. It was training for 
killing infidels, he said. That was a little odd, but it didn’t bother Abu Ali. 
One thing did. The emir mentioned in passing that the Free Syrian Army’s 
fighters were infidels. The other volunteers took it in their stride, but Abu 
Ali, who has a constitutional inability not to speak his mind, asked what he 
meant. “Let’s not talk about this now,” the emir said. “We’ll discuss it after 
the sharia course.” Abu Ali persisted. “I have seen FSA fighters praying. They 
fast at Ramadan. Doesn’t that mean they’re Muslims?” The emir looked impatient. 
“Like I said, we’ll talk about it later,” he said. “You really need a religion 
course.”

At the end of five days, the new recruits were told it was time to leave. Abu 
Ali got into a minibus with about 15 others, and they were driven to Raqqa, the 
Islamic State’s capital, about an hour away. They spent a day there in another 
guesthouse, and then a bus drove them westward for several hours, until the 
roads turned into dirt tracks and they climbed into the Bel’as mountains, a 
dry, craggy range of dun-coloured peaks to the east of the city of Homs. It was 
very cold and there was snow on the ground. The men got off the bus and walked 
along a path towards a group of caves in the mountain slope. Other buses were 
arriving nearby. This was where the sharia training would take place, they were 
told.

For the next two weeks, all of the men would be woken up before dawn. They 
would perform the dawn prayer, then go outside for running and press-ups before 
the sharia lessons began at first light. The lessons were very basic, focusing 
on the difference between Muslims and non-Muslims, and the requirement to fight 
infidels and apostates. Many of the recruits knew no Arabic, and some were 
illiterate. At breakfast they were given a few bits of white cheese –“it was 
cubes, like that Vache Qui Rit stuff,” Abu Ali said – some stale bread, and 
water. Later in the day, it was beans and bread. In the evening, after prayers, 
the recruits would gather inside the cave for announcements and news updates, 
often broadcast with a laptop and projector against the cave wall.

One night the emir in charge of the training course, a bald Syrian with pale 
skin who, in his previous life, had been a history teacher in Homs, said there 
was a special event in store. Once the men were all seated on the cave floor, 
the emir turned on the projector and a video flickered on the cave wall: an 
Arab man in an orange jumpsuit in a cage. Flames licked towards the cage, 
following a trail of petrol, and engulfed the man. A voiceover intoned that 
this was the Jordanian pilotMoaz al-Kasasbeh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/03/isis-video-jordanian-hostage-burdning-death-muadh-al-kasabeh>
, who had been captured after his plane crashed. His grotesque execution by 
fire was seizing the world’s attention at that moment, and even some jihadis 
were denouncing it as an immoral act. The men in the cave were also shocked, 
but they stayed quiet. The emir stood up and explained that this pilot had 
dropped bombs on Muslims, and his execution by fire was a just retribution 
under Islamic law. The men listened in silence.

Abu Ali soon sensed dozens of eyes turning in his direction. He was the only 
Jordanian there, and they all knew it. He had not said anything, but his horror 
at the video must have been visible on his face. The emir also stared at him. 
Then the emir muttered something and laughed derisively. Some of the recruits 
followed suit. This was clearly some sort of loyalty test. Abu Ali felt their 
eyes on him, and he began to shake. He had been taught as a child that burning 
a man to death was forbidden in Islam. The images had sickened him. He held 
steady for a minute or so, and then he heard himself say, “May God help me.” 
Almost immediately, two Isis guards took him by the arms and led him out of the 
cave. The emir followed later. He sat down on the rocks with Abu Ali and asked 
him why he had spoken those words. Did he question what Isis had done? Abu Ali 
said no. He had only spoken out because people were provoking him. The emir 
seemed satisfied. “At the beginning of this course you were akafir (an 
unbeliever),” he said. “Now you are becoming a Muslim.”

Abu Ali was intensely relieved. He had escaped punishment. But from that 
moment on, he told me, “I began to suspect everything around me.” 

When the two-week sharia course was over, most of the men were transported to 
another group of damp mountain caves a few miles away. They now started the 
military training class. It followed a similar routine: up at dawn for prayers 
and a few scraps of cheese and bread, followed by some live-fire exercises with 
AK-47s and rocket-propelled grenades. There was also a lot of running. Abu Ali, 
with his smoker’s lungs, would just sit down on the rocks when he got tired. 
The trainers shouted at him, and he would hold up his hand and shout back: “I’m 
doing administration, not combat.” He was already getting a reputation as a 
laggard.

On the last day of the course, the men were summoned from their cave in the 
morning and asked to recite an oath of loyalty. As soon as the oath was over, 
the men were split up into groups. Abu Ali found himself standing with about 
three dozen other men near a bus. A Syrian commander in battle fatigues told 
them they were going to the frontlines inIraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq>. “Sir, I don’t want to go to the 
frontline,” Abu Ali told the commander. “They said I could do administration in 
Raqqa.” The commander looked at him, stone-faced. “You swore an oath,” he said. 
“You must listen and obey now. The penalty could be death.” Abu Ali stood for a 
moment, registering the shock, then he walked towards the bus.

'How the hell are we going to capture that berm?' Abu Ali said. 'It's 12 of us 
against the Iraqi army'

After a few days of travel, Abu Ali arrived in Garma, a village just west of 
Baghdad near the frontline. Abu Ali and 12 other men were led to a former Iraqi 
army officer in civilian dress. They could hear war planes soaring overhead, 
and every now and then the earth shook as a bomb exploded. With almost no 
formalities, the commander pointed to a large earth berm about 350 metres away. 
“The Iraqi army is on the other side of that berm,” he said. “You will capture 
the berm tomorrow morning.”

Once again, Abu Ali’s reactions got the better of him. “How the hell are we 
going to capture that berm?” he said. “It’s 12 of us against the Iraqi army.” 
The officer looked surprised at this breach of Isis protocol. “Allah is with 
you,” he said. “You will be victorious.” A few hours later, they were given a 
more detailed briefing. They would attack shortly after 3am. The squad leader, 
another Iraqi, suggested that Abu Ali wear a suicide belt into battle. He 
refused outright. “Why don’t you wear it?” he said. “You want to go to paradise 
more than I do.” The leader was not amused. He told Abu Ali to man a Dushka, a 
Russian-made heavy machine gun. Abu Ali replied that he had no idea how to use 
a Dushka. As it turned out, another man came forward just before the attack and 
said he knew how to fire a Dushka. Abu Ali, exhausted and terrified, nearly 
wept with relief. He was assigned to the medical team.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t94a%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t94a%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa642b3fe444ba6306bf928a24ea765aedc2aa28%2F0_24_3776_2266%2F3776.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20reluctant%20jihadi%20%7C%20Robert%20F%20Worth&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t94a%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+reluctant+jihadi+%7C+Robert+F+Worth&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t94a%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa642b3fe444ba6306bf928a24ea765aedc2aa28%2F0_24_3776_2266%2F3776.jpg>
 Pro-government fighters in Garma, outside Baghdad, where Abu Ali was sent with 
Isis forces to attack the Iraqi army. Photograph: Ahmad Al-Rubaye/AFP/Getty 
Images 
For the next few hours, Abu Ali and another recruit dragged wounded men from 
the battlefield. It was terrifying work. They could hear and feel bullets 
whizzing past them in the pre-dawn darkness, and some of the men they dragged – 
there were no stretchers – were screaming in pain. They had to leave many 
others behind. The battle went on for two more days, until it was clear that 
the assault was failing.

On the morning of the third day, Abu Ali and a new friend named Abu Hassan 
walked together into the headquarters in Garma and confronted the Iraqi 
commander. “We don’t want to fight any more. You are leaving dead and wounded 
men behind. The prophet Muhammad, peace be upon him, did not force men to fight 
against their will.” The commander seemed disgusted but unsure what to do. 
Finally, he sent the two men to a less dangerous position.

Abu Ali knew he was taking a risk by refusing to fight, but the alternative, 
he felt, was almost certain death. He expected a punishment. Instead, to his 
surprise, he found himself almost forgotten. He and Abu Hassan were left for 
days in an abandoned house in Garma. They got along well. Abu Hassan was a 
former thief who had joined Isis in the hopes of making some money. As it 
turned out, Isis paid him a monthly salary of $150 at first, and then stopped. 
Abu Ali told me he was repeatedly promised a salary for months, and paid a 
grand total of $50.

The two conscientious objectors were in luck: there was electricity in the 
house, and even better, a television. They spent hours watching news updates 
and movies. They knew this was strictly forbidden by Isis, so they kept the 
windows shut. This made it almost unbearably hot and stuffy inside, but it was 
better than boredom. At one point Rambo came on. “I wish Rambo would join us 
here,” Abu Ali said. “We really need him.” That got a long chuckle from Abu 
Hassan. Later they watched music videos byElissa, the Lebanese pop singer 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5iezwFAPAXQ&nohtml5=False>. A woman showing 
her body and singing: this wasvery forbidden.

After a day or so, a fellow Isis fighter from Kurdistan stopped by the house 
and caught them with the TV on. He gave them a lecture and they promised to 
reform. After he left, they waited about five minutes. Abu Hassan looked at Abu 
Ali, who nodded, and he turned the TV back on. It was a news show with a woman 
presenter. Suddenly the door burst open. It was the Kurdish fighter, who had 
waited just outside to ambush them. He pointed his AK at the TV and fired. Abu 
Ali jumped backwards as glass and TV components sprayed across the room, and 
began shouting: “Hey man, we’re your brothers, calm down! We committed a sin 
but we won’t do it again!” The Kurd glared at them and stamped out.

The next day Abu Ali was transferred to another guesthouse in the city of 
Falluja, not far away, which was under Isis control. This one was crowded with 
men. Not long after, he was amazed to hear the sound of two girls giggling in 
the next room. Another fighter told him the girls were Yazidis who had been 
captured in northern Iraq eight months earlier, when Isis overran the area and 
sold hundreds of Yazidi women and girls into sex slavery. They were 13 and 14 
years old, the man said. They had been offered to the governor of Falluja, who 
didn’t want them, so they were being kept there for the moment. Abu Ali had 
heard about the Yazidi sex slaves, though he had never encountered any himself. 
The men called them “sabaya”. They were mostly rewards for officers or men who 
had done well on the front – not for delinquents like Abu Ali. Over the next 
few hours he heard the girls laughing, and once he heard them sobbing. He 
assumed it was because they missed their families. Later that day, a shouting 
match erupted in the dozen or so men in Abu Ali’s guesthouse. All of them 
wanted thesabaya. It went on for half an hour or so, getting increasingly 
heated.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t94a%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t94a%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d20ecad7ff69fac02add31a83c652c39cea6462%2F0_112_4818_2891%2F4818.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20reluctant%20jihadi%20%7C%20Robert%20F%20Worth&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t94a%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+reluctant+jihadi+%7C+Robert+F+Worth&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t94a%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d20ecad7ff69fac02add31a83c652c39cea6462%2F0_112_4818_2891%2F4818.jpg>
 A displaced Iraqi woman from the Yazidi community. Isis sold hundreds of 
Yazidi women and girls into sex slavery. Photograph: Safin Hamed/AFP/Getty 
Images 
Then a man in fatigues burst into the guesthouse. He looked like a commander. 
He asked where thesabaya were, and one of the men pointed to the door of the 
next room. He marched in without a word. Two loud shots rang out. The man in 
fatigues walked out again. Abu Ali, sitting in a chair by the door, stared up 
at him, frozen. “What did you do?” he asked. The man seemed unruffled. “Those 
girls were causing trouble between the brothers, so I dealt with them,” he 
said. And he walked out.

Abu Ali was not the only Isis member who was sickened by what he saw. The 
initial euphoria had worn off for many of the migrants. Some of them complained 
about unnecessary cruelty, some about favouritism and hypocrisy in the ranks. 
Many others simply had not reckoned on the rigours of life in a terrorist army. 
A few of them, amazingly, complained that Isis was not radical enough – that it 
was bending its principles for political reasons. There are no reliable 
numbers, but by early 2015 one anti-Isis rebel group in northern Syria began 
hearing so many stories about people desperate to escape that it organised a 
smuggling network to bring them out. I met one defector who was as different 
from Abu Ali as anyone could be: 22 years old, well-built, recklessly brave, 
with years of combat experience behind him. He went by the nom de guerre Abu 
Abdullah. He said that he had taken part in the conquest of Raqqa, the Isis 
capital, and later served in the group’s intelligence wing, helping to plant 
bombs and sniff out traitors, some of whom were later executed.

Abu Abdullah’s disillusionment began, he told me, in the late summer of 2014, 
when a tribe in eastern Syria called the al-Shaitat had rebelled against Isis, 
and in the ensuing battles, close to a thousand of them were massacred. Abu 
Abdullah knew little about it, but was assigned to provide security for a 
convoy of dump trucks that was en route to the town of Slouk, not far from 
where the battle took place. Outside the town is a deep natural gorge known as 
al-Houta. As the trucks arrived at the edge of the gorge and tilted their beds 
back, Abu Abdullah watched in horror as the corpses of women and children began 
tumbling out. It was not just a few. There were dozens of them. Many had been 
shot in the head. The little bodies rolled down the slope of the gorge, 
shedding bloody scarves and shoes as they went, like garbage flooding into a 
bin. Abu Abdullah was not a reflective man, from what I could tell. He was a 
bullheaded kid who had joined Isis because he thought they were the best shot 
to liberate his hometown. But “at moments like that, you doubt”, he told me.

He kept fighting for Isis another six months. The disappointments accumulated. 
He watched as a corrupt commander evaded punishment through connections with 
high-ranking Isis figures. When Abu Abdullah tried to report the violations, it 
was he who went to jail, not the commander. Once he knew he wanted to defect, 
in the spring of 2015, he rode back to the al-Houta gorge one afternoon on his 
motorcycle. After checking to make sure no one was around, he climbed down and 
shot a film with his phone. It is a haunting video. In the golden afternoon 
light, the gorge looks a little like part of the Grand Canyon, with layered 
sedimentary rocks in varying tones of rusty brown and umber. The camera pans 
upwards, showing the fading blue sky, the silhouette of a rock formation, and 
then down towards the black hole at the bottom. You can see corpses strewn at 
various places on the way down. Some are very close to the camera, and some 
have rolled down towards the pit. The film unfolds in silence, apart from the 
occasional grinding of Abu Abdullah’s shoes on the stones and sand. It goes on 
for more than five minutes, and at a certain point you begin to wonder why he 
is continuing to film the same motionless scene for so long. Then it dawns: the 
camera is reflecting his own preoccupation. This is a place he cannot forget.

After two weeks of idleness, marooned in his guesthouse in Falluja, Abu Ali 
was packed on to a bus bound for Syria. The men on board knew they were likely 
to be punished. Arriving back in Raqqa, they were taken to a soccer stadium, 
known as Point 11: a notorious Isis prison and security centre. Abu Ali and the 
other 27 men with him had their rifles taken away and were put into a former 
locker room in the stadium basement. They stayed there for a day, and were then 
blindfolded and driven by bus to another holding centre. Many were 
terrified,believing that they were going to be executed. Instead, a man arrived 
the next day and addressed them. “Brothers, do not say, ‘I will not fight any 
more.’ Just say, ‘I prefer to fight in Syria.’ You will be given one more 
chance.”

All the men agreed, and later that day, Abu Ali was driven to his first new 
assignment: prison guard at Point 11. The three weeks he spent there made him 
more sure than ever that he could not stomach the violence of life in the 
Islamic State. He often heard the screams of prisoners being tortured. Abu Ali 
used his phone to shoot a three-minute video in the basement of Point 11. It is 
painful to watch: a gaunt old man with white hair and a long white beard lies 
on the floor of what looks like a locker room, while Isis soldiers kick and 
beat him savagely. The old man begs for mercy. Eventually, the soldiers drag 
him by his arms into a dark room, and the clip ends.

After three weeks at Point 11, he was bussed north, to another battle zone not 
far from Aleppo. He got close enough to the front line that he could hear the 
warplanes shrieking overhead, and feel the ground shaking after the bombs 
struck. It was like Iraq all over again. He was terrified. Abu Ali couldn’t 
help himself. “Why do I have to fight?” he asked his new commander, a 
strong-looking Syrian who was about 20 years old. “They told me I could be in 
administration. I’m not young like you, I’m 38 years old. My knees are bad. I 
can barely run.” The man looked at him impatiently but let him stay in the rear 
for a day. Abu Ali found himself wishing a stray bullet would hit him in the 
arm, just enough injury to get him a desk job.

The next day Abu Ali came up with more excuses. He said that he had been an 
alcoholic before joining Isis, and had a nerve disease as a result. He was 
passed from commander to commander. All of them knew he was lying, but 
eventually they got so sick of dealing with him that they gave in. A Tunisian 
commander gave him a withering look and a document that exempted him from 
battle on medical grounds. “We really don’t need people like you,” he said.

A few days later, Abu Ali found himself alone in a house in the town of 
Manbij, not far from the front. There was an internet cafe next door, and to 
his delight, he was able to access the wireless signal. Soon after he did so, 
he heard the chime of a WhatsApp message on his phone. He looked at it and his 
heart leapt: it was his wife. She had seen that he was online. She had written 
an old expression that they both liked: “If you love something, let it go. If 
it doesn’t come back, it wasn’t meant for you. But if it does, it will be yours 
forever.” After reading it, Abu Ali hesitated for a minute or two before 
answering. He found himself shaking with emotion. There was another chime. She 
had written: “What’s the matter? Don’t you know me?” He wrote back teasingly: 
“No, you must have the wrong number.” But almost instantly he began writing 
again, asking how she was, and where. He apologised for his mistakes. He told 
her he wanted to come back.

At the last checkpoint, an Isis soldier eyed Abu Ali suspiciously and asked 
why he was going to the border

As he recalled that moment, months later, Abu Ali told me: “The second I saw 
her first message I started hating them all. I said to myself: what an idiot 
I’ve been. What have I done?” It was then, he said, that he knew he had to get 
out. He had heard a rumour that one of his comrades in the Iraq battle, a man 
from Morocco, had escaped to Turkey. He sent him a WhatsApp message. The 
Moroccan wrote back quickly. He said he was in Istanbul. He gave the name and 
number of a man he said could help. Abu Ali sent a message to that man, who 
wrote back and told him to wait for instructions. Two days later, the man wrote 
again: go to Raqqa. Equipped with his sick-leave document, Abu Ali got on a 
civilian bus early the next morning. He was wearing an Afghan-style cloak that 
identified him as a member of Isis, and no one gave him any trouble.

When he got to Raqqa, he went straight to an internet cafe and stayed there 
for hours. He had no idea what he would do if he had to stay overnight. Finally 
a message appeared on his phone: go toTal Abyad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/16/kurdish-fighters-cut-key-supply-line-to-islamic-state-capital-raqqa>
, right now. A second message gave him the name of another internet cafe and a 
time. He went to the main bus depot in Raqqa, where it was easy enough to find 
a bus heading north to Tal Abyad, near the Turkish border. At the last 
checkpoint, an Isis soldier eyed him suspiciously and asked why he was going to 
the border. Abu Ali pulled out his documents and started to explain. It turned 
out that the soldier, who looked about 15, was illiterate. He let Abu Ali pass.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t94a%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t94a%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8fd48f10ed9836634d5536bdf4c805a06135ad44%2F0_227_5475_3285%2F5475.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20reluctant%20jihadi%20%7C%20Robert%20F%20Worth&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t94a%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+reluctant+jihadi+%7C+Robert+F+Worth&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t94a%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8fd48f10ed9836634d5536bdf4c805a06135ad44%2F0_227_5475_3285%2F5475.jpg>
 Tal Abyad in northern Syria, where Abu Ali was picked up by the group who 
helped him escape Isis. Photograph: The Washington Post/Getty Images 
By the time he arrived in Tal Abyad it was 9pm, well past dark. He found an 
internet cafe and went inside to wait for the next message. As he looked 
around, it became clear that everyone in the cafe was Isis: long beards, AKs on 
the shoulders, Afghan robes. Abu Ali felt himself shaking. He tried not to look 
at anyone, but one man was eyeing him suspiciously. The meeting time came and 
went. It was almost 11pm, and the cafe would soon be closing. He said to 
himself: that’s it, I’m done for.

Finally, just before 11pm, two motorcycles pulled up just outside, and one of 
the riders shouted through the cafe door at Abu Ali: “The food’s ready, sorry 
we’re late.” Abu Ali got up to go. As he did so, the Isis man who had been 
staring at him in the cafe stepped forward. “Where are you from?” he said. Abu 
Ali replied in an Aleppo accent – he figured a local by himself was less 
suspicious than a foreigner: “I’m sorry, I’m late, I have to go.” He walked out 
the door and got on the back of one of the motorcycles, scarcely breathing. But 
the bike took off down the road and no one followed. The next day, after a 
sleepless night in a nearby house, the men who had rescued him from the cafe 
accompanied him to a remote stretch on the border.

The men were paid smugglers working for a network called Thuwar Raqqa, or 
Revolutionaries of Raqqa. The group had started helping people escape from Isis 
only a few months earlier. It was a small fighting organisation, about 1,200 
men in all, allied with both the Free Syrian Army and the dominant Kurdish 
paramilitary group in northern Syria. Its members were all from Raqqa and the 
surrounding area, and they had many informants and allies in territory ruled by 
Isis. They thought of themselves as a kind of government in exile, and were 
already sketching out plans for the reconquest of their home city. I met two of 
the group’s members in Turkey. They were both quiet and watchful, and seemed to 
speak only as much as was necessary. They were extraordinarily brave men, who 
regularly risked their lives in Isis territory. Several of their comrades have 
been beheaded by Isis, accused – correctly – of spying.

They were the same two men who greeted Abu Ali as he crawled through a hole in 
the border fence to freedom on the night of 25 May 2015, just over four months 
after he had entered Isis territory. He lived for the next three months under 
their protection, in a rented apartment near the border. “These are my 
friends,” Abu Ali told me when I met him in Urfa. “They saved me.”

But someone else had saved him too. After a few weeks, Abu Ali’s handlers gave 
him permission to take a bus north to the resort town of Antalya. He waited 
until 3am and walked to the house where his wife and her family were living. 
(She had told him where to go via WhatsApp). When he was just below her window, 
he typed into his phone: “I’m here.” A few minutes later she slipped out. They 
faced each other in the darkness and embraced for a long time. He could feel 
her sobbing against his chest. They walked to a public park nearby, sat down on 
a bench and talked for about an hour. “I forgive you,” she said finally. “But 
don’t fuck up again.” Dawn was about to break. He walked her back to the house, 
and she said she would persuade her brothers to let them get married again. He 
gave her a last kiss, and she went inside.

Illustration by Christophe Gowans


Robert F Worth’s book A Rage for Order: The Middle East in Turmoil from Tahrir 
Square to Isis is published by Farrar, Straus & Giroux and Picador

• Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread 
<https://twitter.com/@gdnlongread>, or sign up to the long read weekly email 
here 
<http://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/jul/20/sign-up-to-the-long-read-email>.
