
Labour’s Sadiq Khan and the Tories’ Ruth Davidson teamed up to launch a 
cross-party attack on the Vote Leave figurehead,Boris Johnson 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris>, at Wembley on Tuesday night, as 
the campaigns clashed for the final time in the EU referendum battle.
Brexit explained: Guardian leader 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/05/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=guardian_leader>
With just a day of campaigning to go before voters go to the polls, the mayor 
of London accused his predecessor of unleashing “project hate” in a desperate 
bid to win over voters by stirring up fears about immigration.

Khan also said his opponents had been scaremongering with a “big fat lie” over 
whether Turkey would soon join the EU.

In front of an audience of 6,000 gathered for the BBC’s biggest referendum 
event, Johnson hit back by saying Khan had recently claimed that Labour needed 
to listen to people’s concerns on immigration and not simply dismiss them as 
prejudice.

He also accused his opponents of wasting no time in trying to stoke people’s 
worries about life outside the EU. “They told us they were going to have a 
positive and patriotic case, but they are back to project fear within minutes 
of this debate,” he said.

Johnson also faced a blue-on-blue grilling from Davidson, his party’s leader 
in Scotland, whose strong performance attracted praise from remain supporters 
across the political spectrum, and even from within the leave campaign.

Related: EU Referendum: our panel on Question Time at Wembly Arena 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/22/eu-referendum-our-panel-question-time-wembly-arena>

Davidson said it was not good enough that when “asked if people were going to 
lose jobs, Johnson said they might or they might not”.

She also accused her other Tory opponent in the debate, Andrea Leadsom, of 
telling a “blatant untruth” about how many laws were made in Brussels.

She echoed the prime minister as she told people not to vote leave unless they 
were 100% sure because there was no going back.

She joined Khan in piling into her opponents on immigration, saying Brexit was 
not a silver bullet and that even Johnson had called for an “amnesty for 
illegal immigrants, never mind the legal ones”. She said Turkey “is not going 
to happen, it is simply not on the cards”.

In a blow to the remain camp, however, Ilnur Çevik, chief adviser to Turkey’s 
president Recep Tayipp Erdoğan, told Newsnight that David Cameron had been a 
chief supporter of the country’s accession, and his comments in the referendum 
made them feel that he was “taking us for a ride”.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fruth-davidson-experts-agree-britain-is-better-off-in-eu-referendum-bbc-great-debate-video&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fruth-davidson-experts-agree-britain-is-better-off-in-eu-referendum-bbc-great-debate-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ruth%20Davidson%3A%20experts%20'agree%20that%20Britain%20is%20better%20off%20in'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fruth-davidson-experts-agree-britain-is-better-off-in-eu-referendum-bbc-great-debate-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ruth+Davidson%3A+experts+%27agree+that+Britain+is+better+off+in%27+%E2%80%93+video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fruth-davidson-experts-agree-britain-is-better-off-in-eu-referendum-bbc-great-debate-video&media=>
Ruth Davidson: experts ‘agree that Britain is better off in’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/jun/21/ruth-davidson-experts-agree-britain-is-better-off-in-eu-referendum-bbc-great-debate-video>
Despite being a determined leave campaigner, the columnist and Conservative 
Home founder, Tim Montgomerie, took to Twitter to claim that if Davidson was an 
MP rather than an MSP, then she would be a “hot tip to be next Tory leader”.

The former Labour spin doctor, Alastair Campbell, said Scotland had always 
“produced good women”, naming Davidson; her Labour counterpart, Kezia Dugdale; 
the country’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon; and his own mother.

Amina Lone, a Labour campaigner and former candidate for MP who is working for 
Britain Stronger in Europe, said: “I love Ruth. Just love her. She is such a 
positive role model for women. She is down to earth, personable, funny, 
intelligent and has fire in her belly. What’s not to like?”

The night was marked by other emotional pleas as both sides strove to win 
support with the polls suggesting the race is still too close to call.

Johnson said Thursday could be “our country’s independence day”, saying that 
the battle was between one side that was “speaking nothing but fear and those 
of us with hope”.

Related: BBC's Big Referendum Come Dancing Debate ends in a goalless draw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/21/bbcs-big-referendum-come-dancing-debate-ends-in-a-goalless-draw>

Khan raised his voice to claim: “We stay and fight, we don’t quit. Why are you 
a quitter?”


The London mayor also faced a red-on-red battle with Gisela Stuart, who said 
she was an immigrant but argued that Britain’s policy discriminated against 
people from outside Europe.

She and Khan also disagreed on workers’ rights. Stuart said she first joined a 
union 45 years ago, but that the euro was a “broken project” and the EU could 
not protect jobs.

Khan hit back: “Gisela, you are so wrong. Every time you and I have been in a 
lobby voting for workers’ rights they [the Conservatives] have been on another 
side.”

The third remain campaigner on the panel, the TUC general secretary, Frances 
O’Grady, criticised leave campaigners for throwing around the words “red tape”.

“What they are really talking about is getting rid of vital rights at work,” 
she said.

Leadsom argued that British governments had led the way on workers’ rights.


Both sides referenced their families, with Leadsom stressing her role as a 
mother, and Stuart said the referendum was about “my children’s future and 
grandchildren’s future”.

Related: Cameron: Brexiters stoking intolerance with immigration obsession 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/21/cameron-brexit-camp-stoking-intolerance-with-immigration-obsession>

Davidson said: “I do just have to remind people that there are mums and dads 
and grans and grandads on this side as well.”

After the debate, the tetchy atmosphere was highlighted in a series of 
exchanges between senior figures, with the leave campaign’s Michael Gove 
confronting his counterpart Will Straw, who also went toe to toe with Dominic 
Raab.

Straw accused Raab of having “a slogan, but no plan” for controlling 
immigration and managing Britain’s economy post-Brexit. Raab retorted: “We’re 
not the government, but the truth is you would get back control.”

Leave campaigners also described a tweet by Lord Alan Sugar as outrageous 
after he said it was ironic that Stuart, who immigrated from Germany, was 
telling us to control immigration.
