
Pasta e patate has saved our lunch and dinner more times that I care to 
remember. Yet far from being a weary last resort, which it can be, it is still 
one of my favourite things to make, to serve, to eat. I was taught to make it 
by my friend Ezio, a gently opinionated Calabrian who cooks for his large 
family, and however many visitors happen to be around, calmly and extremely 
well. Like most things Ezio cooks, his pasta e patate is simple: onion, carrot, 
a celery stick, a couple of potatoes, lots of very good olive oil (which is of 
course key), and some pasta. I admit to having been wary as he began chopping, 
for as much as I love both pasta and potatoes, I did wonder about the 
double-starch beigeness of it all. Wariness soon faded. The beauty of this dish 
is the way the potato collapses, giving you a slightly thickened broth in which 
you cook pasta. The starch of the pasta then thickens everything further. Black 
pepper and grated cheese jolt everything nicely to finish. Nothing clever here, 
nor impressive: just a pleasing, satisfying bowlful.

Related: A peperonata recipe straight from Rome | Kitchen sink tales 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/29/peperonata-recipe-jane-grigson-rachel-roddy-kitchen-sink-tales>

As with most home cooking, anarchic by definition, there are infinite 
variations and opinions about how to make this dish. However, unlike 
discussions about carbonara and amatriciana, which can get fierce, discussions 
about pasta e patate and other minestre (thick Italian soups/stews) are mostly 
gentle. My partner Vincenzo suggested that this is because, for many Italians, 
this sort of minestra, dished up from the pan, is the embodiment of childhood 
nourishment, transporting them to another time, maybe. Gentle opinions, but 
opinions nonetheless. A friend from Bologna adds meat broth instead of water, a 
homemade or a very good stock cube, which produces an altogether bolder dish. A 
Neapolitan friend likes the soffritto reinforced withguanciale 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Guanciale>, the final panful enriched with 
provola cheese for a consistency so firm that the spoon almost stands to 
attention. The addition of herbs, although not original I am sure, is my idea. 
I like rosemary, the classic Roman sidekick for potatoes (on pizza, or with 
roast lamb) whose strident sap-green, piney flavour works incredibly well. In 
the absence of rosemary, bay gives a nice musty note. As for garlic, some 
people like to add a clove, two even, chopped in with the soffritto, or smashed 
and then pulled out once it has lent its scent – you will know better than me 
on this one.

One thing I will stress the importance of is the extra virgin olive oil, with 
its grassy scent and seductive mix of butteriness and bitterness. It really is 
the fragrant foundation of this dish, and then brings out the flavours of other 
ingredients. Treat it as a key ingredient rather than an afterthought, seek out 
the good stuff with a specific provenance. Somewhere in Italy makes sense here, 
but if you find a better Greek or Spanish one then opt for that (rather than a 
poor mass market brand that comes from goodness knows where). True, a bottle of 
good extra virgin olive oil for, say, £10 or £12 ($20) is an expense whether 
you’re in Italy or further afield, but it is an investment in something that 
will transform the taste of your food. We have a pretty strict budget, so I 
forsake lots of other things in order to have good extra virgin olive olive 
oil, ideally from Sabina in Lazio or southern Sicily. Taking the lead from home 
cooks and teachers I trust, I use it liberally for everything – sautéing, 
frying, dressing, doing my split ends, buffing the wooden table...

As I said, nothing complicated here, ingredients you will most likely have in 
the fridge. It is the sort of dish you could get going the minute you walk 
through the door while you still have your coat on. It them simmers away, 
warming the kitchen and scenting it with rosemary, while you get yourself 
sorted. This is an occasion tospezzare – break spaghetti into 3cm-ish bits – 
which always feels a slightly rebellious act, but I should probably get out 
more. Once you have added the broken bits, or other pasta, you need to keep an 
eye on the pan, stirring so it doesn’t stick, checking you have a consistency 
you like. Pasta e patate is best if you let it sit for a few minutes so the 
flavours settle, after which have spoons at the ready for some good, beige 
comfort.

Pasta and potatoes (pasta e patate) 

Treat this as a set of guidelines rather than strict instructions. When it 
comes to the detail, you know better than me.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fgyz%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fgyz%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05f615f14ba80a4cec3328747424229d7ae98908%2F0_0_2000_1334%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rachel%20Roddy%E2%80%99s%20pasta%20and%20potato%20soup%20recipe%20%7C%20Kitchen%20Sink%20Tales&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fgyz%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rachel+Roddy%E2%80%99s+pasta+and+potato+soup+recipe+%7C+Kitchen+Sink+Tales&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fgyz%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05f615f14ba80a4cec3328747424229d7ae98908%2F0_0_2000_1334%2F2000.jpg>
 ‘Pasta e patate is simple: onion, carrot, a celery stick, a couple of 
potatoes, lots of very good olive oil.’ Photograph: Rachel Roddy for the 
Guardian 
Serves 4
1 onion
1 stick of celery
1 medium carrot
A sprig of rosemary or 2 bay leaves
2 medium potatoes (about 600g of any kind)
6 tbsp extra virgin olive oil
1.4 litres water or light stock of some sort
170g pasta (quadrucci, pastina, farfalle, or broken spaghetti)
Salt, black pepper and pecorino or parmesan

1 Peel the onion and carrot and then dice along with the celery. Peel and cut 
the potato into chunks. Warm some olive oil in a heavy-based pan over a 
medium-low heat, then fry the onion, carrot and celery (along with a pinch of 
salt) until soft and translucent. Add the bay leaf/rosemary and the potatoes 
and fry, stirring so each cube is coated with oil for a couple more minutes.

2 Add the water and another small pinch of salt, bring to a lively simmer and 
then reduce to a gentle simmer for 15 minutes or until the potato is very soft 
– you can break it up slightly with back of a wooden spoon. Add the pasta, 
raise the heat slightly and cook for another 10 minutes or so or until the 
pasta is cooked, stirring and adding a little more water if it looks to be 
getting too thick. Taste for salt (remembering you are probably going to add 
salty cheese) and grind over some black pepper. Serve with some grated pecorino 
or parmesan stirred in, or simply a streak of olive oil.

 * Rachel Roddy is a Rome-based food blogger and author of Five Quarters: 
Recipes and Notes from a Kitchen in Rome (Saltyard, 2015)
