
David Cameron’s hopes of being able to avoid terminal damage to Conservative 
party unity after theEU referendum 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> campaign were dented on 
Sunday when two rebel MPs openly called for a new leader and a general election 
before Christmas.

The attacks came from Andrew Bridgen and Nadine Dorries – both Brexiters, and 
longstanding, publicity-hungry opponents of the prime minister – and their 
claim that even winning the EU referendum won’t stop Cameron facing a 
leadership challenge in the summer was dismissed by fellow Tories.

But their comments coincided with the ministers in charge of the leave 
campaign launching some of their strongest personal attacks yet on Cameron, 
prompting Labour’s Alan Johnson to say that the Tory infighting was getting 
“very ugly indeed”.

Bridgen told the BBC’s 5 Live that Cameron had been making “outrageous” claims 
in his bid to persuade voters to back remain and that, as a consequence, he had 
effectively lost his parliamentary majority.

Related: Conservative rift over EU risks widening as attacks on David Cameron 
intensify 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/29/tory-rift-eu-widening-attacks-on-david-cameron-boris-johnson>

“The party is fairly fractured, straight down the middle and I don’t know 
which character could possibly pull it back together going forward for an 
effective government. I honestly think we probably need to go for a general 
election before Christmas and get a new mandate from the people,” he said.


Bridgen said at least 50 Tory MPs – the number needed to call a confidence 
vote – felt the same way about Cameron and that a vote on the prime minister’s 
future was “probably highly likely” after the referendum.

Dorries told ITV’s Peston on Sunday she had already submitted her letter to 
the chairman of the Tory backbench 1922 committee expressing no confidence in 
the prime minister.

“[Cameron] has lied profoundly, and I think that is actually really at the 
heart of why Conservative MPs have been so angered. To say that Turkey is not 
going to join theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> as far 
as 30 years is a lie.”

A leadership contest would only take place if Cameron lost a confidence vote, 
which would be unlikely if the remain campaign wins the referendum. But a 
sizeable vote against Cameron in a confidence ballot could still prove fatal to 
his premiership, forcing him to accelerate plans for his departure.

Dorries said that if remain won 60/40, Cameron would probably survive. “If 
remain win by a narrow majority, or if leave win, he’s toast within days,” she 
said.

Even if, as many Tories expect, a confidence vote does not materialise, the 
Bridgen/Dorries comments are a reminder of how maverick, hardline Eurosceptics 
were able to play havoc with John Major’s government in the 1990s because he 
had such a small majority. Cameron’s working majority is just 16.

The Conservative MP Steve Baker said Bridgen “[had] a point” about how 
unsympathetic backbenchers were towards Cameron’s EU stance. Baker claimed only 
about 30 were very strongly committed to remain – and he said he thought there 
could be “a problem” for the prime minister after 23 June.

But more senior figures in Tory Brexit camp backed Cameron and insisted a 
confidence vote would not happen because the rebels would not get enough 
support.

“I don’t think there are 50 colleagues gunning for the prime minister,” said 
Chris Grayling, the justice secretary. “I can assure you that those people who 
fought to win their seats 12 months ago are definitely not gunning for a 
general election by Christmas.”

Graham Brady, the chair of the 1922 committee, said Bridgen’s intervention was 
“unfortunate” and that the party had to pull together after the referendum.


Liam Fox, the former defence secretary, said the party would need “a period of 
stability” after the referendum and that it would be best for Cameron to stay 
as prime minister. Iain Duncan Smith, the former work and pensions secretary, 
also said he was not in favour of replacing Cameron.

In a particularly personal attack that seemed clearly aimed at Cameron and the 
chancellor, George Osborne, Priti Patel, the employment minister, usedan 
article in the Sunday Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/05/28/the-wealthy-leaders-of-remain-will-never-know-the-devastating-ef/>
 to say it was “shameful” that wealthy remain campaigners did not realise how 
much harm mass immigration was doing to the poor.

“If you have private wealth or if you work for Goldman Sachs you’ll be fine. 
But when public services are under pressure, it is those people who do not have 
the luxury of being able to afford the alternatives who are most vulnerable,” 
she wrote.

“It’s shameful that those leading the pro-EU campaign fail to care for those 
who do not have their advantages.”

Patel’s article coincided with Boris Johnson, the former mayor of London, and 
Michael Gove, the justice secretary, writing an open letter to Cameron 
<http://www.voteleavetakecontrol.org/pm_challenged_to_set_out_the_facts_on_eu_immigration>
 asking him to accept that it would be impossible for him to achieve his 
manifesto promise of getting net migration below 100,000 if the UK stayed in 
the EU. The letter, also signed by Labour’s Gisela Stuart, said failure to keep 
this promise “is corrosive of public trust”.

A source close to Cameron said that there was now overwhelming evidence, 
backed up bySunday’s Observer survey of economists,  
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/28/economists-reject-brexit-boost-cameron>
that leaving the EU would cause a “serious economic shock” and that “the 
suggestion that crashing your economy is the best way of dealing with 
immigration is clearly nonsense”.

Commenting on the Tory turmoil, Alan Johnson, chair of Labour In for Britain 
<http://www.labour.org.uk/inforbritain>, said: “What is extraordinary is the 
vindictiveness and nastiness we are seeing within the Conservative party and 
Conservative cabinet. I think it’s very ugly, very ugly indeed. If those are 
David Cameron’s friends and allies, he’s welcome to them.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jqv6%2Fsfb%23img-1&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jqv6%2Fsfb%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e19c9a0ccd1500384874294e1889512c0dd71c4%2F0_1257_2592_1555%2F2592.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Conservative%20party%20turmoil%20escalates%20with%20open%20call%20for%20Cameron%20to%20quit&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jqv6%2Fstw%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Conservative+party+turmoil+escalates+with+open+call+for+Cameron+to+quit&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jqv6%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e19c9a0ccd1500384874294e1889512c0dd71c4%2F0_1257_2592_1555%2F2592.jpg>
 Andrew Bridgen MP Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
Andrew Bridgen profile


Andrew Bridgen, Tory MP for North West Leicestershire since 2010, has form as 
a critic of David Cameron’s. In 2013 he publicly admitted that he had sent a 
letter to the chairman of the Conservative backbench 1922 committee calling for 
a vote of confidence in his leader.

Explaining his decision in a newspaper article, 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2338157/Anti-gay-marriage-rebel-bid-oust-Cameron-claiming-PM-lost-credibility.html>
 he said there was a “credibility problem” with Cameron.

“The voters think we have many of the right messages – they just don’t believe 
the messenger. In some cases, the messages are wrong or badly handled. By 
pressing ahead with gay marriage and delaying a promise on an EU referendum 
until he was forced to do so, Mr Cameron has fuelled the rise of Ukip. We have 
created our own nemesis,” he wrote.

“I think the situation is this: it’s like being in an aeroplane. The pilot 
doesn’t know how to land it. We can either do something about it before the 
crash, or sit back, watch the in-flight movies and wait for the inevitable.”

At the time Bridgen was one of only two Tory MPs known to have written a 
letter calling for a confidence vote. The other, Patrick Mercer, resigned after 
a lobbying scandal.

A year later Bridgen wrote an open letter to Cameron formally withdrawing his 
letter calling for a confidence vote, and offering Cameron his “full and 
enthusiastic support”.Explaining his volte-face, 
<http://www.conservativehome.com/parliament/2014/04/andrew-bridgen-writes-to-cameron-withdrawing-his-letter-of-no-confidence-in-the-prime-minister.html>
 he said much had happened in the meantime.
