
Packet of salt and vinegar and a pint of Thames Roadkill, please mate – you 
sure? OK, bit of a well kept secret, I suppose. Got any Headburst? Flayed Cat? 
Growling Arse? No? OK, what’ve you got that’s super-local – tons of flavour 
mind, no more than 8% though, I’m driving, famous last words.

Camberwell Gobfest? I hope you’re having a laugh, my friend, no, I’m not 
saying it’s a badly made beer, just that weird sweetish almost jelly bean 
aftertaste, and the texture – a kind of underlying severe hardness underneath 
the syrupyness. Make it a half then. You know it’s not really a craft beer, not 
now it’s in Tesco, they’re not even a proper microbrewery any more, no, I’m not 
going all Camra on you, well how are you defining micro? Call me a purist, but 
anything with consistent quality control immediately loses the right to craft 
beer status, takes all the fun out of it.

OK, go on then, another half, quite a hefty nose on it, though, I’m still 
getting that weird foretaste, what did I say before? Jelly bean? It’s more a 
butterscotch hit now, no wait, mango? Mmm, complex, solid aftertaste, not bad, 
you need to drink at least a pint and a half, let the palate adjust, am I 
right? What’s that one over there – Dented Skull – kudos, wasn’t it highly 
commended in the 2013 Penge Ale festival? Wow, amazing. I’m getting kiwi fruit 
then fresh Snickers – lovely chewy mouthfeel, is it meant to have bits in it?

Anything stronger? What’s that, Hackney Devil’s Cobblers, great label, what is 
it, stout? I’m more of a porter guy but go for it – what, you think stout and 
porter are the same? Just come over here and say that, mate, and I’ll shove 
your stout where the sun don’t shine, hipster bollocks, the chocolate malt 
gives stout a mocha flavour you’ll never get in a porter. No need to get 
aggressive, I’m going, if this was a proper craft place you’d appreciate a bit 
of banter. I’m off to Wetherspoons.
