
It’s impossible to write about this little French classic without reference to 
its No 1 fan, but really, for all the “exquisite pleasure” the madeleine 
brought him,Marcel Proust didn’t do a terribly good job 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/life/food/2005/05/the_way_the_cookie_crumbles.html>
 of selling its simple charms.

Expansive on the plain appearance of these “squat plump little cakes ... which 
look as though they had been molded in the fluted valve of a scallop shell”, he 
nevertheless neglects the madeleine’s chief selling points: its sublime buttery 
flavour and light, fluffy texture. He’d never have made a Bake Off judge, 
that’s for sure.

The pre-Proustian origins of the madeleine 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1983/07/24/travel/fare-of-the-country-of-memories-and-madeleines.html>
 are a mystery. Some credit them to Talleyrand’s personal chef, others to a 
peasant woman named Madeleine whose baking attracted the attention and 
championing of the Duke of Lorraine, Stanisław Leszczyński. Wherever they came 
from originally, I know where they’re going – straight into my cup of tea. 
(Serving suggestion courtesy of Marcel Proust.)

Raising agent

The most significant difference in the recipes I dig up is the raising agent 
responsible for the madeleine’s characteristic fluffy texture. According to the 
Oxford Companion to Food, they would traditionally have been leavened with 
beaten egg whites, as in the recipe Geraldene Holt includes in her classic book 
of Cakes, which is taken from Louis-Eustache Audot’s 1858 La cuisinière de la 
campagne et de la ville. More modern instructions rely on baking powder, which, 
though no doubt frowned upon by purists, helps to give the madeleines their 
distinctive bulbous profile: like a camel, they stand or fall on their humps –
Dorie Greenspan callsla bosse – the bump – “the holy grail of madeleine bakers” 
<http://www.wnyc.org/story/recipe-dorie-greenspans-lemon-madeleines/>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c32j%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c32j%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441192040642%2Fc34a5bbc-bd65-43f1-8550-1b3445428d6d-2060x1545.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20madeleines&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c32j%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+madeleines&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c32j%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441192040642%2Fc34a5bbc-bd65-43f1-8550-1b3445428d6d-2060x1545.jpeg>
 Louis-Eustache Audot’s 1858 madeleine. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the 
Guardian 
Audot’s madeleines are indeed wonderfully light, but though not exactly dry, 
they are definitely tougher than the others I make, and keep less well, too 
(not that any of them last particularly well; like so many of the most 
exquisite pleasures, this is a fleeting one).

Butter

This lighter, drier texture may also have something to do with the amount of 
butter Audot uses: just half the weight of the flour, whileSebastien Rouxel – 
author of Bouchon Bakery 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/life/books/2012/11/28/holiday-cookbook-recipes/1731479/>
 and former executive pastry chef of the Thomas Keller restaurant group;Justin 
Gellatly – of Bread Ahead and author of Bread, Cake, Doughnut, Pudding 
<http://www.lady-aga.com/post/113501292463/st-john-madeleines>; and Michel Roux 
– whose recipe appears in Claire Clark’s Indulge – all use the same amount of 
both.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c32j%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c32j%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441192139494%2F072f40fd-b329-49bc-9626-3fb692bcef07-2060x1545.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20madeleines&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c32j%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+madeleines&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c32j%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441192139494%2F072f40fd-b329-49bc-9626-3fb692bcef07-2060x1545.jpeg>
 Sebastian Rouxel’s madeleine. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Clearly, there is a trade off between flavour and texture – madeleines can 
either be delicate in both respects, or rich, soft and moist. Those attracted 
by the first and possibly older variety will be well served by Audot’s recipe, 
but I happen to think the latter goes better with a cup of tea.

That said, the traditional madeleines of Commercy, where Leszczyński’s peasant 
is said to have resided, are made with beurre noisette, butter that has been 
browned to give it a nutty flavour. Only the recipe in Roger Pizey’s World’s 
Best Cakes suggests this step, but I love the extra dimension it lends to what 
is otherwise a fairly simple, if distinctively shaped, little sponge. (He also 
adds milk to his batter, resulting in a damp, almost crumpet-like texture that 
I’m rather less keen on.)

Sweetener


Audot and Pizey both use straight caster sugar, while Roux and Rouxel mix 
theirs with dark brown sugar and Gellatly goes for a mixture of caster and 
demerara, which I think works best with the toasty flavour of the butter – 
toffee-like, but without a hint of bitterness.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c32j%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c32j%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441192186804%2Ff58e65f7-55ba-4a02-af3e-78b8e8a75e2d-2060x1545.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20madeleines&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c32j%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+madeleines&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c32j%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441192186804%2Ff58e65f7-55ba-4a02-af3e-78b8e8a75e2d-2060x1545.jpeg>
 Justin Gellatly’s madeleine. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Roux, Gellatly and Rouxel also all use honey, I suspect as much for the 
moisture it gives as its lovely flavour. Though not strictly traditional, it is 
common enough to allow me to include without worrying I’ll never be able to 
holiday in France again, and it certainly helps keep the cakes nice and soft.

Flour

Audot calls for fine cake flour, but the plain variety, thoroughly sifted, 
does the job just as well.

Flavouring?

Citrussy additions are common in madeleine recipes. Audot uses orange blossom 
water and lemon zest, and Pizey uses orange zest, too. I particularly like the 
flavour of the first with honey, but the zests are also rather lovely – better, 
in my opinion, and certainly more distinctive than Roux’s vanilla extract, 
which makes his madeleines taste rather generically of “sponge”.

Roux and Rouxel are the only ones to specify the addition of a little salt – 
and, as ever, a pinch makes all the difference.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c32j%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c32j%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441192321479%2F976618a9-60d0-4362-8a17-9f218cb0a0bf-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20madeleines&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c32j%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+madeleines&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c32j%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441192321479%2F976618a9-60d0-4362-8a17-9f218cb0a0bf-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Michel Roux’s vanilla madeleine. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Resting, preparing the tin and piping

Rouxel and Gellatly both rest their batters before baking, overnight or for a 
minimum of 4 hours. Roux goes for a more moderate 30 minutes, while Audot and 
Pizey bake theirs immediately. The idea of resting is to hydrate the flour, 
which thickens the batter, and is supposed to give the cakes their 
characteristic little bump – though I must say, Pizey’s boast a rather 
impressive shape without it. A tip-off from Greenspan,following conversations 
with two Parisian pastry chefs 
<http://www.wnyc.org/story/recipe-dorie-greenspans-lemon-madeleines/>, makes 
more of a difference: not only does she rest and chill the batter before piping 
it into the moulds, but she chills it in the tin, too, and then slides this on 
to a hot baking sheet.

Pizey notes that “the secret to baking the best madeleines is not only a hot 
oven, but also well-buttered and floured moulds”, and he’s right; the 
best-tasting madeleines in the world are as naught if you can’t get them out of 
the tin. Chilling the buttered and floured moulds before use, as he and Rouxel 
suggest, proves helpful in this regard – I don’t have a non-stick tin, but 
others claim they make life easier, though they may also cause your madeleines 
to brown unevenly.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c32j%2Fsfb%23img-6&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c32j%2Fsfb%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441192283420%2F6841bb12-8423-4d0e-a10f-757804b43c1d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20madeleines&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c32j%2Fstw%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+madeleines&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c32j%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441192283420%2F6841bb12-8423-4d0e-a10f-757804b43c1d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Roger Pizey’s madeleine. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
You can pipe the batter into the tin, as Roux and Pizey suggest, but it’s 
easier to spoon it. More importantly, don’t overfill the moulds, as I did a 
couple of times, or you’ll end up with misshapen monsters too shameful to share 
with others – the mixture will spread during cooking, so, as Roux notes, “there 
is no need for it to touch the sides of the mould”.

Oven temperature

As the quote above suggests, Pizey, like Roux, is a fan of a hot oven for his 
madeleines – 220C, in fact, but I find they brown too quickly in mine. A more 
moderate 180C – as suggested by Gellatly, Audot and Rouxel – seems safer, and 
still allows the little cake to develop the deliciously crisp frill around the 
edges that is so often missing from the shop-bought variety. In fact, it’ll 
disappear within mere minutes (OK, perhaps hours) of coming out of the oven, 
which is all the more reason to bake your own, and then eat them all 
immediately. After all, exquisite pleasure waits for no man.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c32j%2Fsfb%23img-7&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c32j%2Fsfb%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441192401058%2Fead5a1d1-9707-49d8-9aee-1670c6d68538-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20madeleines&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c32j%2Fstw%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+madeleines&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c32j%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441192401058%2Fead5a1d1-9707-49d8-9aee-1670c6d68538-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Perfect madeleines. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Felicity Cloake’s perfect madeleines


Makes about 16 large madeleines
90g unsalted butter, plus 2 tbsp to grease
2 medium eggs
70g caster sugar
15g demerara sugar
¼ tsp salt
2 tsp runny honey
2 tsp orange blossom water (optional)
90g plain flour
½ tsp baking powder

Melt the butter in a medium, light-coloured pan 
<https://www.cooksillustrated.com/equipment_reviews/1439-round-cake-pans?ref=EquipmentReview_browse_7>
 over a medium-high heat, bring to the boil and allow to simmer until it begins 
to turn golden brown. Quickly pour into a heatproof bowl to stop it cooking any 
further and allow to cool.

Whisk the eggs in a large bowl with both sugars and the salt until lightened 
in colour and voluminous. Beat in the honey and orange blossom water if using, 
followed by the cooled butter.

Whisk together the flour and baking powder to get rid of any lumps, then 
gently fold into the egg mixture. Press some clingfilm on to the top and then 
chill for at least an hour, and up to 12.

Meanwhile, generously grease 2 madeleine tins with butter and lightly dust 
with flour, shaking off the excess. Chill this as well.

Put a scant tablespoonful of the batter into the centre of each mould – don’t 
fill it completely – then chill for another hour.

Heat the oven, and a baking tray, to 180C. When you’re ready to bake, slide 
the tin on to the hot baking tray. Bake for about 9½-10 minutes, keeping an eye 
on them; once they look golden on top, whip them out of the oven, allow to cool 
for a minute, then prise the cakes from their moulds and on to a cooling rack. 
Eat as soon as cool enough.

Madeleines – overhyped by Monsieur Proust, or a rare and simple joy? Is it 
possible to improve upon the plain original with other flavourings? And has 
anyone ever come across the British version mentioned in Larousse, complete 
with raspberry jam and desiccated coconut?
