
More than 6 billion people live in countries where serious levels of public 
sector corruption are fuelling inequality and exploitation and locking millions 
of men, women and children into poverty, according to theannual index of 
perceived corruption <https://www.theguardian.com/world/corruption-index>.

Transparency International <https://www.transparency.org/>’s corruption 
perceptions index 2015 <http://www.transparency.org/cpi2015> – which ranked 168 
countries on a scale of 0 (highly corrupt) to 100 (very clean) – is once again 
topped byDenmark <https://www.theguardian.com/world/denmark>, which scored 91. 
Close behind areFinland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/finland> (90), Sweden
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/sweden> (89), New Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/newzealand> (88) and the Netherlands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/netherlands> (87).
Least corrupt countries 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/01/least_corrupt_countries/giv-27167Unl5JkwykAiO/>
Germany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>, Luxembourg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/luxembourg> and the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news> are equal 10th with a score of 81, while 
theUS <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news> comes in 16th on 76. The five 
countries at the bottom are:Somalia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/somalia> 
(8);North Korea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/north-korea> (8); Afghanistan
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> (11); Sudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/sudan> (12), and South Sudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-sudan> (15).

Although the report finds that two-thirds of all the countries rated have a 
serious corruption problem – judged to be a score of less than 50 – and 
acknowledges that corruption remains rife,Transparency 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/transparency-and-development> 
International said there were grounds for optimism as more countries had 
improved their scores than seen them decline since the previous index.


It pointed to Guatemala <https://www.theguardian.com/world/guatemala>, Ghana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ghana> and Sri Lanka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/srilanka> as countries where progress has 
been made. The Central American nation was praised for its crackdown on 
corruption in September after former president Otto Pérez Molina wasordered to 
stand trial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/08/guatemala-ex-president-stand-trial-graft-scandal>
 for corruption, illicit association and bribery linked to a 
multimillion-dollar customs scam.
Most corrupt countries 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/01/most_corrupt_countries/giv-27167lOZCGGR7myES/>
In Ghana, the investigative journalist Anas Aremeyaw Anas and a team of 
reporters revealed a bribery scandal at the heart of the judiciary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/24/anas-aremeya-anas-ghana-corruption>
, while in Sri Lanka,corruption became a key issue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/09/sri-lanka-election-result-who-is-new-president-maithripala-sirisena>
 in the presidential election last year.

Among the countries that have seen the biggest declines over the past four 
years areAustralia <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news>, Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil> and Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey>. Australia, which came 13th with a 
score of 79, was11th last year <https://www.transparency.org/cpi2014/results>, 
on 80 points. In 2012 , it scored 85. The country has been beset bymajor 
corruption scandals involving state-run companies in recent years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2014/dec/03/australia-marked-down-corruption-rankings>
, leading Transparency International to call on the government to tackle the 
weaknesses in its laws that are undermining efforts to deal with the issue.


Brazil – which is still convulsed by the corruption scandal surrounding its 
biggest oil company, Petrobras 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/12/petrobras-scandal-brazilian-oil-executives-among-35-charged>
 – has fallen from 69th (43) to 76th (38) over the past year.

The NGO said Turkey’s “very visible trend towards less separation of powers 
[and] decreasing civil liberties – especially freedom of speech andfreedom of 
press 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/19/jailed-turkish-editor-can-dundar-slams-eu-deal-with-erdogans-fascist-government>
” had combined with accusations of high-level corruption to see it drop from 
64th (45) in 2014 to 66th (42) a year later.

The index is based on data from organisations including the World Bank 
<http://www.worldbank.org/>, the Economist Intelligence Unit 
<http://www.eiu.com/index.asp?rf=0> and the World Economic Forum 
<http://www.weforum.org/>.


Related: Corruption pervades fast-growing economies of China, Turkey and Angola
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/03/corruption-china-turkey-rise> 

According to Transparency International, high-scoring countries typically have 
good levels of press freedom, transparent and accessible budget information, 
independent and fair judiciaries, and “high levels of integrity among people in 
power”.


The opposite is true for countries at the other end of the scale, which are 
also often afflicted by conflict, poor governance and prevalent bribery.

Despite the overall picture – and the fact that 53% of G20 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/g20> countries scored less than 50 – 
Transparency International said the triumphs of 2015 showed that corruption 
could be tackled if people worked together.


“To stamp out the abuse of power, bribery and shed light on secret deals, 
citizens must together tell their governments they have had enough,” said its 
chair, José Ugaz.


“The index clearly shows that corruption remains a blight around the world. 
But 2015 was also a year when people again took to the streets to protest 
corruption. People across the globe sent a strong signal to those in power: it 
is time to tackle grand corruption.”
