
The exams are done, new Glastonbury 2015 photos are still making the 
occasional appearance on your Facebook feed and the streets are lined with 
pale, knobbly knees beneath floral surf shorts and crumpled linen skirts – 
that’s right, summer is here.

But in a world facing climate change, mass resource depletion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/sep/02/limits-to-growth-was-right-new-research-shows-were-nearing-collapse>
 and insupportableair, land and water pollution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/pollution>, there’s no excuse for the 
likes of short-haul flights and disposable barbeques as summertime kicks in.

We’ve therefore compiled a students’ sustainable summer bucket (and spade) 
list. Enjoy.

1. Go wild!


“Camping is perfect for students,” says travel writer Dixe Wills. “It can be 
enjoyed with minimal equipment and is still as cheap as chips. Indeed, if you 
choose to gowild camping 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/feb/13/wild-camping-scotland-herring-road>
, then there’s no charge at all. Just follow the wild campers’ dictum, ‘Pitch 
late, leave early and leave no trace’ and it becomes one of the most 
sustainable getaways you’ll ever enjoy.”

When it comes to choosing where to go, don’t forget there is a wealth of 
holiday opportunities on your doorstep.

Unless you’re glamping – which, let’s face it, bears little relation to 
camping bar the fact that the two words rhyme – there are a few bits of 
essential kit you’ll need: sleeping bag and mat, tent, headtorch and suncream. 
For a more comprehensive kit list specifically for students,Student.com has 
compiled one 
<http://www.studentcom.co.uk/news/100days/things-youll-definitely-need-to-take-camping.html#.VZzG-vlVhHx>
 which includes atrunk kitchen/bar 
<https://www.pinterest.com/pin/443745369510954239/>, a water trampoline 
<http://watertrampolines.com/> and an off-road commode 
<http://www.theoffroadcommode.com/>. All vital camping items, obviously.

The good news is that most of the essentials that you don’t already have can 
be borrowed. If friends and family don’t come up trumps, check outStreetbank 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2012/sep/04/where-to-find-free-stuff>, 
the free neighbourhood sharing service that enables you to lend and borrow 
locally. You might also be able to score some kit for free onFreecycle 
<https://www.freecycle.org/>. 

For the things you can’t get hold of elsewhere, Blacks 
<http://www.nus.org.uk/en/nus-extra/discounts/10-off-in-store-and-online-with-blacks/>
 andCotswold Outdoor 
<http://www.nus.org.uk/en/nus-extra/discounts/10-off-at-cotswold-outdoor-online/>
 offer NUS extra cardholders 10% off. Whether you’re buying or borrowing 
though, just remember to take it all away again with you when you leave. The
tens of thousands of tents left at Glastonbury 
<http://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/she-said/2014/jun/13/tens-of-thousands-of-tents-are-discarded-at-festivals-and-i-know-why>
 is the opposite of what we want to achieve here.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4af4v%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4af4v%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F8%2F1436349785862%2Fe0484c2d-c481-4ee7-8c99-817c07459f4a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20wild%20camping%20to%20festivals%3A%20have%20a%20sustainable%20student%20summer&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4af4v%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From+wild+camping+to+festivals%3A+have+a+sustainable+student+summer&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4af4v%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F8%2F1436349785862%2Fe0484c2d-c481-4ee7-8c99-817c07459f4a-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Glastonbury 2015. Leave no trace at festivals – take your tent home with you. 
2. I want to ride my bicycle, I want to ride my bike … or the train

Many a good word has been written about the joys of train travel, including 
lists ofthe world’s greatest train journeys 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/apr/07/ten-of-the-world-s-amazing-train-journeys>
 – can you imagine the same being written about flights?

Trains are a bike-friendly, low-carbon 
<http://www.seat61.com/CO2flights.htm#.VZwve2Qfb5o> alternative to flying, and 
there are bargains to be had if you book in advance. Interrail offers aYouth 
pass <http://www.interrail.eu/interrail-passes/global-pass> for under 25s that 
enables you to travel across 30 European countries for up to 10 days for only 
£149. For advice,The Man in Seat Sixty-one <http://www.seat61.com/>, offers 
information on train travel worldwide.

If you’re into cycling, Warm Showers <https://www.warmshowers.org/> is a free 
worldwide hospitality exchange for touring cyclists where members share local 
knowledge or a meal with touring cyclists, or even offer them a bed for the 
night. Websites likeGoCarShare <http://gocarshare.com/> and BlaBlaCar 
<https://www.blablacar.co.uk/> likewise tap into the community ethos, 
connecting drivers with spare seats to passengers looking to get somewhere - 
cutting carbon in the process. What’s more, GoCarShare now works with 
universities including St Andrews, MMU and Queen Margaret University to help 
build more sustainable student travel networks.

Remember, when it comes to choosing where to go, don’t forget there is a 
wealth of holiday opportunities on your doorstep. The north coast of Cornwall is
perfect for student surfers on a budget 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2011/apr/26/summer-holiday-ideas-students-budget>
. The Youth Hostel Association (YHA) offerscamping pods 
<http://www.yha.org.uk/places-to-stay/camping-and-cabins/camping-pods> in 
England and Wales and membership benefits of10% off for 16-25 year olds 
<https://www.yha.org.uk/membership>. And music festivals aren’t hard to come by 
these days – not to mention a great way to spend the summer and a pretty amazing
student work experience opportunity 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/jun/30/how-to-work-at-a-music-festival-students>
 too.
 Bernina Express, connecting Davos in Switzerland to Tirano, Italy. 
3. Activities

Freedom from lectures and exams is a great opportunity to try new activities. 
Growing your own food might be a bit daunting if you’ve not done it before, but 
there’sa wealth of advice out there to help students get started 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/may/28/student-gardeners-heres-how-to-grow-your-own-fruit-and-veg>
.

Summer is also the perfect time to get fit. GoodGym <https://www.goodgym.org/> 
helps people get into shape by combining regular exercise with activities such 
as turning compost at a city farm or painting a community space. The project 
runs in Bristol and almost a dozen London boroughs, and people are proposing to 
start GoodGyms everywhere from Glasgow to Gibraltar. If running sounds a bit 
too strenuous, however,BorrowMyDoggy <https://www.borrowmydoggy.com/> enables 
you to borrow local dogs for walks or offer pet-sitting and holiday care.

Finally, there’s nothing like having a bit of time on your hands to get those 
things done that you never seem to get round to – activities that save you 
money and help you live more sustainably. Seize the opportunity summer offers to
get your electronics fixed <http://therestartproject.org/>, stock up on 
secondhand books for next year <http://www.readitswapit.co.uk/TheLibrary.aspx> 
andswitch to a more ethical bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/green-living-blog/2012/feb/10/ethical-bank-account>
.

Now where did I put that bucket and spade … 

Read more

 * From eco sex to peeing in the shower: six ways students can go green  
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/nov/28/from-eco-sex-to-peeing-in-the-shower-6-ways-students-can-go-green>
 * Forget fad diets: sustainable food is healthier and more eco-friendly  
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jan/22/forget-fad-diets-sustainable-food-is-healthier-and-more-eco-friendly>
 * Seven questions you should ask before you volunteer abroad  
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jun/02/seven-questions-you-should-ask-before-you-volunteer-abroad>
Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
