
Jeremy Corbyn <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> faced a 
grilling from shellshocked Labour MPs after a day of policy confusion and a 
sometimes chaotic shadow cabinet reshuffle revealing the lengths the newly 
elected leader still has to go to rally the parliamentary party behind him.

At the evening meeting 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2015/sep/14/corbyn-appoints-labour-shadow-cabinet-with-john-mcdonnell-as-shadow-chancellor-reaction-politics-live>
 of the parliamentary Labour party, Corbyn faced pointed calls to clarify his 
position on Europe, Nato, Trident and possible airstrikes in Syria – and even 
whether he would wear a white poppy at the Cenotaph.

The new Labour leader was asked by Gisela Stuart to issue a statement telling 
his supporters to stop describing Labour MPs who did not agree with him as 
Tories, whileJess Phillips asked why men were dominating 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/14/labour-shadow-cabinet-angela-eagle-extra-title-women-row>
 the senior positions in the party.

Related: If first impressions matter, it's not been the best start for Jeremy 
Corbyn 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/14/if-first-impressions-matter-its-not-been-the-best-start-for-jeremy-corbyn>

The questions came after a day in which Corbyn completed a necessarily 
difficult shadow cabinet reshuffle – with the final result that, for the first 
time,more women had been appointed 
<http://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2015/sep/14/jeremy-corbyn-labour-shadow-cabinet-statistical-breakdown>
 to the shadow cabinet than men. But that came after Corbyn was accused of 
blundering by handing the post of shadow home secretary, shadow foreign 
secretary and shadow chancellor – traditionally regarded as the most senior 
portfolios – to men.

One MP at the PLP meeting described the atmosphere as one of concern with 
Corbyn’s first few hours in the job, rather than overt hostility.


Many MPs are privately saying that Corbyn does not seem to have prepared for 
the leadership and he is being urged by senior party figures to quickly build 
an experienced media team to help him project his messages.

In his single most controversial appointment, he handed the post of shadow 
chancellor to his close leftwing allyJohn McDonnell 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/14/john-mcdonnell-corbyn-shadow-chancellor-profile>
, prompting criticism from some Labour MPs. Charles Clarke, former Labour home 
secretary, said he was aghast and demanded party moderates draw up a parallel 
economic strategy.

 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F14%2Fjeremy-corbyn-makes-labour-front-bench-debut-video&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F14%2Fjeremy-corbyn-makes-labour-front-bench-debut-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F14%2F1442251287998%2FKP_475476_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jeremy%20Corbyn%20makes%20Labour%20front%20bench%20debut%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F14%2Fjeremy-corbyn-makes-labour-front-bench-debut-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jeremy+Corbyn+makes+Labour+front+bench+debut+%E2%80%93+video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F14%2Fjeremy-corbyn-makes-labour-front-bench-debut-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F14%2F1442251287998%2FKP_475476_crop_640x480.jpg>
 Jeremy Corbyn makes Labour front bench debut.Link to video 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2015/sep/14/jeremy-corbyn-makes-labour-front-bench-debut-video>
Hilary Benn 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/14/jeremy-corbyn-labour-shadow-cabinet-in-full>
, the shadow foreign secretary, refused to praise McDonnell’s appointment. He 
said: “This is the choice that Jeremy has made. I respect the choice that 
Jeremy has made as leader.”

McDonnell countered the criticisms about men dominating in the top jobs, 
saying this reflected a pecking order derived from 19th-century colonial 
politics and the delivery portfolios of education, defence, health and 
international development were more important in the modern world.

Corbyn appointed Lucy Powell, Ed Miliband’s former chief of staff, to 
education, Maria Eagle to defence, Heidi Alexander to health, and leftwing 
veteranDiane Abbott <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/diane-abbott> to the 
international development post.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ccz4%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ccz4%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ae68b603bfe93fe1e7b62382c926b442b7f9eb2%2F0_0_2560_1535%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Corbyn%20gathers%20his%20cabinet%20and%20makes%20first%20moves%20to%20rally%20MPs&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ccz4%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Corbyn+gathers+his+cabinet+and+makes+first+moves+to+rally+MPs&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ccz4%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ae68b603bfe93fe1e7b62382c926b442b7f9eb2%2F0_0_2560_1535%2F2560.jpg>
 Jeremy Corbyn on front bench during TUC bill with Diane Abbott, Angela Eagle 
and John McDonnell Photograph: BBC 
Late on Sunday night, faced by criticism of the dominance of men, he also 
announced that Angela Eagle, already appointed business secretary, would be 
made shadow first secretary of state and so would cover for him at prime 
minister’s questions. One of his aides was overheard recommending Eagle’s swift 
elevation, saying he needed to “do a Mandelson” and give her a title that
Mandelson had when he was in government 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2009/jun/16/education-peter-mandelson> .

Corbyn took the same line of defence as McDonnell, saying: “You can’t say that 
foreign secretary is more important than delivering education to our children, 
or the health of the people.”

McDonnell, probably Corbyn’s oldest political ally and secretary of the 
Socialist Campaign Group 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/aug/15/jeremy-corbyn-world-supporters-mentors-influences>
, said he would reject the traditional restraining role of the Treasury. He 
said he would not backtrack on his opposition to austerity and that his role 
was to transform capitalism. He acknowledged he had made enemies at Westminster 
but that was because he had been swimming against a tide of austerity.

McDonnell defended controversial remarks he had made about the IRA in 2003, 
when he had argued that it was “bombs and bullets” that had “brought Britain to 
the negotiating table 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2003/may/30/northernireland.devolution>”. 
He said that he was trying to strengthen the wing of the IRA that favoured 
peace by saying they could stand down with dignity. Although he admitted his 
words had not been well chosen, he said did not regret them if it led to lives 
being saved.

Separately, confusion surrounded the party’s position on the referendum on 
Britain’s continued membership of the EU 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/26/british-eu-referendum-when-what-who-answers-to-key-questions-brexit>
. Benn attempted to calm fears among many Labour MPs that Corbyn might choose 
to campaign for Britain to leave the EU in the in/out referendum expected next 
year.


It is understood that Chuka Umunna stood down 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/13/chuka-umunna-quits-over-jeremy-corbyns-eu-stance>
 as shadow business secretary, declining to serve under Corbyn, complaining the 
new leader had refused to give him an assurance he would not back a “Brexit” 
vote.

Related: Jeremy Corbyn's shadow cabinet in full 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/14/jeremy-corbyn-labour-shadow-cabinet-in-full>

Benn said Corbyn would fight to stay in the EU “under all circumstances”, but 
McDonnell told the Guardian 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/14/john-mcdonnell-labour-shadow-chancellor-not-good-at-consensus-politics-corbyn>
 that Corbyn would only take a view on the EU referendum package when David 
Cameron presented a deal. “Jeremy has made it clear that what we should be 
working with parties across Europe for is a reform package across Europe 
itself. Whatever Cameron comes back with, we will have to assess what that is,” 
he said.

“If it is any attack on employment rights or the promotion of TTIP [the 
Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership], we will be rejecting that 
package, but we will have to come up with a reform programme as well. Jeremy 
has not supported withdrawal, but has not given Cameron a free pass on it.”

Corbyn opposes the replacement of the Trident 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/trident> nuclear weapons system and has 
questioned the role of Nato. Chris Bryant, who was appointed shadow leader of 
the House of Commons, said: “It’s difficult and I think it is going to be a bit 
of a bumpy ride because there are issues on which – they are not light issues – 
I profoundly disagree with him, like on Nato.”
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F14%2Fjeremy-corbyn-behind-scenes-labour-leadership-video&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F14%2Fjeremy-corbyn-behind-scenes-labour-leadership-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F14%2F1442240656346%2FKP_475445_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Exclusive%3A%20behind%20the%20scenes%20with%20Jeremy%20Corbyn%20as%20he%20wins%20the%20Labour%20leadership%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F14%2Fjeremy-corbyn-behind-scenes-labour-leadership-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Exclusive%3A+behind+the+scenes+with+Jeremy+Corbyn+as+he+wins+the+Labour+leadership+%E2%80%93+video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F14%2Fjeremy-corbyn-behind-scenes-labour-leadership-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F14%2F1442240656346%2FKP_475445_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Exclusive: behind the scenes with Jeremy Corbyn as he wins the Labour 
leadership.Link to video 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2015/sep/14/jeremy-corbyn-behind-scenes-labour-leadership-video>