
David Cameron this week announced a £20m language fund particularly targeted 
at British Muslim women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/18/muslim-women-to-be-taught-english-in-20m-plan-to-beat-backward-attitudes>
. The Prime Minister claimed that some 190,000 British Muslim women, or 22%,
speak little or no English 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/opinion/columnists/article4667764.ece>, and 
suggested that a minority of men were promoting “backward attitudes” and 
exerting “damaging control” over their female relatives.

But while Cameron’s commitment to funding for English language classes was 
welcomed in many quarters (particularly in light of previous£45m cuts to the 
Esol budget 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/dec/07/refugees-language-barrier-english-esol-cuts>
), he also drew unnecessary and unclear links between theEnglish language 
skills of Muslim women and extremism 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/18/david-cameron-stigmatising-muslim-women-learn-english-language-policy>
, as well as appearing to threaten that migrants who failed to reach a 
particular standard of English may not be allowed to remain in the UK.

The conflation of these very different issues seemed to suggest that the 
rights and empowerment of Muslim women are only of particular concern when they 
are instrumental in protecting the rest of Britain from the threat of 
extremism, not to mention simultaneously casting Muslim women as suppressed 
victims and dangerous outsiders. Of course, measures to tackle oppression and 
violence against women should be applauded – and Cameron did make a point of 
stating that these are not issues confined to Muslim communities – but this was 
undermined by his singling out of Muslim women in particular, as many pointed 
out.

On Twitter, Baroness Sayeeda Warsi 
<https://twitter.com/SayeedaWarsi/status/688868105339166720> – former minister 
of state for faith and communities – said: “Women should have the opportunity 
to learn English full stop. Why link it to radicalisation/ extremism?”She added 
<https://twitter.com/SayeedaWarsi/status/688874667378102272>: “And why should 
it just be Muslim women who have the opportunity to learn English? Why not 
anyone who lives in the UK and can’t speak English”? She also highlighted the 
problem of a blanket suggestion that mothers who don’t speak English well might 
raise children who are integrate less or who are less likely to contribute 
positively to society,saying 
<https://twitter.com/SayeedaWarsi/status/688876189683978241>: “PS mums [sic] 
English isn’t great yet she inspired her girls to become a Lawyer, teacher, 
accountant, pharmacist, cabinet minister#WomenPower 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/WomenPower?src=hash>”. 



A statement from the Bradford-based Muslim Women’s Council read 
<http://www.muslimwomenscouncil.org.uk/this-is-about-collective-responsibility-and-not-finger-pointing/>
:

Whilst we welcome the additional funding pledged today by the Prime Minister 
for English language support for Muslim women, we do not agree with the 
assertion that there is a link between a lack of English and extremism.David 
Cameron <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> is conflating these 
two issues and is further isolating the very same group of people that he is 
trying to reach and assist.

Although the language funding has been generally greeted as a step in the 
right direction, it will do little to protect Muslim women from the hate crime 
that hasspiked by more than 300% since the Paris terror attacks 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/paris-attacks-british-muslims-face-300-spike-in-racial-attacks-in-week-following-terror-a6744376.html>
, with women and girls as the majority of victims. Nor will it offset the 
Islamophobia that saw the winner of The Great British Bake Off, Nadiya Hussain, 
worry she had “put her kids in danger 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/husseinkesvani/nadiya-hussain-bake-off-religious-abuse#.jp7Y3Pq7A>
” by appearing on the show, or address instances like that of the10-year-old 
Muslim boy questioned by police 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/lancashire-police-say-terrorist-house-incident-not-about-spelling-mistake-a6824481.html>
 apparently because he made a spelling mistake and wrote that he lived in a 
“terrorist” rather than a “terraced” house. Nor does it alleviate the inherent 
bias that plays a role in theeconomic inactivity to which Cameron referred 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-20608039> among women of Pakistani and 
Bangladeshi heritage, who often face discrimination when seeking employment. 
Nor does it resolve the funding crisis that currently leaves67% of black and 
minority ethnic women’s specialist support services 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/womens-blog/2015/nov/30/womens-support-services-save-lives-so-why-is-the-government-cutting-their-funding>
 uncertain of their future.

 And while, of course, it is right to tackle instances of gender 
discrimination within British Muslim communities (a fight long ledby Muslim 
women themselves <http://www.mwnuk.co.uk/>), it is short-sighted to imply that 
this is the only direction from which women in the UK, Muslim or otherwise, are 
likely to experiencesexism, discrimination, violence and abuse 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/an-overview-of-sexual-offending-in-england-and-wales>
.

It is interesting to see the prime minister announcing this measure under the 
headline: “We won’t let women be second class citizens”, when his government has
failed to ratify the Istanbul convention 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/istanbul-convention-britain-drags-its-feet-over-womens-rights-10432895.html>
, which sets minimum standards for governments to meet when tackling violence 
against women, despitepressure from campaigners 
<http://icchange.co.uk/about/about-the-campaign/>. And, despite endless appeals 
from parents, teachers, students and sexual violence experts, the government 
has not introducedcompulsory sex and relationships education on topics such as 
consent 
<http://www.sexeducationforum.org.uk/policy-campaigns/gaps-in-sre-leave-children-at-risk.aspx>
 and healthy relationships in all schools, a measure campaigners believe could 
have a real impact on violence against women, as well as protecting children 
from abuse.

It is important for the prime minister to declare with such zeal that he wants 
to tackle the “minority of men” who perpetuate misogynistic attitudes and 
“exert damaging control” – but the same determination should apply to those 
exerting dominance and control over theone in four women in England and Wales 
<http://www.refuge.org.uk/get-help-now/what-is-domestic-violence/domestic-violence-the-facts/>
 who experience domestic violence.

Of course we should be offering language classes, and other forms of support, 
to anybody in the UK who needs it. But it isn’t enough to give with one hand 
and take away with another, or to extend support to Muslim women only when it 
suits a scaremongering narrative.
