
After months of claiming that Donald Trump doesn’t have a hope in hell of 
winning the Republican nomination (facepalm),several 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/electoral-map-looks-daunting-for-donald-trump-1462407971>
sources 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2016/05/04/upshot/electoral-map-trump-clinton.html>
 are now predicting that his hopes of winning the national election are slim. 
Is this more of the same short-sightedness or is the electoral math really 
stacked against the New York businessman?

Based on the results of the past six US presidential elections, it’s true that 
Trumphas an uphill climb to get to the White House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/28/donald-trump-women-voters-poll-republican>
. But those results should be treated with caution – not least because an 
assumption that the past can help to accurately predict the future is one 
reason why Trump’s success has been continually underestimated (and speaking of 
historical precedents, if Hillary Clinton does secure the Democratic nomination 
–which now looks very likely 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/04/bernie-sanders-democratic-nomination-primary-us-election-hillary-clinton>
 – it will be the first time a woman has done so, which might also complicate 
predictions of voter behavior).

It’s a simple fact of political reality that some states are less competitive 
battlegrounds than others. In 31 states, the same political party has won the 
last six presidential elections. Since 18 of those stronghold states are places 
thatDemocrats <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> have consistently 
had victories (19 if you include Washington DC), Trump’s party has a tougher 
starting point.

To make matters worse for Trump, those “safe” Democratic states together wield 
much more power – having a combined total of 242 electoral votes. By contrast, 
the 13 states that have always voted Republican over the past two decades only 
have 102 electoral votes. Remember, 270 electoral votes is enough to win the 
White House.

It’s unlikely that either party will spend large amounts of time or resources 
in states they consider safe. But understanding the battleground in this 
election requires a little more nuance: of the states that have recently 
flipped between parties, some will be more competitive than others.

Battleground states 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/05/battleground-states-table/> 
Take Kentucky, for example. Even though the state was won over from the 
Democrats in 2000, since then, theRepublicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> have easily won every 
election by a margin of over 15 percentage points. So, although Kentucky is 
historically a swing state it probably won’t be part of the 2016 battleground.

It’s an entirely different story in states like Ohio and Florida. Not only has 
party control changed hands multiple times in those states over the past 20 
years, but often victories have been hard fought. In 2004, the Republicans won 
Ohio by just 2 percentage points. The following election, the Democrats won the 
state back but by a margin of only 5 percentage points.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jvd4%2Fsfb%23img-1&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jvd4%2Fsfb%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe92567f37900b02670c940e48d636691a203ddf%2F0_139_2341_1405%2F2341.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reality%20check%3A%20Does%20the%20electoral%20map%20work%20in%20Trump's%20favor%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jvd4%2Fstw%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reality+check%3A+Does+the+electoral+map+work+in+Trump%27s+favor%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jvd4%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe92567f37900b02670c940e48d636691a203ddf%2F0_139_2341_1405%2F2341.jpg>
 Barack Obama campaigns in Ohio in 2012. Photograph: Chip Somodevilla/Getty 
Images 
But four years is a long time in US politics, so 2012 results might not be 
such a great barometer for understanding this election. After all, it was as 
recently as 2011 that Donald Trump announced that he was switching his 
affiliation from the Republican to theIndependent Party 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/donald-trump-switches-party-affiliation-to-independent/>
 and Hillary Clinton was saying “no, no 
<http://articles.latimes.com/2011/oct/17/news/la-pn-hillary-clinton-future-20111017>
” when asked if she would run in the 2016 election. Back then,43% 
<http://www.gallup.com/poll/146987/americans-views-trump-favorable-unfavorable.aspx>
 of Americans said they had a favorable opinion of Donald Trump while66% 
<http://www.gallup.com/poll/146891/hillary-clinton-favorable-near-time-high.aspx>
 said the same of Hillary Clinton (an all-time high for the former secretary of 
state).

Polling today shows that neither candidate is popular 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/04/donald-trump-hillary-clinton-general-election-analysis>
. The question, though, is which candidate will be the least unpopular in 
November 2016, and crucially whether they can be so in the battleground states.
Unpopularity 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/05/clinton-v-trump-unfavorable/> 
Nationally, Clinton has held an edge on Trump when Americans have been asked 
the (decreasingly) hypothetical question of who they would vote for in a 
match-up between the two candidates. However, Clinton’s lead has shrunk from 11 
percentage points in late March to just 6.5 percentage points this week.
Trump vs Clinton nationally 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/05/clinton-v-trump-polling/> 
Few polls have been conducted that look underneath these national averages. 
That’s partly because state-level polling is very expensive but it’s also 
because regional analysis six months before a national election is not very 
accurate.

Unsurprisingly, where polling companies have recently invested their time and 
resources –Arizona 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/az/arizona_trump_vs_clinton-5832.html>
,Florida 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/fl/florida_trump_vs_clinton-5635.html>
,Indiana 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/in/indiana_trump_vs_clinton-5878.html>
,North Carolina 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/nc/north_carolina_trump_vs_clinton-5538.html>
,Ohio 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/oh/ohio_trump_vs_clinton-5634.html>
 andWest Virginia 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/wv/west_virginia_trump_vs_clinton-5885.html>
 – are parts of the country that also appear in the table above as “places to 
watch”. With the exception of West Virginia (where a poll from May last year 
suggested Trump would win by 27 percentage points) all of those historic 
battleground states look like they’ll be closely fought this election too, with 
neither candidate leading by more than 10 percentage points.

Trump and Clinton can now feel confident about securing their parties’ 
nominations but they can’t feel so sure about getting the support of these 
battleground states. The candidates will no doubt seek to understand the 
demographic makeup of places like Florida and Ohio, asking questions like “have 
jobs been lost here?”, “what are Medicare enrollment rates?” or “is religion 
important?” – and tailor their rhetoric in the next six months accordingly. 
Because without those voters, neither candidate has an easy path to the 
presidency.
