
Amanda Spielman, a senior figure in establishing the successful multi-academy 
schools chain Ark, is to take over from Sir Michael Wilshaw as Ofsted’s chief 
inspector when his term ends at the end of the year, the Department for 
Education has said.

News of Spielman’s appointment attracted immediate criticism from some 
teaching unions for her lack of experience as a teacher or senior leader in a 
school, but others praised her for her role advising Ark and as chair of the 
exams regulator, Ofqual.

Nicky Morgan, the education secretary, said: “From helping to set up one of 
the country’s top academy chains, to acting as a council member for the 
Institute of Education, to overseeing our ambitious qualification reform 
programme, Amanda has extensive experience at the frontline of the education 
system, making her uniquely qualified to take up this important role.

“I know that she is the right person to deliver the education white paper’s 
commitment to continue to improve the quality and consistency of Ofsted’s 
inspections, ensuring that it plays a central role in realising our vision of 
educational excellence everywhere.”

Related: Hunt for new Ofsted chief inspector of schools reaches final stage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/22/hunt-for-new-ofsted-chief-inspector-of-schools-reaches-final-stage>

As a crown appointment, it will be considered by the House of Commons 
education select committee before final approval by the privy council.

The chief inspector of schools is responsible for the inspection of England’s 
more than 20,000 state schools, and oversight of council child protection 
provision, managing a sprawling staff of 1,500 and an annual budget of more 
than £150m.

The Guardian revealed Spielman, 55, to be the frontrunner for the post 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/22/hunt-for-new-ofsted-chief-inspector-of-schools-reaches-final-stage>
 early in the applications process and she is said to have impressed the 
selection panel, including Morgan, with her views on the inspectorate’s future 
role.

Spielman is seen by DfE officials as a very different personality to Wilshaw, 
who has clashed with successive secretaries of state for education on a range 
of subjects since taking the role in 2012. Michael Gove, the former education 
secretary, contemplated sacking Wilshaw for perceived poor management, and 
relations between the two became strained.


Those who have worked with Spielman in the past say she is a strong character 
who is unlikely to be bowed by political opposition, and will be able to 
navigate through the DfE’s sometimes difficult bureaucracy.

Related: Ofsted 'should not become the plaything of government' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jun/10/ofsted-should-not-become-the-plaything-of-government>

Rebecca Allen, the head of the Education Datalab research unit, said: “Amanda 
has a very analytical and evidence-based approach to making decisions, which 
will turnOfsted <http://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> into a more 
conventional regulator, rather than vehicle for a single-minded visionary to 
transform schools. This will suit the times we are living in, where schools 
crave stability of expectations and the new powers of the regional schools 
commissioners need to be carefully balanced.”

Allen added: “She will undoubtedly refocus Ofsted’s own internal work on 
research to ensure that they understand the reliability of the judgments they 
make on schools.”

Spielman’s CV includes a career in accountancy and corporate finance before 
joining Ark in the chain’s early days, in partnership with its chief executive, 
Lucy Heller. Since then Ark has become the most successful multi-academy trust 
of its type in England, with its schools regularly winning outstanding Ofsted 
ratings.

Kevin Courtney, the acting general secretary of the National Union of Teachers 
<https://www.teachers.org.uk/>, criticised the appointment over Spielman’s 
background. He said: “To have as the new chief inspector of Ofsted a person who 
has no teaching experience and who is heavily implicated in the academy 
programme certainly does call into question both their suitability and 
impartiality for the job.”

But the Association of School and College Leaders <http://www.ascl.org.uk/>, 
which mainly represents secondary school heads, was more enthusiastic. “We are 
sure that Amanda’s broad experience in education and business will help her to 
oversee a remit which extends widely beyond schools, and we look forward to 
working with her,” said Malcom Trobe, the union’s interim general secretary.

Wilshaw spoke of his concerns about Ofsted’s future on Friday, saying in a 
Guardian interview 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jun/10/ofsted-should-not-become-the-plaything-of-government>
 that it should not become a plaything of government.
