
The government is planning to redirect money used for social work student 
bursaries into a nationalFrontline graduates development scheme 
<http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/mar/15/social-work-student-bursary>
. This could have potentially devastating consequences for the future of social 
work provision – and for the most vulnerable service users – across the 
south-west of England.

Even though a decision on the scheme has yet to be officially announced, 
students at my institution, Plymouth university, are already preparing for the 
worst and considering how they will be able to continue their studies. Without 
the bursary, the cost of training to become a qualified social worker would be 
beyond their means.

First-year students raised their concerns with me last week. Student 
spokesperson Paul Tippet said: “Without the bursary, many students may have to 
leave the programme, as they will not be able to balance the need to earn 
additional income with the demands of university, nor afford to be over £30,000 
in debt on qualification.”

Related: Scrap the social work bursary, and lose students like us 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog/2016/feb/17/social-work-bursary-students>

Data from our 2015 intake found that almost all students applying to the 
social work programme come from the far south-west, meaning they have strong 
local connections to the area in terms of work, housing, friends, family 
networks and their children’s education.

The local nature of our students and their commitment to remain living and 
working in this area is borne out by employment figures, which suggest the 
significant majority of our qualifying students go on to work in the far 
south-west.

Without homegrown social workers, employers will need to attract graduates 
from outside the area. This could prove difficult given that earning potential 
is far lower than in other regions. With Cornwall identified as thesecond 
poorest region in northern Europe 
<http://inequalitybriefing.org/graphics/briefing_43_UK_regions_poorest_North_Europe.pdf>
 [pdf], the attraction for qualified social workers relocating to the 
south-west from other regions could be seriously compromised.

More civil servants writing policy will not solve the problem​ if there are no 
social workers on the actual frontline

While some may be prepared to relocate, the importance of local social work 
programmes for local people should not be underestimated, not least because 
this is arguably a stronger motivating factor than salary.Social work 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/socialwork> graduates want to work in the 
south-west because they already have an established life here. From an 
employer’s perspective this provides stability in service delivery and helps 
address issues of retention.

A recent evaluation of Frontline 
<http://sites.cardiff.ac.uk/cascade/2016/03/30/frontline-evaluation/> found 
differing views of retention between students at higher education institutions 
and Frontline students. At high tariff universities, 30% more students were 
expected to stay in the profession for more than seven years, opposed to five 
years for the majority of Frontline graduates.

This mirrors the Teach First experience. Teach First, the parent of Frontline, 
was developed in 2003 to address the same perceived issues facing social work; 
poor quality of graduates and recruitment and retention issues. However, the
government’s own figures 
<http://www.theyworkforyou.com/debates/?id=2015-06-18b.584.0> reveal that even 
among Teach First ambassadors, just over a third leave teaching after two 
years. After five years, only half were still teaching.

Is this relevant to the current debate? I think so, and so presumably does 
Josh MacAlister, Frontline’s chief executive. He has already established a link 
with thecivil service fast stream <http://www.varsity.co.uk/news/6453> for 
Frontline participants who decide they do not want to be directly involved in 
social work.

MacAlister told Varsity magazine he wants Frontline trainees who leave the 
programme and choose a career path other than social work to “remain committed 
to the mission” by entering the civil service. According to him, government 
social work policymaking needs more people who understand the job.

However, more civil servants writing policy will not solve the problem if 
there are no social workers on the actual frontline.

Playing smoke and mirrors with social work education funding will do nothing 
to improve the current situation, and may well leave those who require social 
work services in areas such as the south-west significantly more vulnerable.

Arguably, pitting higher education bursaries against schemes such as Frontline 
is not the issue. The real issue is this: regardless of how students are 
educated, successive governments have demonstrated little real interest or 
understanding of social work and the lives of those who require services. 
Instead, they blame anything but their own decision-making for the current 
situation that both service users and trainee social workers find themselves in.

The Social Life Blog 
<http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog> is written by 
people who work in or use social care services. If you’d like to write an 
article for the series, emailsocialcare@theguardian.com 
<mailto:socialcare@theguardian.com> with your ideas.

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.

 
<http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog/2015/nov/04/social-workers-arent-failing-the-system-the-system-is-failing-them>
