
Hi guys, you’ll probably remember our last awesome project, the DoggieRenew 
anti-ageing pop-up, I know right, helping our companions with a really 
neglected problem in the canine world. Well trust us, this venture is going to 
be even more banging because we want to take our commitment to doggie 
innovation to a whole new level of awesome. Welcome to DoggieTakeOut. Clue’s in 
the name, haha!

So imagine you’re at home and you’re like, “Let’s have a takeaway” – oh wait, 
is your poor doggie going to sit there eating his boring usual food while you 
stuff your faces? How guilty does that make you feel? Our new venture, 
DoggieTakeOut, will do exactly what it says on the tin, more or less, so when 
you’re done choosing your human takeout you check out the DoggieTakeOut app and 
select from an adventurous organic menu of yummy doggie snacks, lunches and 
dinners, and because we’re passionate about detail, low-cal canapes for those 
nights when poor doggie’s on the 5:2! Check our website for more, but as a 
taster how wouldyour pooch feel about tucking into our gluten-free chicken 
liver parfait dumplings with a fusion style squirrel and lamp-post salsa, 
delivered free to doggie’s door for a minimum spend of £15?

But most excitingly, this is your chance to support us from the beginning. We 
need your lovely help to raise £500,000 for our first DoggieTakeOut premises, 
and what’s great is, as well as making doggies happy, your generosity makes you 
eligible for fabulous rewards! In exchange for only £100, you’ll get your hands 
on one of the first printed menus of what might one day be a reality! Pledge 
£1,000 and we’ll send you a free doggie napkin when they become available, and 
£5,000 gets you a voucher for one entire doggie takeaway, along with the 
satisfaction of saving at least three London-based humanities graduates from 
living with their parents! So please help guys, it’s gonna be a massive buzz 
and, you know what, your money’s going to a fabulous cause – us!
