
The arch of the Sydney Harbour bridge, city rooftops above Darling Harbour and 
sunbakers under vast skies: these are the photographic images that are often 
chosen to define Australia. Yet as Judy Annear, curator ofThe photograph and 
Australia 
<http://www.artgallery.nsw.gov.au/exhibitions/the-photograph-and-australia/> 
exhibition that opens at theArt Gallery of New South Wales 
<http://www.artgallery.nsw.gov.au/> this month, says: “We think we know these 
twentieth century icons like Max Dupain, Olive Cotton and David Moore, and we 
think they encapsulate what Australia is. But actually it’s a much bigger 
story.”

The new exhibition sets out to explore this broader story of Australian 
photography, spanning the nineteenth century through to contemporary work. It 
is the first comprehensive survey of photography since 1988 to draw from 
collections nationwide and is particularly relevant to the rise of digital 
technology, says Annear. She has emphasised work from the nineteenth century as 
a useful contrast to the current digital revolution, pointing out that times of 
major technological change show how societies see themselves. What makes 
Australian photography distinct is a sense of exploration, says Annear, 
particularly through the interest in the landscape, the southern sky and an 
emphasis on Indigenous culture.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F472zc%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F472zc%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F27%2F1427436025951%2F65272aaf-37f9-448d-b2b4-4212aec3587b-2060x1649.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20photograph%20and%20Australia&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F472zc%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+photograph+and+Australia&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F472zc%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F27%2F1427436025951%2F65272aaf-37f9-448d-b2b4-4212aec3587b-2060x1649.jpeg>
 Charles Bayliss, Group of local Aboriginal people, Chowilla Station, Lower 
Murray River, South Australia 1886 Photograph: Art Gallery of New South Wales 
The exhibition contains early daguerreotypes of Aboriginal people of the Kulin 
nation of Victoria. It traces the history of Aboriginal and settler relations 
from the 1840s through to today, and explores the level of adaptation between 
the two communities. “The kind of early photography that I’ve put in the 
exhibition gives you a very strong indication of the different communities of 
Aboriginal people in different parts of Australia. Where they lived, how they 
lived, who they were and the level of exchange that was going on between them 
and the settlers”, Annear explains.

Post-war photography through to the seventies shows Aboriginal photographers 
producing their own work, to reinvent themselves, their history and those 
relationships. The exhibition includes work fromMervyn Bishop 
<http://www.artgallery.nsw.gov.au/collection/works/?artist_id=bishop-mervyn>, 
the first Aboriginal press photographer, and from contemporary artists such as
Tracey Moffat 
<http://www.artgallery.nsw.gov.au/collection/works/?artist_id=moffatt-tracey>, 
Ricky Maynard 
<http://www.artgallery.nsw.gov.au/collection/works/?artist_id=maynard-ricky>, 
andMichael Riley 
<http://www.artgallery.nsw.gov.au/collection/works/?artist_id=riley-michael>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F472zc%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F472zc%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F27%2F1427436545439%2F8bf2bffa-199d-466a-b460-31e88eea5e12-2060x1553.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20photograph%20and%20Australia&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F472zc%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+photograph+and+Australia&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F472zc%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F27%2F1427436545439%2F8bf2bffa-199d-466a-b460-31e88eea5e12-2060x1553.jpeg>
 Tracey Moffatt, I made a camera, 2003 Photograph: Art Gallery of New South 
Wales 
Images by early photographers including Fred Kruger, Franky Hurley and Richard 
Daintree give examples of photographs sent to world exhibitions in the 
nineteenth century, alongside rare photographic objects and albums by anonymous 
photographers. Prominent contemporary artists such as Anne Ferran, Rosemary 
Liang and Simryn Gill show how photography can be used to contemplate time and 
place.

The work of contemporary photographer David Stephenson 
<http://www.davidstephensonart.com/> caught Annear’s attention in particular, 
because of her interest in how artists have adapted the medium to their own 
purposes. Stephenson investigates the relationship between photography and 
abstraction through his work and his 1995 star series of an abstract night sky 
explores the vastness of space and time. “One of the things I really didn’t 
want to let go of was that essential aspect of photography for me which is a 
prescriptive or factual relationship to the real world”, the artist explains.

The series is part of his ongoing interest in reduction, minimalism and 
conceptual art. He developed rules for creating a set of images through a 
progression of camera movements. “I was trying to get back to the origins of 
photography being fundamentally marks on a piece of paper made with light. They 
draw out aspects of that because they are quite literally marks made by the 
movement of the earth and the light entering the camera from distance stars”, 
says Stephenson.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F472zc%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F472zc%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F30%2F1427675169685%2F6e247d64-1bf9-47fb-8d5b-cab11edbe7a7-2002x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20photograph%20and%20Australia&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F472zc%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+photograph+and+Australia&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F472zc%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F30%2F1427675169685%2F6e247d64-1bf9-47fb-8d5b-cab11edbe7a7-2002x2040.jpeg>
 David Stephenson, Stars #807, 1995 Photograph: Art Gallery of New South Wales 
The exhibition ends with a new installation work entitled the Compound Lens 
Project, by photographer, writer and theoristPatrick Pound 
<http://www.stillsgallery.com.au/artists/pound/index.php?obj_id=bio> and web 
designerRowan McNaught <http://tlsc.co/rowan>. The installation presents a 
database of collected photographs, and explores how a computer interprets a 
particular image according to how it is categorised - and then tries to 
replicate it. It explores how the sheer amount of images in circulation now 
make it a medium which is impossible to fully archive, order and understand.

The idea that photography can both document reality and also re-contextualises 
it demonstrates the difficulty of representing the history of a nation through 
images. “It’s not a nationalistic show – in a lot of ways it’s very much about 
how impossible it is to encapsulate what it is that we are,” says Annear. “And 
of course that’s the conundrum of photography – everyone always wants it to pin 
the moment but the moment is always elusive, you can never really pin it down.”

The photograph and Australia 
<http://www.artgallery.nsw.gov.au/exhibitions/the-photograph-and-australia/> is 
showing until 8 June at the Art Gallery of New South Wales.The exhibition 
catalogue is availablehere 
<http://www.artgallery.nsw.gov.au/shop/item/9781741741162/> and the symposium, 
Trafficking images: histories and theories of photographic transmission 
<http://www.artgallery.nsw.gov.au/calendar/photography-symposium-trafficking-images/>
, takes place on 18 April.
