
Through her writing, Fish revived interest in countless plants, such as 
sisyrinchium, snowdrops, hellebores and primroses - yes, even these favourites 
were once out of fashion

Paths do not end in focal points; instead the visitor is confronted with yet 
more plants at every turn. Birdbaths and other objects are set off to one side 
and treated with no more emphasis than a plant

Ground cover planting was a notion largely conceived by Fish. She tirelessly 
promoted plants such as cranesbill and artemisia (pictured) that could cover 
bare soil, smother weeds and reduce maintenance

In true cottage-garden style, there is an emphasis on perennials. Native 
varieties and exotics, such as this centaurea, rub shoulders with shrubs, 
herbs, bulbs, grasses and ferns

In 1966, Fish published a book on ferns and grasses, making her one of the 
first people in the country to advocate the use of ornamental grasses, such as 
miscanthus, mixed in with other perennials

Margery Fish came to East Lambrook Manor in 1937 and set about creating what 
became possibly the most important cottage garden in the country. It was born 
out of an unbridled passion for plants; there is no attempt at contrived 
formality, no grand theories behind it and barely a straight line in sight.

Her writing, including the classic book We Made A Garden (1956), turned Fish 
into our first gardening celebrity. She advocated pastel shades "because it's 
possible with them to have a riot without disagreement. Pinks, lavenders, soft 
blues, cream and lilac never clash." Yellows, oranges and reds, on the other 
hand, were not entertained.

This garden is all about mixing countless varieties of plants in an 
anything-goes style - the essence of cottage gardening. The result is abundant 
planting that is natural and romantic. There are uneven, winding paths where 
seedlings are encouraged to spring from every crack and crevice; there are 
honeysuckles and roses draped in apple trees. Apart from a row of willows and a 
few clipped shrubs, there is little obvious design, but such planting needs 
careful planning. It is this ability to seem so relaxed and uncontrived that 
makes it so successful.

Â· (Open all year, 01460 240328; eastlambrook.co.uk 
<http://www.eastlambrook.co.uk>.)
