
A powerful new report from the black feminist organisation Imkaan 
<http://imkaan.org.uk/> has revealed a state of emergency among black and 
minority ethnic (BME) women’s groups 
<https://www.dropbox.com/s/c3n2gjs4g2g37s2/IMKAAN%20-%20STATE%20OF%20THE%20SECTOR%20%5BFINAL%5D.pdf?dl=0>
working to end violence against women and girls and providing specialist 
support for survivors.

The report, which campaigners handed in to Downing Street along with a 
petition to protect such services, outlines a funding crisis affecting BME 
services, including refuges, helplines, outreach and advice provision.

 In this week’s spending review, Chancellor George Osborne announced that, 
instead of ending the “tampon tax” (which requires women to pay 5% VAT on 
sanitary items by classing them as a luxury), he would use the £15m levied by 
the tax to help fund women’s charities. But quite apart from the problematic 
conflation of periods and refuges which, intentionally or not, suggests male 
violence against women is a women’s problem for women to solve, his speech 
didn’t make clear how the funding would be distributed or whether charities, 
apart from those explicitly named, would be supported. Even a major national 
organisation, such asRape Crisis <http://rapecrisis.org.uk/>, which wasn’t 
named in the Chancellor’s speech, remains uncertain of its future, with a 
spokesperson saying the charity is in“a very precarious position” 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/women/politics/tampon-tax-george-osbornes-ludicrous-proposal-is-a-bloody-mess/>
. For smaller, specialist organisations, which are more likely to get their
funding from local councils 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2015/nov/25/views-from-local-government-on-george-osbornes-spending-review>
, deep cuts to local government budgets mean that the situation remains 
hazardous.

Responding to the spending review, the End Violence Against Women Coalition 
<http://www.endviolenceagainstwomen.org.uk/news/220/spending-review-evaw-response>
 pointed out the “alarming 29% cut to the Communities Department budget” and 
expressed serious concern about the impact this could have on 
violence-against-women specialist support services. It concluded: “Today’s 
announcement fails to offer them a life raft.”

There are more than 34 dedicated specialist BME violence against women and 
girls services in the UK, offering flexible and diverse support systems that 
take into account the specific and complex needs of their service users. But 
when Imkaan, which acts as an umbrella group for BME organisations, surveyed 
its members, a shocking 67% reported uncertainty about their sustainability in 
the current climate.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4egzx%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4egzx%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27009918009ee4422ecaf84bd3c721b6c4d85fc2%2F0_298_5760_3455%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Women's%20support%20services%20save%20lives.%20So%20why%20is%20the%20government%20cutting%20their%20funding%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4egzx%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Women%27s+support+services+save+lives.+So+why+is+the+government+cutting+their+funding%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4egzx%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27009918009ee4422ecaf84bd3c721b6c4d85fc2%2F0_298_5760_3455%2F5760.jpg>
 A campaigner makes her message clear, 21 Nov. Photograph: Mark 
Kerrison/Demotix/Corbis 
One organisation responded: “Very uncertain. We did a tender for a refuge in 
April/ May and still don’t know the outcome. If it is not given to us, it will 
mean we close in the next year or so.”

Imkaan’s report finds that BME women and children in the UK have great and 
urgent need of specialist BME women’s services, which uniquely understand the 
situations they face. During the last financial year, in London alone, 733 BME 
women sought refuge spaces and only 154 were successful. Nationally, 17 BME 
violence against women and girls organisations supported a total of 21,713 
women, also over the course of just one year.

Marai Larasi MBE, executive director of Imkaan, says: “These organisations are 
well known in the communities they serve and have the highest numbers of women 
approaching them directly, rather than being referred on by police, social 
workers or others. Bigger, more generic services are rarely able to achieve 
this profile or these ‘self-referrals’. If these services are lost, lives will 
be lost. When this lesson is learned, it will be hard to start again and 
rebuild. We urge the government to show that it understands the needs of BME 
women facing violence and to commit to a nationally ring-fenced funding 
solution.”

As funding cuts continue to impact the women’s sector, the report highlights a 
trend towards councils awarding funding to larger generic providers at the cost 
of specialised services.Apna Haq 
<https://you.38degrees.org.uk/petitions/keep-apna-haq-open-in-rotherham>, 
Rotherham’s only BME women’s service, remains at risk of closure after its 
£145,000 contract for providing domestic violence support was terminated by the 
council in favour of a mainstream provider with no specialism in minority 
ethnic women’s needs, which could carry out the work at a slightly lower price.

Zlakha Ahmed, executive director of Apna Haq, says: “Independent, specialist 
and dedicated services, run by and for the communities we seek to serve, are 
life-saving. Our ‘led by and for’ services offer uniquely empowering 
experiences to women and children as service users are reflected in staffing, 
management and governance structures … Demand is increasing every day. We, and 
many others, simply cannot afford to close.”

In 2012, the European Institute for Gender Equality <http://eige.europa.eu/> 
carried out a review of the implementation of the Beijing Platform for Action 
in the EU member states on violence against women and victim support. One 
finding of that review, quoted in the Imkaan report, reads: “Specialist BME 
services are in short supply throughout the European Union. As a result, it is 
of upmost importance for member states to strive to support their existence, in 
order to not only provide effective support for BME women and children, but 
also to contribute to states’ fulfilment of their human rights obligations in 
the area of combating violence against women, including article 22 of provision 
of specialist support services, as specified in the Council of Europe 
Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic 
violence.”

The convention referred to, also known as the Istanbul Convention, came into 
force 12 months ago. It specifies the requirement for short- and long-term 
specialist services for those who have experienced violence against women. But 
despite signing up to it three years ago,the UK government has still failed to 
ratify it 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/istanbul-convention-britain-drags-its-feet-over-womens-rights-10432895.html>
. In February this year, the Joint Committee on Human Rights released a report 
under the headline“Government doing less at home than abroad on violence 
against women and girls” 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/joint-select/human-rights-committee/news/violence-against-women-and-girls-report/>
, in which it explicitly warned that the government could harm its 
international reputation by failing to ratify the convention. And in March,
Women’s Aid 
<http://www.womensviewsonnews.org/2015/04/renewed-call-for-istanbul-convention-for-uk/>
 received a letter from David Cameron confirming that the coalition government 
would not ratify the Istanbul Convention, allowing the issue to drag on. Though 
18 states, including Italy, France, Spain, Denmark and Sweden have all ratified 
the convention, the UK still has yet to do so.

Ratification would mean that the UK government would have to bring its 
provision, such as the one cited above relating to specialist support services, 
into force through domestic policy and legislation. While it drags its feet, 
services providing specialist provision for black and minority ethnic (BME) 
women are at crisis point.
