
The use of the word porn to refer to things that aren’t porn – food porn 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/foodporn>, stationery porn, etc – is a bad and 
irritating thing. But in the case of the recent bookCabin Porn 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/327270/>, based on a 
blog of the same name, it seems apt: for most of us, these luscious photos of 
hideaways are every bit as removed from real life as the nudes that Playboy 
recentlyannounced 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/oct/13/playboy-magazine-to-stop-publishing-pictures-of-naked-women>
 it would stop publishing. It’s destined for coffee tables in Stoke Newington 
and Williamsburg, owned by people with little intention of moving to a cabin. I 
don’t mean to mock: I, too, have a fantasy about a wilderness cottage in which 
I’ll surely never live. In other words, I spend time crafting an imaginary, 
supposedly superior alternative existence, while doing precisely nothing to 
bring it about. And when you think about it‚ well, isn’t that a bit weird?

The question has been troubling me since reading a superb New Yorker essay by 
Kathryn Schulz <http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2015/10/19/pond-scum> on 
America’s original cabin pornographer,Henry David Thoreau 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Henry_David_Thoreau>, who in 1845 abandoned 
civilisation for a hut in the woods, in order to “live deliberately”, focused 
only on essentials. He’s been championed as a pioneer of environmentalism and 
radical simplicity, but in Schulz’s view, he was a sanctimonious jerk. For one 
thing,Walden Pond 
<http://www.mass.gov/eea/agencies/dcr/massparks/region-north/walden-pond-state-reservation.html>
 in Massachusetts, the site of his retreat, wasn’t the middle of nowhere: 
Thoreau strolled back to town twice weekly, where his mother did his laundry 
and gave him snacks. More fundamentally, Schulz sees in his exile an attempt to 
escape “the entanglements and responsibilities of living among other people”. 
Thoreau apparently couldn’t accept that relationships might be among life’s 
essentials. He wasn’t seeking a more authentic reality, so much as fleeing the 
bits of reality he couldn’t handle.

This is a startling way to think about our cabin fantasies, and perhaps also 
about meditation retreats, the trend fordigital detox holidays 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/04/24/digital-detox-retreats-un_n_3147448.html>
 and other fashionable manifestations of spare, minimalist, decluttered living: 
what if they’re at least partly motivated by avoidance? Meditating on a 
mountaintop might be a way to encounter reality at its most pure, but it’s also 
free of the ambiguities of sex, friendship or parenting. Even if Walden Pondwere
 the middle of nowhere, the breeze rippling the water wouldn’t be “more real” 
than, say, a Thoreau family argument – just easier to cope with. Or think of 
Timothy Treadwell, in Werner Herzog’s documentaryGrizzly Man 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0427312/>, driven to the company of bears because 
human relationships never seemed to work.

And should you turn your wilderness fantasy into reality, it may not prove as 
uncomplicated as you’d hoped. Zach Klein, creator of Cabin Porn, lives the 
cabin life for real – but also suffers fromLyme disease 
<http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/Lyme-disease/Pages/Introduction.aspx>, contracted 
in the countryside. Thoreau, Schulz suspects, wasn’t truly happy, but rather, 
“for reasons of his own psychology, a castaway from the rest of humanity”. And 
Timothy Treadwellwas eaten by a bear 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timothy_Treadwell#Death>. Grizzlies may be far 
less difficult than people, in a lot of ways, but their table manners are much 
worse.

oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com <>

Oliver Burkeman is the author of The Antidote: Happiness for People Who Can’t 
Stand Positive Thinking <http://www.oliverburkeman.com/books>
