
As a press officer, I believe communications teams have a role to play in 
supporting women to feel confident about interviews, and increasing their 
visibility both within the institution and more widely.

Birkbeck is full of academics who are equipped with the knowledge and 
expertise to take media interviews on a vast array of subjects. But university 
press offices are busy places and it is often easiest to turn to academics who 
have regularly put themselves forward for media interviews in the past, or to 
respond to requests for communications support from the academics who contact 
you proactively.

This probably explains why three-quarters of experts used by the media are men 
<http://womeninjournalism.co.uk/research/>, and only 26% of opinion articles in 
the UK press from July 2011 to June 2012 were by women 
<http://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2013/may/02/power-of-media-women-in-frame>
. I suspect it is also the trap thatBBC Radio 4 <http://www.bbc.co.uk/radio4> 
producers fell into at the end of 2012 when they interviewed all-male panels 
for stories about breast-cancer screening and teenage contraception. Throughout 
2012, women made up just18.5% of guests  
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/sep/28/today-guests-reporters-women-bbc>
on theToday <http://www.bbc.co.uk/search/?q=Today> programme.

Not just women's issues

I don't think anyone believes that there weren't any women available or 
willing to be interviewed on these topics, or others. It is not just on 
"women's issues" that we need to hear from female experts either – there are 
women at Birkbeck <http://www.bbk.ac.uk> who are eminently qualified to discuss 
commodities trading, biosecurity or flood insurance. Yet, last month theDaily 
Mail <http://www.theguardian.com/media/dailymail>felt it was acceptable to 
imply thatwomen are being selected for media interviews just because of their 
gender or race 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2014/mar/20/dailymail-newsnight>, 
driving home the fact that there is still a long way to go.

I haven't seen any press officer training that addresses the gender imbalance 
in the media, and to my knowledge it hasn't been widely discussed in higher 
education communications forums, but as communications professionals we are all 
voracious media consumers and the increased attention to lack of female media 
presence can't have passed us by.

Practical support is needed

University press officers are always available to offer interview tips, advice 
and mock interviews. Interestingly, I don't recall a male academic ever asking 
me for this sort of advice before an interview, whereas female colleagues often 
have done. It's also been the women who contact me afterwards to analyse how 
they came across, or to ask whether they made their point clearly enough.

I'm sure there are men who would be grateful for training, but the statistics 
suggest they are overcoming anxiety or any other barriers with greater ease 
than their female counterparts.Birkbeck <http://www.bbk.ac.uk> has many female 
academics who are already more than happy to take an interview on theToday 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/search/?q=Today> programme at short notice, but if there 
is practical support that others might appreciate then we need to offer it.

Of course any press officer worth their salt will always put forward the 
expert best at displaying their expertise and communicating with the audience, 
regardless of gender. But how can we make sure that, when the press call comes 
in, there are women in our institution who are ready and prepared to take the 
interview?

I'd be interested to know if other press offices have developed training or 
programmes targeted particularly at women within their institution. If you are 
a female academic, are there issues that stop you putting yourself forward for 
media interviews – and how could your press office support you? If we were 
putting together a checklist for university press officers, what should it 
include? My starter for 10 is below, but I'd be really pleased to hear others' 
thoughts.

How can press officers help?

• Be aware of the gender split of the academics that you put forward for media 
interviews, expert comment and training sessions.• Look out for programmes 
offering training or exposure to women, such asThe Women's Room 
<http://thewomensroom.org.uk/> , and encourage female colleagues to go on them.
• Proactively identify and contact academics who have good stories to tell but 
might just need some encouragement.
• Give praise. When an academic gives a good interview, tell him/her!

Bryony Merritt is media and publicity officer at Birkbeck, University of 
London – follow her on Twitter@BryonyMerritt <https://twitter.com/BryonyMerritt>
.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Looking for your next 
university role? BrowseGuardian jobs 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/education/higher/job-vacancy/direct-employer/?INTCMP=BACJOBBTN6240I2>
 for hundreds of the latest academic, administrative and research posts.
