
It's easy to forget that Gstaad is just a village. The locals – and there are 
fewer of them than there are cows – still work to the seasons, taking cattle to 
pasture in summer and gathering them in when the weather gets cold. They smoke 
pipes and make their own cheese. By rights, it should be no better known to the 
outside world than, say, Little Gidding.

But the patronage of Madonna, Valentino 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Valentino_Garavani>, George Clooney and a host of 
other more secretive high-net-worthers makes Gstaad adorf with a difference. (A 
quick note on pronunciation for those exclusive chalet parties: calling it 
Guh-staad rather than Staad will mark you out as a parvenu, even though in 
Swiss-German it is actually more like Kshtaat.)

So why does the global elite love this place so much? There's the skiing, of 
course. The village is in a valley at the heart of theBernese Oberland 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bernese_Oberland>, surrounded by smooth, sheer 
slopes. And Switzerland's banking and tax regimes help. But locals point to the 
foundation of exclusive boarding school Le Rosey, followed by the John F 
Kennedy and Gstaad International schools, as the tipping point. These are a 
magnet for wealthy parents, whose offspring can be seen speeding past ordinary 
mortals on the pistes, resplendent in shiny salopettes and Ray-Bans. Which is 
nice for the people who run exclusive hotels and Prada boutiques, but what 
about the rest of the population?

Gstaad's image as an enclave for the super-rich means ordinary tourism has 
been slow to get going. But given that the infrastructure is so heavily skewed 
towards luxury, is it even possible to have an affordable holiday there?

"They're all mad at me," says Michel Wichman, who runs the Hotel Spitzhorn 
<http://www.spitzhorn.ch/en> in Saanen, just outside Gstaad, which we reach 
after a picturesque railway journey up the valleys from Lake Geneva. He's 
talking about the five-star hoteliers down the road, who are horrified at the 
idea of a new three-star enticing the wrong sort of guest.
 A room at the Hotel Spitzhorn, Gstaad. Photograph: Mark Nolan/Hotel Spitzhorn 
I don't think they need worry. Spitzhorn's stripped-wood minimalism isn't 
likely to draw hordes of drunken backpackers (a double room in high season 
costs CHF240/£163). The rooms are unfussy and bright, and there is a spa and 
ski-hire centre in the basement.

Next morning, after a breakfast of birchermüesli, we're ready to hit the 
slopes. But first we drive the short distance to the centre of Gstaad. Most of 
the road is buried underground in an effort to pretend nasty things like cars 
don't exist. This – and the edict that new buildings must be "chalet style" and 
none can be more than three storeys high – suits the conservative tastes of 
billionaires but makes for a monotonous architectural experience. A chalet is a 
chalet, after all, and it's not hard to get bored looking at them.

One building that has escaped the restrictions is the grand old Gstaad Palace 
<http://www.palace.ch/>, a luxury alpine fantasy that looms over the village. 
We admire it but, slightly intimidated, turn to the pretty row of shops on the 
promenade. We spy a hotdog stall, which certainly ticks the affordability box. 
Maybe this whole playground-of-the-rich thing is exaggerated? But theRialto 
<http://www.rialto-gstaad.ch/>, a cafe-bar that is a favourite with the Le 
Rosey kids, has margherita pizzas for £13.

And then we enter Pernet Comestibles <http://www.pernet-comestibles.ch/>, the 
local grocer, otherwise known as the-place-with-the-£6,676-bottle-of-champagne; 
and the walk-in cigar humidor; and the caviar counter. So far, so conforming to 
stereotypes. But those are then blown away atMichel's Stallbeizli 
<http://stallbeizli.ch/>, a farmer-run cafe where you can sip a cappuccino 
separated from the large herd of cows only by pane of glass. It's not enough to 
keep out a distinctly bovine odour, but it's certainly a unique selling point.

Gstaad, we find, is a peculiar mixture of the down-to-earth and the 
detached-from-reality, the homespun and the Hollywood. Local ladies weave rugs 
from scraps of cast-off clothing, selling their a handiwork as souvenirs, while 
next door diamond-encrusted Chopard watches catch the alpine sun from behind 
bulletproof glass.

From the cow cafe it's a short walk to the cable car, at the top of which sits 
Bergrestaurant Eggli <http://www.gstaad.ch/berge/winter/gstaad/eggli.html> 
(eggli-appenzell.ch), an upmarket pitstop for skiers, where the clean air 
complements a hearty menu of rösti and fondue, with main courses pricey but 
worth it, at around £18.50. Gliding out on full stomachs, we find the slopes 
surprisingly empty. And though the snow isn't fresh (it has been freakishly 
warm), it's neither icy nor slushy. We spend the afternoon free from the menace 
of piste-brats, flying across deserted expanses of white, amid jaggedly 
beautiful scenery.
 The bar at Saanewald Lodge 
The experience isn't replicated the following day, though, when we venture 
10 miles to Zweisimmen, with its more extensive slope network. Yes, it's the 
weekend, but it's more crowded and the lack of fresh snow is beginning to tell. 
Still, a hearty welcome awaits at theHamilton Lodge 
<http://hamiltonlodge.ch/zweisimmen-en>, a moutainside chalet which offers 
plumped-up duvets and wonderful views (if you have £180 to splash). For those 
on tighter budgets, nearbySaanewald Lodge <http://saanewald-lodge.ch/> is also 
"ski-in, ski-out" and has cabin-like rooms from £89 and aScalextric 
<http://www.scalextric.com/> suite. The feeling of seclusion here is 
marvellous: you are at 1,500m, perched between the snow and the stars.

If this seems a bit Magic Mountain – clean and healthful but a little 
bewitched – that's because Switzerland does retain an other-worldly quality. A 
final experience captures this perfectly. We take a horse-drawn sleigh, in the 
freezing but crystal-clear night, to an otherwise snow-bound farmhouse near 
Lauenen. Tucked under blankets, we glide along for a good 30 minutes, the 
ground glowing a faint violet and small clouds hanging in the sky above like 
ghosts onWalpurgis night <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Walpurgis_Night>.

At our destination – the family-run Mattestübli restaurant – Mrs Brand, 
a woman so proud of her cows that she has a photo album of them, plies us with 
fondue and kirsch before sending us on our way again. If the spirit of this 
place is anywhere, it's here, among ordinary folk who are bemused to find their 
little home town in the pages of Vanity Fair or Tatler, and prefer the joys of 
animal husbandry to celebrity-spotting. That's the kind of Gstaad it would be 
nice to see more of.

• The trip was provided by the Gstaad Tourism Board (gstaad.ch 
<http://www.gstaad.ch/>). Flights were provided by SWISS (swiss.com 
<http://www.swiss.com/web/EN/Pages/index.aspx?Country=GB>), which has flights 
to Geneva from £107 return. Rail tickets were provided by Switzerland Travel 
System (swisstravelsystem.co.uk 
<http://www.swisstravelsystem.co.uk/index.php?affiliateid=189&system=GB>); a 
Swiss Transfer Ticket covering a round-trip between the airport/Swiss border 
and your destination costs from £92
