
One sunny June afternoon in 2010, I drove down to the Kent coast to meet a 
group of year 6 pupils for an Education Guardian story 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2010/jul/20/primary-pupils-secondary-school>
. I had no idea then that it was start of five-year relationship that would 
include candid conversations on Sats, selective education and – a few years 
down the line – sex, drugs and social media.
 Janet Murray: ‘Watching the pupils blossom from nervous 11-year-olds into 
confident young adults has been fascinating’ 
The children from St Saviour’s primary school, in Westgate-on-Sea, Kent – one 
of 36 areas that still have selective education – didn’t only have the 
challenge of moving up to big school. They also had the 11-plus to contend 
with, and some were going off to grammar school, others to a local high school.

On the first day we met, back in 2010, Gabriel gossiped about his mum making 
him do 11-plus practice papers, 40 of them, no fewer, in the summer holidays, 
along with promises of a mobile phone and a bedroom makeover if he passed. 
Cameron, whose father told me had “always struggled with social skills”, 
giggled nervously as he spoke of a boy in year 11 who’d told him there was a 
ghost in the toilets at his new school. Lewis shared his fears about travelling 
to school alone on the bus, while Ellie and Tayla voiced theirs about older 
children stealing their lunch money and about too much homework.

Their stories were so honest and touching, that what was originally planned as 
a one-off article turned into an annual Education Guardian feature. Over the 
past five years, I’ve met up with the children each year to find out how 
they’re doing.

Related: Primary pupils face the challenge of secondary school 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2010/jul/20/primary-pupils-secondary-school>

Watching them blossom from nervous 11-year-olds into confident young adults 
has been fascinating – and probably the best job I’ve done in 15 years of 
education journalism. The children welcomed me into their world and I came to 
look forward to hearing Gabriel’s gossipy (and delightfully uncensored) tales 
of school life, Tayla’s angst over falling out with friends, Cameron’s 
relationship ups and downs, and Lewis and Ellie’s enthusiastic updates on 
school trips and theatre productions.

When we met for the last time last month, there was a definite lump in my 
throat – especially when Lewis said that having the Guardian follow his journey 
was one of the “best bits about his time at secondary school”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4an68%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4an68%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd44aa8f49700a5cdcaae52aea0f25ec0b9486a05%2F454_156_4597_2759%2F4597.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20children%2C%20five%20years%20at%20secondary%20school%2C%20and%20the%20best%20job%20I%20ever%20had&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4an68%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five+children%2C+five+years+at+secondary+school%2C+and+the+best+job+I+ever+had&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4an68%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd44aa8f49700a5cdcaae52aea0f25ec0b9486a05%2F454_156_4597_2759%2F4597.jpg>
 Ellie, Lewis, Gabriel, Tayla and Cameron in year 6 at St Saviour’s primary 
school in 2010. Photograph: Teri Pengilley for the Guardian 
Gabriel

Dane Court grammar school, Broadstairs, Kent

You get detention if you don’t finish your homework. My parents would kill me
Gabriel, in 2010 
Five years ago, I was this tiny, fat person who was always getting into 
trouble for being loud and boisterous. Now I’m tall, slim and, although I’m 
still quite chatty, I’m not as annoying I used to be.

I remember being worried about getting detentions – and I got plenty of those 
over the years – mainly for not doing my homework. I finally knuckled down in 
year 11, although I wish I’d done it earlier.

I’m glad I got into grammar school but it has been a struggle at times, as I’m 
not particularly academic. I’m predicted to get mainly Bs in my GCSEs, which is 
lower than lots of people here, but being around brighter kids has definitely 
pushed me.

Related: Grammar and secondary modern pupils talk about year 8 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2012/jul/09/secondary-school-year-8-children>

I know there are people who aren’t at grammar school who are more academic 
than me. I’m just lucky because my parents pushed me to study for the 11-plus 
and I did OK on the day. I still think we should have grammar schools though; 
academic people need to be together, so people who are not as bright don’t get 
in the way of their learning.

I’m still in love with performing arts. In fact, I’m off to the Arts 
Educational School in west London to do a BTec in musical theatre, along with 
A-level drama. The idea of moving away from home is scary, but I’m lodging with 
a family so I won’t be completely on my own. My long-term dream is to perform 
in the West End but I know it won’t be easy. There’s a lot of competition out 
there.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4an68%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4an68%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F17%2F1437155013099%2F9a05d77f-24e8-4ee9-a9fa-3ae5d76ad2e5-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20children%2C%20five%20years%20at%20secondary%20school%2C%20and%20the%20best%20job%20I%20ever%20had&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4an68%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five+children%2C+five+years+at+secondary+school%2C+and+the+best+job+I+ever+had&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4an68%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F17%2F1437155013099%2F9a05d77f-24e8-4ee9-a9fa-3ae5d76ad2e5-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Gabriel at Dane Court grammar school’s prom. Photograph: Martin Godwin for the 
Guardian 
Ellie


King Ethelbert high school, Birchington, Kent

My parents didn’t bribe me to pass the 11-plus, but some did. One person was 
offered £150
Ellie, in 2010 
I had a couple of years when I wasn’t very happy at school. I think it was 
around year 8 when I got teased a bit by people in my year for being quiet and 
nerdy. I just ignored them and eventually they got bored and moved on to 
someone else. I think this happens to most people at some point.

I’m predicted good GCSE grades, so I was planning to move to Dane Court 
grammar school for sixth form – and even went to their induction day – but now 
I’m not sure. Staying at King Ethelbert seems easier because everything is 
familiar. I’m worried people will look down on me at a grammar because I’ve 
come from an ordinary school.

It’s funny looking back at the pictures Education Guardian has taken of us 
over the past few years. We looked so cute when we were in year 6. Now we’ve 
all grown up, filled out and turned into adults.

I’m totally different from how I was at primary school. I used to be really 
quiet and quite introverted, but I’ve taken part in so many school shows and 
theatre trips in London I’ve really grown in confidence. Being at the top of 
the school helps; you don’t have anyone looking down on you any more.

Tayla


Dane Court grammar school

The older pupils kept looking at us, saying we looked really sweet
Tayla, in 2010 
The last few months have been really emotional. We’ve had our GCSE exams, a 
leavers’ assembly in school and a prom at the Winter Gardens in Margate. A 
group of us got together and organised the prom ourselves.

At the leavers’ assembly each form teacher gave a presentation on their class, 
along with pictures of us, right from our first day in year 7. It was funny to 
see how much we had all changed and look back on the good times, like our trip 
to Germany in year 8 and all the school productions we did, particularly High 
School Musical.

I’m still deciding whether to stay here to do A-levels or move to another 
local grammar school where they do the international baccalaureate, but the 
thought of leaving my friends behind is hard.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4an68%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4an68%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F17%2F1437155162934%2F463519e0-eab2-4307-a135-2df849c2db50-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20children%2C%20five%20years%20at%20secondary%20school%2C%20and%20the%20best%20job%20I%20ever%20had&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4an68%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five+children%2C+five+years+at+secondary+school%2C+and+the+best+job+I+ever+had&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4an68%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F17%2F1437155162934%2F463519e0-eab2-4307-a135-2df849c2db50-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Tayla at Dane Court grammar school. Photograph: Martin Godwin for the Guardian 
It’s scary to think that in a year’s time I’ll have to make some big decisions 
about my future. I definitely want to go to university and study law, but I 
know I don’t want to go too far from home. I think I’ll end up studying in 
London or Kent. I’m not scared by the idea of student loans; we’ve had 
assemblies at school where the teachers explained you don’t have to pay it back 
until you’re working.

I’m so glad I passed the 11-plus and came to grammar school because I’ve been 
pushed really hard. I’m predicted all As and A*s in my GCSEs. I’ll be gutted if 
I get any Bs. I think grammar schools are a good idea because academic people 
need to be in an environment where people aren’t messing about, so they can get 
on with their work.

I’ve heard a few people from King Ethelbert’s are thinking of coming here for 
sixth form and I think that’s fine. If they get good GCSE grades, they should 
be allowed to come here.

Cameron


King Ethelbert high school

I’m worried about moving around the school for different lessons
Cameron, in 2010 
I was so proud to be voted head boy at King Ethelbert’s at the start of year 
11. What made it really special was it showed how far I’d come since I’d joined 
the school.

I spent the first few years hiding myself away. I’d go to the Skills Club at 
lunchtimes to play board games, just so I didn’t have to talk to anyone. When I 
got to the end of year 8 I thought to myself “this has got to stop, I have to 
get out there and make some friends”. And that’s exactly what I did.

Since then, I’ve given loads of speeches at open days and assemblies, and 
shown prospective parents and pupils round the school – all things that have 
improved my confidence. Back in years 7 and 8, people used to tease me for 
being a nerd. Now I walk around the school and people seem to really want to 
talk to me.

Related: The class of 2010: how do they feel about selective schools now? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/jul/15/class-of-2010-how-do-they-feel-selective-schools>

My grades have improved too; back in year 7, I was in the bottom sets for 
everything, but I’ve worked really hard to improve. I took three GCSEs early 
and got an A for maths, a B for English and a C for science. I don’t think 
anything could have predicted that – or that I’d be thinking of going to 
grammar school for sixth form.

I remember being upset at not passing my 11-plus and not getting to go to the 
brainy school as a result, but I think it’s been the best thing for me. I bet 
most of us have done just as well in our GCSEs as we would have done at grammar 
school.

Being a teenager can be tough, but I’ve managed to avoid the worst of it. 
After our leavers’ do the other week, I went on to a house party. Apparently 
there were people doing cocaine in the shed, but I didn’t get involved. I was 
happy with a couple of drinks.

Lewis


King Ethelbert high school

You hear stories, like if you talk back to one of the older kids, you get 
punched
Lewis, in 2010 
I can’t believe how much we’ve all changed over the past five years. I look 
back at the pictures of myself and some of my hairstyles are really 
embarrassing. But I’m definitely more confident: I used to be a bit shy around 
people, but now I can go up to anyone and have a chat.

Cameron has changed the most. He used to be this timid little boy and now he’s 
head boy. You see him walking down the corridor and everyone wants to talk to 
him. He’s so well-liked and respected. Ellie has changed too. She used to sit 
at the back of the class, quietly, but now she’s not afraid to speak up.

I’ve loved my time at King Ethelbert. The only low point was in year 9 when I 
was diagnosed with a connective tissue disorder calledbenign joint hypermobility
 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2012/feb/27/double-jointed-footballers-greater-risk-injury>
. There were days when I felt so tired and everything ached, but no one really 
believed me. They’d take the mick out of me for not taking part in sport. One 
of my teachers, Mrs Jackson, saw I was struggling and said “you can talk to me, 
you know”. That made such a difference.

Related: Romance and GCSEs on the curriculum as our Kent pupils head into year 
10 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/jul/15/secondary-school-year-10-children>

The last day of school was sad, with everyone signing each other’s shirts and 
books. After our leavers’ assembly, I could have gone home, but I spent an hour 
going round to my teachers and thanking them.

I’m hoping to get mostly Bs and Cs in my GCSEs and stay on in the sixth form 
for A-levels. After that I’d like to study film at university.

I’m not convinced the 11-plus is a good idea. I didn’t take it because I 
thought I would fail. The idea was just too stressful. Doing tests at that age 
just makes kids nervous, which can mean they do badly – even if they’re capable 
of passing. Everyone tends to form their own friendship groups anyway – often 
around what sets they’re in – so I don’t know why everyone can’t just go to the 
same sort of school.

• Read more about Gabriel, Ella, Tayla, Cameron and Lewis:
2010: “If I get a detention my dad will kill me” 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2010/jul/20/primary-pupils-secondary-school>
2011: “It was a bit of a shock meeting people who were much cleverer than me” 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2011/jul/11/secondary-school-start-year-6-pupils>
2012: “Ellie has a lot more opinions of her own and her friends are really 
important to her now” 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2012/jul/09/secondary-school-year-8-children>
2013: Romance and GCSEs as the pupils head into year 10 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/jul/15/secondary-school-year-10-children>
2014: “More people are experimenting with smoking, alcohol and drugs, but I’m 
not interested” 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/jul/15/class-of-2010-how-do-they-feel-selective-schools>
