
What are the latest French strikes about?

French workers are angry about employment law reforms in the so-called El 
Khomri bill, named after the employment minister Myriam El Khomri. The 
Socialist government and employers say the legislation makes the country’s 
strict employment laws more flexible – including allowing companies to 
negotiate the 35-hour maximum working week and cap severance payments if they 
need to shed staff in times of financial difficulty. It is hoped this will 
encourage firms to take on more staff, helping to lower the country’s high 
unemployment rate, now hovering above 10%. Workers oppose the law, claiming it 
makes their situation more precarious and undermines hard-won privileges and 
rights. The law has sparked the industrial action, but unions are also airing 
other grievances about working conditions and salaries.

How are the strikes affecting France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>
?

It is a lot of sound and fury, plus slogans, with noisy demonstrations and 
some ancillary hooliganism, but daily life goes on, if a little more slowly. 
Strikers have blocked fuel depots, ports and power plants, and 16 of France’s 
19 nuclear power stations have been hit by walkouts, but some protests have 
petered out and so far there have been no power cuts. There were fears of 
petrol shortages, but the government authorised the use of the country’s petrol 
reserves, which can theoretically last for three months. Long queues at some 
fuel stations last week were mostly caused by French drivers panic-buying for 
fear of a shortage. Train journeys are taking longer, with some services 
cancelled, but the strikes have yet to really bite. This may be about to 
change, with more widespread action planned in the next few weeks.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k9v7%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k9v7%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F871654797573dad578db082a5a9baa0616128c7e%2F24_165_4786_2872%2F4786.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20are%20the%20French%20strikes%20about%20and%20will%20they%20affect%20the%C2%A0Euro%202016%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k9v7%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What+are+the+French+strikes+about+and+will+they+affect+the%C2%A0Euro+2016%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k9v7%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F871654797573dad578db082a5a9baa0616128c7e%2F24_165_4786_2872%2F4786.jpg>
 A demonstrator protesting against the government’s planned labour law reforms. 
Photograph: Jean-Sebastien Evrard/AFP/Getty Images 
Will they affect the Euro 2016 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016>
 championships?

“We’re not trying to block the Euros. It’s not transport strikes that will 
stop people going to matches,” says Philippe Martinez, leader of the CGT union 
– the oldest and most powerful in France – and a Barcelona fan. But, he adds, 
“it’s all in the government’s hands”. At the same time, the CGT has threatened 
to paralyse Paris and other cities. The reality for football fans is likely to 
be more complicated. The CGT has called for a rolling strike, and the SUD, 
whose members work on the Paris transport system, has asked its workers to 
begin similar open-ended action on 10 June, the first day of Euro 2016. Most 
disruption is expected on 14 June, when the unions have called for a national 
day of industrial action. Most petrol depots have been unblocked, but they 
could be the focus of further protests. Not all unions support the campaign.

Related: More than 100 flights across Europe cancelled amid French strikes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/02/flights-across-europe-cancelled-amid-french-strikes-labour-law>

What should fans be aware of when they travel?

It is hard to say how many workers will heed the strike call, or how affected 
transport will be. The government is likely to make promises of concessions to 
avoid major disruption to this showcase sporting event, but there will 
inevitable delays to air, sea and rail travel. Fans travelling to matches are 
advised to allow more time. Since 2007, rail workers have been required to give 
48 hours’ notice of their intention to go on strike and assure a minimum 
service, so there will be trains. Exactly how many is anyone’s guess.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k9v7%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k9v7%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ad6646c25bc6505ee081a1be537cf74a74a5487%2F16_92_4900_2940%2F4900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20are%20the%20French%20strikes%20about%20and%20will%20they%20affect%20the%C2%A0Euro%202016%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k9v7%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What+are+the+French+strikes+about+and+will+they+affect+the%C2%A0Euro+2016%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k9v7%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ad6646c25bc6505ee081a1be537cf74a74a5487%2F16_92_4900_2940%2F4900.jpg>
 CGT union members on the street in Marseille. Photograph: Bertrand 
Langlois/AFP/Getty Images 
What effect are the strikes having on François Hollande’s government?


Hollande had already hit a record low in popularity, so it can hardly get much 
worse. The prime minister, Manuel Valls, has said it is his “responsibility” to 
make sure the bill is enacted. The government used an emergency constitutional 
clause to push the bill through the lower house of parliament without a vote.

Related: French rail workers go on strike as disputes over labour laws spread 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/31/french-rail-workers-strike-labour-dispute>

Is striking part of the French DNA?

French historian Stéphane Sirot said it was an element of the French 
character: “It’s part of the long French tradition of taking to the streets,” 
Sirot told the Local publication. “The protests can be violent, which only 
increases the media attention and fuels the reputation, but when you look at 
statistics of the number of days lost to strikes in different countries during 
the past 100 years,France is generally in the middle of the table 
<http://www.nationmaster.com/country-info/stats/Labor/Strikes>.

In other countries, strikes often follow failed negotiations. In France they 
precede talks as a way of flexing union muscles. The French complain about 
disruption to their daily lives, but on the whole, they feel industrial action 
is for the greater good. The current round of strikes have elicited mixed 
feelings, with various polls showing that half the country supports the labour 
law being changed or withdrawn, but also roughly half support the industrial 
action.
