
In 2000 children’s charity Barnardos produced one of the most shocking adverts 
ever for its Giving Children Back their Future campaign. An advertising watchdog
urged newspapers not to carry <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/622269.stm> the 
image (the Guardian and Observer defied the ban) of a baby injecting itself 
with heroin, and the charity swiftly replaced it with a smiling infant.

Two years later, however, Barnardos was using shock tactics again, with a 
campaign called Stolen Childhood, featuring imagery of artificially aged 
children being forced into prostitution. And its advertising campaign in 2009, 
showing the reality of domestic abuse, provoked more than 800 complaints, 
earning it a place on the listof the most complained about adverts ever produced
 <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-18243577>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4te9h%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4te9h%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc29ada60abf7b1ff3826f89b9c4b8c8ed959f90%2F0_0_1328_797%2F1328.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Have%20charity%20shock%20ads%20lost%20their%20power%20to%20disturb%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4te9h%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Have+charity+shock+ads+lost+their+power+to+disturb%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4te9h%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc29ada60abf7b1ff3826f89b9c4b8c8ed959f90%2F0_0_1328_797%2F1328.jpg>
 Barnardos’ advertising campaign from 2002 drew attention to increases in child 
trafficking, prostitution and abuse. Photograph: BARNARDO'S/PA 
Barnardos may be the most notable, but it is far from the only charity to have 
repeatedly used emotive charity advertising.Pancreatic Cancer Action 
<http://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2014/feb/12/pancreatic-cancer-action-controversial-advert>
 produced a particularly memorable ad, which showed a pancreatic cancer patient 
saying they would rather have a less virulent form of the disease such as 
breast, testicular or cervical cancer. But as their chief executive explained, 
despite complaints, using shock tactics to bolster a relatively small budget 
was highly effective. Millions of people became aware of the mostly fatal 
condition (just 3% of those diagnosed live longer than five years).

Related: Charity campaigns that changed the way we think – in pictures 
<http://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/gallery/2015/feb/02/charity-campaigns-influential-oxfam-unicef-adverts-gallery>

Barnardos told the Guardian back in 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/joepublic/2009/mar/27/charity-advertising-shock>
 that for it, too, shock tactics have proved effective in monetary terms – some 
potential donors were put off by the shocking violence in its domestic violence 
advert but overall, the proportion of viewers who said they were “very likely” 
to give to the charity increased.

However, as the market in emotive charity advertising becomes saturated 
<http://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2014/sep/29/poverty-porn-charity-adverts-emotional-fundraising>
, should the sector consider soft sell advertising to avoid fatigue?


Soft sell advertising, according to Ian Heartfield, creative director at 
advertising agency BBH <http://www.bartleboglehegarty.com/london/> (which 
recently produced the acclaimed video,The Chokeables 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gtbUB1XPW_o>, for St John Ambulance), 
“entertains the consumer using wit, charm, [and] excitement … More often than 
not it’s brand building, rather than product selling.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgtbUB1XPW_o&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgtbUB1XPW_o&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgtbUB1XPW_o>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgtbUB1XPW_o&media=>
 Emma Sheppard, head of brand and communications at St John Ambulance, said 
that the motive for the video was ‘to make it as easy as possible for people to 
learn first aid’. 
Dan Shute, managing director of advertising agency Creature 
<http://www.creaturelondon.com/>, agrees that since the 1980s charity 
advertising has been stuck in a rut: “There is definitely a cliche of charity 
advertising – or charity with a serious message, like public service 
advertising. I would say since the serious Aids campaign of the 1980s there has 
been a series of waves of shock advertising.”

Shute says to get through to audiences that “are bombarded by same thing all 
the time” you need to offer something that doesn’t simply shock, but engages 
and entertains. “There’s a really simple metric here – you want people to like 
you [the brand].”

The recent Green party political broadcast, produced by Shute’s agency, is a 
case in point. It’s called GrownUpPolitics and features children impersonating 
the UK’s most senior politicians, andcaused a social media storm 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/07/greens-advert-causes-social-media-storm-as-kids-play-politicians>
. Shute says: “At the moment the right answer seems to be to be funny, 
lighthearted satire – but everyone starts doing the same thing then we would 
start. The point is that the Green party is the party that does things 
differently.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Ds2dNEQiHUUo&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Ds2dNEQiHUUo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Ds2dNEQiHUUo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Ds2dNEQiHUUo&media=>
 The Green party advertisement was, as in previous ads, intended to show that 
their politics is different. 
Shute also emphasises the importance of not repeating the same things over and 
over; it’s about the difference between execution and platform. The platform or 
strategy can stay the same – the idea that showing the Green party looks at 
politics differently – but the execution needs to change. Last year the 
execution was aboy band made up of the four main political leaders 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PPgS7p40ERg> all singing in harmony, this year 
it’s kid–politicians being childish.

However, Joe Wade, managing director, at Don’t Panic advertising agency, is 
unequivocal in his support for using emotive advertising to reach a mass 
audience: “I would say emotive advertising is the way to go, especially for 
charities. TheMost Shocking Second a Day 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RBQ-IoHfimQ> video we made for Save the 
Children is probably one of the most successful examples of this.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRBQ-IoHfimQ&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRBQ-IoHfimQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRBQ-IoHfimQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRBQ-IoHfimQ&media=>
 Considered to be one of the most successful charity ads in recent years, the 
Most Shocking Second a Day video tapped into the trend for parents to make one 
second a day videos of their children. 
Wade says isn’t referring to traditional ads of “starving African children”, 
because this sort of content is too bleak to be shareable. And there are ways 
to ensure emotive ads are tested ahead of buying expensive old media slots. 
Save the Children, he notes, paid to run the Most Shocking Second a Day video 
on TV only after it went viral online. Digital success, he argues, can 
determine the likely impact of buying traditional ad space. Either way, he is 
clear emotive advertising is here to stay.

Heartfield agrees that being emotive often makes it easier for charities to 
justify advertising spends, and avoid the hit/miss risk of fun or amusing 
adverts. “When a brand spends vast sums of money on advertising that is nothing 
more than wallpaper, it’s reckless. When a charity does the same, it’s 
bordering on immoral. We’re not selling tins of beans, we’re trying to save 
lives. Get noticed. Get talked about,” he says.

But it must be engagingly emotive, rather than so distressing that it turns 
viewers off, says Shute. Shares, likes and comments are vital, argues Wade, 
when it comes to beating the rise inad-blocking software 
<http://digiday.com/publishers/global-rise-ad-blocking-4-charts/> and paid for 
views.

Related: The Dress: are social memes and shock tactics the future of charity 
marketing? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/mar/10/social-memes-shock-dress-charity-marketing>

So what works, other than making people cry or laugh? For both Wade and Shute 
it’s about tapping into the zeitgeist. For instance, the Most Shocking Second a 
Day video mimicked the trend of parents makingone second a day videos of their 
children 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/newsvideo/viral-video/10186145/Father-captures-every-day-of-babys-first-year-on-video.html>
. They also suggest looking at filming trends such as the rise of the 
continuous shot, seen recently inthe film Victoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/31/victoria-review-one-take-berlin-schipper-heist-thriller>
, or through someone’s point of view, such as personalGoPro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/oct/04/rise-of-gopro-wearable-cameras>
 efforts. However, the old tricks – riding on the social media buzz of large TV 
series or piggy-backinga trending hashtag 
<http://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/mar/10/social-memes-shock-dress-charity-marketing>
 – are not going anywhere.

But whether emotive or amusing, the messages charities want to convey, as do 
brands, will have to become ever more intertwined in telling a wider story, 
Wade says. The stories charities need to tell might be as hard-hitting as ever, 
but the mode will have to become more subtle. As Heartfield says: “No one’s 
really talking about ‘ads’ anymore,” people talk about a great video they have 
seen that may or may not have had a brand behind it.

The advertising agencies are clear on what makes a charity advert work – and 
it’s not about hard or soft sell. Change comes not from shock or amusement, but 
from how compelling an advertisement is. “[Whether its soft sell or not] great 
ads have always had something in common: people have wanted to watch them,” 
says Shute.


For more news, opinions and ideas about the voluntary sector, join our 
community <https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/> – it’s free!
