
More than half of teaching assistants 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/feb/26/teaching-assistants-improve-pupils-results-studies-show>
 say they have experiencedphysical violence 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/classroomviolence> in the classroom in 
the past year, according to a report published by trade union Unison.


One respondent claimed to have been “kicked, punched, slapped, headbutted and 
insulted verbally by children”. Another, a teaching assistant at a school for 
children with emotional and behavioural difficulties, feared going to work in 
case they suffered a serious injury.


“I am very concerned about the high level of violence that staff are being 
asked to deal with on a daily basis,” the respondent said. “I go to work 
worrying that I may be badly injured – or that one of my colleagues will. The 
verbal abuse is constant.”


The Unison <https://www.unison.org.uk/> report, entitled Bad Form: Behaviour 
in Schools, finds that almost one-fifth of educational support staff, including 
business managers, technicians, librarians, administrative workers, caretakers, 
cleaners and catering personnel, have experienced violence.


However, teaching assistants “bear the brunt”, with three-quarters of those 
questioned claiming to have witnessed violence in school and more than half 
(53%) saying they had received verbal threats, usually from pupils (85% of 
cases), but also from parents (31%).

Unison claimed that the behaviour is linked to staff cuts due to budget 
constraints <http://www.theguardian.com/education/school-funding>. More than 
one-tenth of the 14,500 people who took part in the survey pointed out that 
there had been reductions in staff numbers, either as a result of redundancy or 
posts left vacant following a departure. One-fifth said their school did not 
have an adequate behaviour management policy.

Unison’s head of education, Jon Richards, said: “These are not just occasional 
incidents. Abuse is becoming a regular and alarming occurrence, with more than 
half of teaching assistants coming across violent behaviour in the classroom, 
the playground or at the school gates.


“A lack of resources means schools are unable to address behavioural issues. 
Dealing with these problems can dominate the day, when time could be better 
spent supporting children’s learning.”
