
On a snowy night in Boston in 2008, IBM engineer Leah Busque and her husband 
were rushing out to dinner when they realized they were out of dog food. They 
didn’t want to miss their reservation but needed to feed their hungry yellow 
labrador retriever, Kobe. If only they could find someone trustworthy to do the 
chore for them.

 That’s when Busque came up with an idea that would eventually turn into 
TaskRabbit <https://www.taskrabbit.com/>, an on-demand service that connects 
clients with “Taskers” – people who have the time and willingness to run an 
errand in exchange for an agreed-upon fee. Customers book services directly 
through the company’s mobile app.

TaskRabbit, which launched a redesigned app in March, is just one of many 
rising companies whose services are designed for smartphone users. Today, these 
businesses are setting themselves apart through a commitment to fulfilling 
everyday needs fast. Whether it’s on-demand dry cleaning, gourmet food delivery 
or sending flowers to a paramour, if the need exists, there’s probably an app 
for it.

The app that’ll walk your dog

If you’ve ever considered having a dog, you might have been dissuaded by the 
logistics of looking after a pet.Wag <https://wagwalking.com/> co-founder Josh 
Viner learned that from experience.

Before he started Wag, Viner had a packed schedule in Los Angeles working as 
an advisor to several tech companies while pursuing his own projects. “Everyone 
from my brother to my parents told me to not get a dog, and I quickly realized 
that there was no easy solution for dog owners,” he says. “You can outsource 
most things these days, but not pet care.”

 Well, now you can – a little. Viner is determined to make the daily walk a 
breeze for dog owners around the US. In his app, customers can see ratings and 
reviews of nearby Wag walkers-for-hire. During the task, GPS integration shows 
the dog being walked in real-time. Afterward, walkers fill out a digital report 
card with the number of miles logged, a map of the route and a brief write-up 
that proud pet-parents can share on Facebook and Instagram.

The app is currently available in eight cities including New York, San 
Francisco and Chicago, with plans to add more areas this year.

Gourmet meals designed for the delivery trip
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kmym%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kmym%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65d9453ffd11c5f9ae15522e2eabded3f6b62eff%2F21_0_1633_981%2F1633.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=On-demand%20everything%3A%20these%20apps%20may%20change%20your%20life&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kmym%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=On-demand+everything%3A+these+apps+may+change+your+life&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kmym%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65d9453ffd11c5f9ae15522e2eabded3f6b62eff%2F21_0_1633_981%2F1633.jpg>
 Meals from Maple, like this shrimp and soba dish, are made to be delivered. 
Photograph: Maple 
City slickers are spoiled with great restaurants, but getting delivered meals 
that are designed to be consumed on-premises is a challenge. Caleb Merkl has a 
solution. He’s the CEO and co-founder ofMaple <https://maple.com/>, launched 
April 2015 in New York.

Think of Maple as a delivery-only gourmet restaurant. With the app, customers 
can view each day’s lunch and dinner menus and place an order, or even preorder 
before its service begins at 11am every weekday.Photos <https://maple.com/menu> 
of a recent daily menu showed spiced shrimp over a parmesan grit cake; 
provençal chicken with brussels sprouts and a walnut salad; and a spinach bowl 
that included farro, broccoli florets and toasted pine nuts.

Since Maple launched, about 1,000 different meals have been developed under a 
board of advisors assembled by its chief culinary officer, David Chang, who 
most food lovers will recognize as the founder of the Momofuku restaurant group.

The app only serves parts of Manhattan, but the idea could quickly catch on in 
other parts of the country. According to Merkl, demand for Maple has been 
driven mostly by word of mouth. “While we’re excited to take our next big step, 
we’re only going to do so once we’re in a place to scale without sacrificing 
the quality of our service and product,” he says.

An extra pair of hands

If TaskRabbit’s recent advertising takeover in New York City’s Grand Central 
Terminal – its new slogan is: “We do chores. You live life” – is any 
indication, investors are placing big bets on everyday folks leaving 
do-it-yourself (DIY) aspirations behind for help that can be conjured with a 
simple tap.

TaskRabbit’s redesigned app 
<https://blog.taskrabbit.com/2016/03/01/get-to-know-taskrabbits-new-mobile-app/>
 is built for speed: it’s the first real-time services platform for everyday 
work. Previously, the app’s services were completed on the same day of a 
request. Now, Taskers and clients are matched within five minutes, with a focus 
on chores being done in less than 90 minutes. The app also provides an 
estimated arrival time so clients can plan their day accordingly.

Related: New York start up aims to help refugees through food delivery service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/jan/14/new-york-city-jobs-for-refugees-eat-offbeat-syria-lebanon-migrant-workforce>

While popular services on TaskRabbit range from housecleaning to home repairs, 
Taskers have been hired to do almost every imaginable assignment. In the US, a 
Tasker was even paid to scuba dive to the bottom of a lake to retrieve a set of 
car keys, company spokeswoman Lisa Chan says.

As for the night eight years ago that inspired TaskRabbit, Busque and her 
husband ended up keeping their dinner reservation. On the way home, they picked 
up food for Kobe, who was fine after eating his meal a little later than usual. 
But folks with full schedules would probably agree that some tasks are worth 
getting done on time, if only for the peace of mind.

Here are five more ways to make your life a lot easier

BloomThat <https://www.bloomthat.com>. Make someone’s day with this flower 
delivery app. Each bouquet is designed according to what’s fresh and in season. 
Called the “Uber for flowers”, BloomThat offers next-day delivery nationwide 
and delivery to select locations within 90 minutes.

Rent The Runway <https://www.renttherunway.com>. Eyeing that designer dress 
but not ready to commit? Rent The Runway lets customers wear special occasion 
pieces without the long-term investment.

Hotel Tonight <https://www.hoteltonight.com>. Get a room at last-minute prices 
in more than 1,900 cities across North America, Latin America and Europe. The 
app offers reservations at top-rated hotels up to seven days from when you book.

Shyp <https://www.shyp.com/>. Save yourself that dreaded trip to the post 
office. Shyp couriers will pick up, package and send your stuff – all at a 
competitive price. It’s perfect for sending a gift or even cleaning out your 
home.

Magic <https://www.getmagicnow.com>. Whether it’s on-demand helicopters or 
out-of-stock items, no task is too big or small for this mobile concierge 
service. Send a text message to Magic’s short code and get anything you want – 
from the routine to the extraordinary ­– as long as it’s legal. Charges vary 
depending on the task.

This content is paid for by Cadillac
