
Hällåkra Vingård
In the south of Skåne, where the slopes meet the flat southern plains, 
Hällåkra Vingård grows about 20,000 vines. “The grapes are specially suited for 
a colder climate and a shorter growing season, which gives the wine its 
characteristic Scandinavian acidity, freshness and fruitiness, reminding you of 
the Nordic fauna,” says Håkan Hansson, wine farmer and CEO of the vineyard.

Hällåkra started out by producing classic wines, and has in the past few years 
started to produce natural wines. “Besides the odd vineyard in Denmark, we are 
the only [Nordic] producer that sells wine on the market,” Håkan says.


Visit hallakra.com <http://hallakra.com/> for full schedules of tastings and 
tours of the vineyard.

Related: Find the Swedish TV locations making a killing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/holiday-in-sweden/2016/may/03/find-the-swedish-tv-locations-making-a-killing>

Absolut Skåne
Åhus, on the east coast of Skåne is the home to famous Swedish vodka producer 
Absolut. Take a tour of the distillery, which produces vodka with a distinct 
character from Skåne’s fields of winter wheat, and hear the story of how a 
local vodka company became one of the world’s most exclusive vodka brands.

“Visitors are able to take a tour of Absolut’s production facilities to 
experience our ‘One Source’ process, starting with the scenic wheat fields of 
Skåne, where Absolut sources all its grain directly from local farmers, to the 
bottling plant, which fills 600,000 bottles per day,” says Tamara Urukalo, 
global brand advocacy director for Absolut.


Visit åhussweden.se <http://ahussweden.se/> for more information. 


Kullabygden
Due to its beautiful location, Kullabygden is full of artists’ studios and has 
a rich heritage of pottery. This is also the go-to destination for a 
gastronomic experience in Skåne. Visit theHöganäs market hall 
<http://www.hoganassaluhall.se/>, which is full of produce from local farms. 
This includes cold cuts, jams, fruit and vegetables.

At the same location you will also find Garage Bar <http://garagebar.se/>, a 
South American-inspired restaurant that has live gigs in the evenings. If you 
would like to visit the farmers directly, steer your way to the local tomato 
farm, Vikentomater, which also invites guest chefs every Saturday.


“Vikentomater is a charming farm shop with a great selection of local produce 
and delicatessen. One-hundred-and-one different varieties of tomatoes are 
cultivated here in a rainbow of colours, shapes and flavours. On Saturdays 
famous chefs cooks for an audience who get to sample the food. There is also a 
café serving cakes and simple lunch dishes,” says Mats Olofsson, owner of the 
farm.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkmb%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkmb%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe75dc9db1b01c726ac529cbdf71772cac0c2afe%2F0_190_5701_3420%2F5701.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20things%20to%20do%20in%20Sk%C3%A5ne&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkmb%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top+10+things+to+do+in+Sk%C3%A5ne&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkmb%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe75dc9db1b01c726ac529cbdf71772cac0c2afe%2F0_190_5701_3420%2F5701.jpg>
 Österlen, where the orchards meet the beaches. Photograph: Carolina Romare / 
Folio/Getty Images/Folio Images RF 
Österlen
It is no wonder that artists, writers and gardeners alike have made Österlen 
their home. The landscape, including widespread fields and fruit orchards, is 
absolutely spectacular. Between the cozy village of Kivik and Stenshuvud 
national park, where apple orchards meet the white beaches of Hanöbukten, is 
the family businessKiviks Musteri <http://kiviksmusteri.se/sv/>. This is where 
you will learn how to make cider – don’t miss the cider tasting along with some 
Skåne-styled tapas.

“Our fourth generations of knowledge and tradition produces juice, cider, jams 
and fruit drinks. This is where the apple even has its own house – House of 
Apples – where you can learn about bees, apples and experience the production,” 
says Maria Anderberg, of Kivik Musteri.


The Talldungen hotel <http://www.talldungen.se/> offers spectacular views of 
the Österlen landscape. And should you get hungry, the hotel has its own micro 
bakery and a restaurant where the focus is on local produce.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkmb%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkmb%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff339860f564b1240ba7ad3d1b21bc22bf37358fb%2F286_371_2925_4793%2F2925.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20things%20to%20do%20in%20Sk%C3%A5ne&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkmb%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top+10+things+to+do+in+Sk%C3%A5ne&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkmb%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff339860f564b1240ba7ad3d1b21bc22bf37358fb%2F286_371_2925_4793%2F2925.jpg>
 The Talldungen Hotel restaurant. Photograph: PR 
There are plenty of other foodie stops in Österlen: have dinner at Allé 
<http://www.alle.se/>, drink coffee at the coffee roaster Kafferosteriet 
<http://kafferost.com/> and buy cheese from Vilhelmsdal 
<http://www.vilhelmsdal.se/> and bread from Olof Viktors 
<http://olofviktors.se/>. Or why not visit Maria’s farm kitchen 
<http://osterlenkokkonst.se/>? Maria will teach you how to cook delicacies from 
the area in an old farmhouse kitchen.

Kattegattleden biking trail
Last year saw the opening of Kattegattleden, a bike trail that stretches 230 
miles (370 km) along the west coast of Sweden, starting in Gothenburg and 
finishing in Helsingborg, Skåne. It is divided into eight stretches, including 
Helsingborg-Höganäs, Höganäs-Ängelholm and Ängelholm-Båstad. Besides the 
spectacular scenery of the coast, there are several pit stops along the way 
that include food and drink at vineyards and farm shops. Make sure to stop by 
Kullahalvön, which is famous for its culinary scene, including restaurants such 
asRut på Skäret <http://rutpaskaret.com/>, Rusthållargården 
<http://www.rusthallargarden.se/> and Grand Hotel Mölle 
<http://www.grandhotelmolle.se/#about>. Visit kattegattleden.se 
<http://kattegattleden.se/> for a full route.

A slice of Swedish Hospitality
If you fancy visiting real Skåne, you should sign up to A Slice of Swedish 
Hospitality run by Mia Klitte. Instead of going out for dinner, Swedes will 
invite you to their homes for a genuine Swedish experience. By choosing a 
family on aasliceofswedishhospitality.com 
<http://www.asliceofswedishhospitality.com/> you are able to choose between a 
traditionalfika of coffee and cakes, or a full dinner. “We visit local farmers 
and get inspired by how they keep traditional crafts, including micro dairy 
farms to local vegetable growers,” says Klitte. “The families all love food and 
are curious people.”

Malmö
You will be spoilt for choice when it comes to picking a restaurant in the 
city of Malmö. Titti Qvarnström is one of the leading chefs in the area: her 
Michelin-starred restaurantBloom in the Park <http://bloominthepark.se/> 
doesn’t have menus – instead food is served according to availability, day and 
mood. “Everything to do with food has to be joyful for me,” says Qvarnström. 
“There are some conditions for that: food should be locally produced, and 
animals treated with respect. By being in touch with farmers and breeders, it 
gives us a different kind of feeling and understanding of the food.”

Other Malmö restaurants with a similar philosophy include Bastard 
<http://bastardrestaurant.se/>, Lyran <http://lyranmatbar.se/>, Bord 13 
<http://bord13.se/english/#menu> and Vollmers <http://vollmers.nu/>.


Ven Island
Ven is a small island between Sweden and Denmark, in the Öresund strait. It 
was once part of Denmark, and given to Tycho Brahe, a Danish nobleman who built 
astronomical research stations here, and was later invaded by Swedes. Make sure 
to visit theTycho Brahe museum <http://www.tychobrahe.com/>, but make food and 
drink your top activities.

There is a whisky distillery on the island, Spirit of Hven, where you can book 
in a guided tour and sample some whisky. For food, head toElla’s restaurant 
<http://www.restaurangella.se/>, which serves locally produced durum wheat 
pasta with local goat cheese; andPumpans Café 
<http://pumpans.com/http___www.pumpans.com/Valkommen.html>, where they serve 
locally produced vegetarian dishes.


“Visit our cozy garden café where a lot of care and love have been added in 
both the garden and the food. This is where travellers can find a moment of 
peace, “ says Urban Claréus who runs the café.


Sofiero castle
This year sees the 150th anniversary of Sofiero castle <http://www.sofiero.se/>
, located in the city of Helsingborg. You can attend special tours and 
experiences throughout the year, including Shakespeare’s play As You Like It 
(12 May – 11 June), set in the castle park. And in the last weekend of August 
The Big Garden Party will take place, a yearly event now celebrating its 20th 
year. “In connection with the anniversary, we have been able to make 
substantial commitments that gives Sofiero the true attractiveness that the 
castle and the park deserves,” says Annika Malmgren, manager of Sofiero castle. 
Don’t miss a stop at the castle’s famous restaurant, which serves up seasonal 
food.

Touring with Wallander
The famous Swedish crime detective Kurt Wallander celebrates 25 years this 
year. Although a fictional character made up by the author Henning Mankell, his 
hometown of Ystad will make sure to celebrate, and so will visitors. Besides 
taking a tour in his footsteps in Ystad, you can visit the studios where the 
films were made, and, as of this year, you will also be able to enjoy the 
Wallander Opera, which will be set up at Ystad city theatre from 13 August. It 
takes off where the series end, making it a must for loyal fans. Visit
visitystadosterlen.se <http://www.visitystadosterlen.se/en> for ticket 
information.
