
One of North America’s oldest marked hikes, the Appalachian Trail, known 
affectionately as the AT, is the granddaddy of long-distance footpaths. 
Stretching for 2,180 miles from its rolling beginnings in Georgia to its craggy 
finish in Maine, the venerated trail is about to gain a new level of popularity 
thanks to the filmA Walk in the Woods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/28/sundance-2015-review-a-walk-in-the-woods-robert-redford-in-butch-cassidy-and-the-sundowner-kid>
, released in the UK today.

Related: Top 10 long-distance hiking trails in the US 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jan/19/top-10-long-distance-hiking-trails-us-california-oregon-texas>

When writer Bill Bryson <https://www.theguardian.com/books/billbryson> set out 
to hike the AT in 1996, he knew little about backpacking and almost nothing 
about thru-hiking (doing a long trail end to end). Its physical, mental and 
logistical challenges led him and his comically out-of-shape hiking buddy Katz 
to abandon their quest less than half of the way to Maine.

How many filmgoers who go to watch Robert Redford (who plays Bryson – yes, 
really) and Nick Nolte (Katz) bumble their way down the trail will be inspired 
to take to the AT? Will they make it further than Bryson did? And will they 
leave the trail better than they found it? Concerned for how the trail might 
fare under the harsh glare of Hollywood, the Appalachian Trail Conservancy 
(ATC) has launched a campaign called#ProtectYourTrail 
<http://www.appalachiantrail.org/a-walk-in-the-woods/protectyourtrail>, with 
the aim of educating new hikers on the “Leave No Trace” principle: a set of 
guidelines designed to minimise visitor impact on natural places.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cdcn%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cdcn%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F18%2F1442567629731%2Fac5b2c23-6433-4d69-a0b1-64da3d78ee30-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Appalachian%20Trail%20welcomes%20careful%20hikers%20%E2%80%93%20and%20movie%20fans&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cdcn%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Appalachian+Trail+welcomes+careful+hikers+%E2%80%93+and+movie+fans&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cdcn%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F18%2F1442567629731%2Fac5b2c23-6433-4d69-a0b1-64da3d78ee30-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Redford, left, and Nolte take in the scenery along the Appalachian Trail. 
Photograph: Frank Masi/Society of Motion Picture Still Photographers 
Related: Top 10 national and state parks in New England, USA 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/may/26/top-10-national-state-parks-new-england-usa>

Members of the ATC – a non-profit network based in Harpers Ferry, West 
Virginia – were on hand during filming to ensure the crew treated the trail 
with respect, adhering to the seven Leave No Trace principles, which include 
travelling and camping on durable surfaces, disposing of waste properly and 
respecting wildlife.

But while the ATC says the 78-year-old trail can handle more visitors – 
provided they practise LNT ethics – others say it’s time to impose limits on 
the number of hikers. In 2014, 2,742 thru-hikers voluntarily registered with 
the ATC, with 714 intrepid backpackers completing the full trek – a success 
rate of one in four. The trail has seen a steady 10% increase in thru-hikers 
since 2010, with an estimated three million people hiking some portion of it 
each year.

Perhaps the most impressive statistic of all is the number of volunteer hours 
that go into maintaining it: in 2014 more than 5,000 volunteers spent a 
staggering 241,936 hours working on the trail.
 Hikers on the Knife Edge Trail to the Baxter Peak of Mount Katahdin, the 
northern terminus of the trail. Photograph: Nicolaus Czarnecki/Zuma Press 
That dedication is a reflection of how beloved the AT is by all who walk any 
length of it. Dennis Procopio, a veteran thru-hiker from San Jose, California, 
who goes by the trail name Fusion, says: “Hiking the AT offers a truly sacred 
escape from the rat race. The AT is a place of altruism, non-judgment and 
kindness and there is collective intention to enable healing and 
self-discovery.”

Reviews of the film have been mixed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/14/nick-nolte-in-a-walk-in-the-woods>
, but if you are inspired by it, you don’t need to commit six months to walking 
in the woods. A three-day hike along Virginia’s Triple Crown section between 
Roanoke and Blacksburg, or a 10-day trek across northern Maine’s infamous 
100-mile wilderness may be enough to satisfy your wanderlust. Even a short hike 
can change your life: just be sure to leave no trace.

• Mary has hiked big chunks of the AT in each of the 14 states it runs 
through, except Georgia. Someday, she’ll hike it all.

billbryson.co.uk 
<http://billbryson.co.uk/index.php/a-walk-in-the-woods-film-tie-in-rediscovering-america-on-the-appalachian-trail/#uk>
; maps and advice atappalachiantrail.org <http://appalachiantrail.org/>; more 
on the Leave No Trace centre atlnt.org <https://lnt.org/>
