
I recently spotted new adverts on my Facebook feed asking me to help 
struggling schools. It’s no surprise – I regularly post about teaching and 
education, and count being a teacher in my career history. The ad promotes the
National Teaching Service 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/national-teaching-service-pilot-gets-underway>
, a new scheme to encourage the best teachers and middle leaders to move across 
the country and work in rural or underperforming schools that struggle to 
recruit and retain staff.

This time, Facebook’s marketing algorithm has missed its mark; I haven’t been 
a teacher for three years. But my experience visiting and studying education 
systems in top-performing countries in the years since I was in the classroom 
allows me to shed light on how other systems work – and how this ambitious 
national programme might be best implemented.

The challenge of getting qualified, quality teachers into schools that need 
them most is one many countries face. Australia, for example, has some 
significant geographical challenges. When we talk of rural schools in the UK, 
we refer to coastal or remote schools, two or three-hour’s drive from the 
nearest city. In Australia, that is more likely to be a three-hour flight. How 
does the government convince their teachers to move into the outback?

Related: 10 professional development ideas for teachers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/teacher-blog/2013/oct/22/teacher-professional-development-school-advice>

Australian states offer a number of incentives to encourage teachers into 
these remote schools. These can include: housing subsidies of 70-100%; 
retention benefits if they stay in rural schools beyond a certain number of 
years; vacation travel expenses; and an “isolation from goods and services” 
allowance. The UK’s National Teaching Service is offeringrelocation subsidies 
of up to £10,000 
<https://www.gov.uk/guidance/national-teaching-service-for-teachers-and-middle-leaders>
, which is a great start, but other potentially persuasive benefits, such as 
allowances for travelling home and retention renumeration for staying beyond 
the three-year programme, aren’t included.

North of Australia, the Japanese government also offers benefits to mitigate 
being posted to schools that teachers have not chosen themselves, but their 
approach is much more structured. In Japan they have a system called tenkin, in 
which company and government employees are rotated to different offices (and 
sometimes roles) every few years. New teachers are posted to a new school after 
four years, and after that, teachers are rotated to a new school every six 
years. This allows for rich professional experiences, evens out teaching 
quality and revitalises the workforce within each school. Teachers are 
compensated with generous subsidies and given a formal introduction to the 
area, in addition to mentoring and professional development. Vitally, these 
opportunities are not reliant on individual schools.

While England does not have a recruitment system in which teachers can be 
posted where they are needed, the NationalTeaching 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/teaching> Service could offer an 
opportunity to start one. Like the Japanese system though, the professional 
development offered would need to be of a guaranteed, recognised standard – not 
reliant on the individual schools to which teachers were posted.

Another important feature of the Japanese system is that while they do post 
great teachers to schools that need extra help, they also post teachers who 
need to improve to successful schools with strong teaching skills. This latter 
point is crucial. Just moving around good teachers isn’t enough to make a 
significant impact on the system because the same amount of talent is just 
distributed in a different way. To have a significant and long-lasting impact 
on the teaching quality across the country you need to ensure that there are 
systems in place that support teachers to learn from one another.

Related: Busy teachers in England missing out on professional development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/teacher-blog/2014/jun/25/busy-teachers-england-miss-out-professional-development>

In Japan, Singapore and Shanghai, this learning happens through lesson study, 
where teachers of different expertise and experience plan lessons together, 
observe each other teach and have discussions about the effectiveness of the 
pedagogy observed. Teachers in Finland also have a weekly timetabled session to 
plan lessons with their colleagues, which allows them to learn from one 
another. The focus in all of these places is on supporting teachers.

National Teaching Service teachers must be given the time to plan professional 
development and engage other staff in conversations about pedagogy. Their 
impact could be so much greater if headteachers could make space for these 
conversations and observations throughout their school.

Korea’s system rotates teachers like Japan’s does, but they also make the 
experience of working in disadvantaged schools count more when it comes to 
promotion than working in affluent areas. By making access to the highest rungs 
of their career ladder depend partly on whether they’ve had experience in a 
more challenging area, they make the experience more sought-after.

With a variety of career incentives, including guaranteed professional 
development and time for supporting others, the benefits of the National 
Teaching Service could convince more brilliant teachers to make the move to 
rural areas and challenging schools – and to stay there. And maybe if I return 
to the classroom, and work my socks off to become a brilliant teacher, I might 
click on that Facebook link after all.

Lucy Crehan is an associate at the Education Development Trust 
<https://www.educationdevelopmenttrust.com/>. Follow her on Twitter @lucy_crehan
 <https://twitter.com/lucy_crehan>.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
