
The Afghan government is indirectly but knowingly funnelling money to the 
Taliban <https://www.theguardian.com/world/taliban> through the country’s 
lucrative marble business, the Guardian has learned. Afghanistan’s vast mineral 
deposits, which under different circumstances could fund development, instead 
nourish some of the worst ills plaguing the war-torn nation: corruption, 
smuggling and a militant insurgency.

In Helmand province, large marble reserves are in areas long under Taliban 
control. The government, largely unable to extract marble on its own and intent 
on maintaining an embryonic marble industry, buys the stone from private 
companies, who in turn pay the Taliban ample taxes and for extraction rights.


As a result, the government adds to a revenue stream into the militant group’s 
coffers worth millions of dollars each year. In 2014,a UN monitoring team 
estimated 
<http://www.securitycouncilreport.org/atf/cf/%7B65BFCF9B-6D27-4E9C-8CD3-CF6E4FF96FF9%7D/s_2014_402.pdf>
 that at least two-thirds of the $15m (£10m) made on Helmand marble each year 
went to the Taliban.

The presidential envoy to Helmand, Abdul Jabbar Qahraman, put the figure even 
higher. He told the Guardian that the Taliban now made $50,000-$60,000 per day 
from marble, or more than $18m (£12m) annually.

“Yes, we are concerned,” said a government official in Helmand familiar with 
the mining industry, requesting anonymity because the government has ordered 
provincial officials not to speak to the media. “But we don’t have any other 
way.”

A 55-year-old Italian-built marble factory in Lashkar Gah is the only one of 
its kind in Helmand. On a recent morning, elderly men caked in dust were 
sanding ashtrays and vases with surgical concentration. A younger man ran the 
saw of an ancient-looking Cappelli Africa stonecutter machine smoothly through 
wet slabs of marble, spraying himself with grey mist.

Business has never been better, said Mohammad Lal Kargar, the factory’s 
manager, who has worked here since the 1970s. That was not saying a lot. 
Afghans only recently warmed to marble, and though demand is growing, the 
factory’s revenue totals £8,000-£9,000 per month.

That is a fraction of the Taliban’s earnings, and a fair bit short of the 
approximately £500m that USAidhas estimated 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-afghanistan-marble-idUSTRE63K00C20100421> is 
Afghanistan’s total export potential. According to the UN, Afghanistan’s marble 
reserves are worth between £100bn and £140bn.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k687%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k687%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec3cd85d84bbc5da83ed6d616d1a3caac618221d%2F0_338_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Afghan%20government%20money%20reaching%20Taliban%20through%20marble%20trade&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k687%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Afghan+government+money+reaching+Taliban+through+marble+trade&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k687%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec3cd85d84bbc5da83ed6d616d1a3caac618221d%2F0_338_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Inside a marble factory. Photograph: Jim Huylebroek for the Guardian 
The factory in Lashkar Gah is 49% government-owned, with 51% belonging to a 
private company headed by a former US contractor. Because the Taliban refuse to 
sell marble to the government, Kargar said, the factory buys marble from 
private contractors who extract the stone and transport it to Lashkar Gah.

The government and Taliban both charge contractors for extraction rights, 
because both claim the southern districts containing the mines as their 
territory. In addition, according to one prominent industry source, the Taliban 
tax trucks between $300 and $500 per tonne of marble, depending on its quality.

By the time pink onyx marble – the most valuable kind – makes it to Lashkar 
Gah, the price tag is $700 per tonne. According to theAfghanistan Investment 
Support Agency 
<http://www.aisa.org.af/Content/Media/Documents/Marble-industry-AFG-AISA-20127112014173236730553325325.pdf>
 (AISA), Afghan onyx is seven times more expensive than Pakistani marble, which 
makes export more difficult.

Musafar Quqani, a spokesman for the ministry of commerce, which administers 
the government share of the Helmand factory, denied channelling money to the 
Taliban. Nobody in Helmand had ever complained about having to bribe the 
Taliban, he said, adding that no marble went to Pakistan illegally.

But a former ministry spokesman, Wahidullah Ghazikhil, confirmed that the 
government worked with private companies who paid off Taliban and smuggled 
marble to Pakistan. “The private companies are bribing Taliban for their own 
profit,” said Ghazikhil. “The government can’t do anything.” He said nobody 
knew exactly how much money the Taliban had made this way.

Asked whether the government should stop buying marble altogether, the Helmand 
official said: “The government has seriously considered this. But someone else 
would buy it, and then all of the marble would go to Pakistan.”

In 2014 Afghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> signed a 
new mining law. While an improvement, the law still “lacks a provision 
prohibiting illegal armed groups, militias or members of the national army from 
benefiting from mining,” according to the corruption watchdog Global Witness.

“Marble is just part of the wider connection between extractives, corruption 
and armed groups,” said Stephen Carter, the group’s Afghanistan campaign 
leader. “Resources like these should be funding development and increasing 
Afghanistan’s independence from foreign donors. Instead they are putting 
Afghanistan at a real risk of a chronic, resource-driven conflict.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k687%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k687%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30601aa9f7ea4d2b4b887b7e2bf37563fd5c9ee4%2F0_125_5537_3322%2F5537.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Afghan%20government%20money%20reaching%20Taliban%20through%20marble%20trade&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k687%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Afghan+government+money+reaching+Taliban+through+marble+trade&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k687%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30601aa9f7ea4d2b4b887b7e2bf37563fd5c9ee4%2F0_125_5537_3322%2F5537.jpg>
 Marble objects in a shop window. Photograph: Jim Huylebroek for the Guardian 
The UN has identified between 25 and 30 illegal mining operations in Helmand, 
from where, several sources estimate, at least 80% of marble disappears into 
Pakistan. “They put their own stamp on it and call it Pakistani marble,” Kargar 
said.

Some of it ends up back in Afghanistan. Due to insecurity on roads, it is 
often easier to import marble to Kabul from Pakistan than to transport it from 
provinces such as Helmand and Badakhshan. According to AISA, more than 80% of 
the Afghan marble market comes from Pakistan.

Marble is smuggled along a well-trodden route used also for weapons and drugs. 
From mines in the desolate Khanashin and Dishu provinces, it snakes through 
Badamchar, a smuggler’s havendescribed by Nato 
<http://archive.defense.gov/news/newsarticle.aspx?id=61497> as “a Taliban 
command-and-control area”, with ammunition storages, bomb factories and 
training camps for foreign fighters. This smuggling route is a backbone of the 
insurgency, which the government and its international backers have never 
broken.

For 14 years, the US-led coalition sacrificed more lives and money in Helmand 
than in any other Afghan province. But Brig Gen Charles Cleveland, a spokesman 
for the coalition in Afghanistan, admitted that clearing the southern, rural 
areas had not been first priority. “Focus was on population centres,” he said. 
“We would like to have done, and would still like to do, everything we can to 
secure the border. But the bottom line is, trying to secure those borders from 
every single smuggling route is probably going to be a futile effort.”

Cutting off the Taliban supply routes required cooperation from Afghanistan’s 
neighbours, he said. “Securing the border is not just done from one side of the 
border. The Afghan government won’t be able to do it by themselves.”

Additional reporting by Mokhtar Amiri. 
