
The only surviving part of the castle is the 15th-century keep. It provides a 
dramatic entrance to the gardens spread out below Two hundred clipped hollies 
and yews, some towering to well over 40ft, frame views and help give the garden 
its definitive structure The parterre features several miles of clipped box 
hedges containing roses and bedding plants. Open areas are infilled with grass 
and a gravel matching the stone of the castle Statues and urns are typical of 
the extravagant baroque style of the 17th and 18th centuries The reds and 
yellows of hybrid tea roses, golden yews, purple prunus and 30 varieties of 
acer echo the colours of the Drummond family crest.

Drummond Castle Gardens <http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gardens> is a 
curious place. It is not particularly pretty, but as you walk through the arch 
of the 15th-century keep, the ground drops away to reveal a spectacular view 
over a vast, five-acre formal garden that takes the breath away.

Over 500 years, it has undergone many changes, most significantly in 1820, 
when Lewis Kennedy installed a terraced garden that included typically French 
ponds and allees. Kennedy's work was continued by Sir Charles Barry, best known 
for designing the Houses of Parliament, who is thought to have put in the 
Italianate terraces and baroque staircases. And in the Victorian era a carpet 
of evergreens, predominantly on the banks below the castle, was introduced.

Laying it out would have been far from easy - formal gardens tend to be level 
and symmetrical, but the paths at Drummond swoop up and down, adding a thrill 
to the experience. The colour schemes are an overriding feature: blue lavender 
and silver Anaphalis triplinervis are laid out in triangles and fans, 
replicating the flag of St Andrew. Other trees and shrubs echo the colours of 
the heraldic Drummond family crest. Indeed, the success of this complex garden 
is entirely down to the fact that it can be seen from a height.

Â· Open until October, 01764 681433 (drummondcastlegardens.co.uk 
<http://www.drummondcastlegardens.co.uk>)
