
Independent schools should lose their charitable status unless they volunteer 
to run state academies, the UK’s chief schools inspector has said, warning that 
the reluctance of private schools to help educate poor children is a moral 
outrage.

Sir Michael Wilshaw, head of Ofsted 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted>, said: “I get quite angry when I 
hear independent school heads saying ‘inequality is getting worse, we’ve got to 
do something’ and wringing their hands. Well, we know that. So get stuck in and 
sponsor an academy.”

Speaking at a conference on social mobility on Wednesday, Wilshaw added: “I 
think they should lose their tax subsidies and the reliefs they get from the 
Charity Commission unless they sponsor an academy and show that they really 
mean what they say.”

Asked about the partnerships and scholarships that private schools currently 
offer, Wilshaw derided them as a sop. He said: “It’s a way of meeting the 
demands of the Charity Commission and not much else.”

“I say this, really, in a sense of moral outrage, that they are opening up all 
theseindependent schools in Dubai 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/feb/26/uk-schools-suffering-as-new-teachers-flock-abroad-warns-chief-inspector>
 and the Middle East and elsewhere – sucking in more of our teachers, who 
aren’t going to Derby or Northampton or Grimsby or Hull, but going off to an 
independent school sponsored by the big public schools over here.

“It’s a sense of moral outrage that they not doing enough for our own poor 
children.”

Private schools qualify for charitable status 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/nov/29/is-it-right-public-schools-charitable-status>
 because of their educational mission, which some critics say is inappropriate 
for institutions charging around £30,000 for a boarding school place.


Related: Ofsted boss clashes with private school heads over 'deep pockets' 
remark 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/oct/02/ofsted-independent-schools-deep-pockets-wilshaw>

But Wilshaw’s comments were rejected as “utter nonsense” by John Claughton, 
headteacher ofKing Edward’s school, Birmingham <http://www.kes.org.uk/>, who 
was present at the conference.

Claughton said his school worked with nearly 200 state primary schools in 
Birmingham, and last year alone spent£2m on means-tested scholarships 
<http://www.trust.kes.org.uk/why.html>, with 100 of the school’s 850 pupils 
receiving a full rebate of the £12,000 fee and a further 100 benefiting from 
financial assistance.

“To say that we do nothing for our community is disgraceful. Accusing 
independent schools of stealing all the state school teachers is 
extraordinary,” Claughton said.

Wilshaw has been a frequent critic 
<http://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/teacher-blog/2013/oct/02/ofsted-michael-wilshaw-independent-schools>
 of the independent sector’s lack of involvement insponsoring academies or free 
schools 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/aug/18/private-schools-academies-independent-dna-wellington-college>
, although a number of leading private schools such as Eton and Manchester 
Grammar school have done so.

“It’s small potatoes, really, those bursaries. The independent sector would 
have much more impact if they allied themselves – as one or two do – with local 
schools to improve those schools’ performance,” Wilshaw told the conference.

Sir Peter Lampl, founder and chairman of the Sutton Trust, told the conference 
that teacher recruitment by independent schools was a big issue at a time of 
severe shortages in the state sector.

Wilshaw added that teachers were “trained by the taxpayer, and then to go off 
into the independent sector seems wrong. I just think we need to worry about 
this.

“If the independent sector is going to have all these privileges, then they 
should put something back.”

But Wilshaw’s claim that “the independent sector is expanding exponentially 
abroad and taking our teachers” was disputed by the IndependentSchools 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> Council.

Julie Robinson, the ISC’s general secretary, said: “The truth is, there are 
just 44 schools set up abroad by ISC schools and between them they do not 
employ large numbers of UK-trained teachers.

“It therefore seems wrong to state, as Mr Wilshaw has, that this is the cause 
of teacher shortages in this country and we see no reason why independent 
schools setting up international campuses should be a problem.”

Related: UK schools suffering as newly qualified teachers 'flock abroad' 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/feb/26/uk-schools-suffering-as-new-teachers-flock-abroad-warns-chief-inspector>

Wilshaw has previously said that he recruited teachers from abroad – including 
from Ireland – when he was head teacher in state secondary schools in London.

Chris King, chair of the Headmasters and Headmistresses Conference of public 
schools and head of Leicester Grammar School, said Wilshaw’s “simplistic, 
adversarial approach” did not stand up to scrutiny.

“Some independent schools already successfully sponsor academies but not all 
independent schools have the resources, expertise or personnel to do so,” King 
said.

“Perhaps it would be more productive to find ways of improving state 
education, which many independent schools are already doing through successful 
and unsung partnerships.”

Earlier, Wilshaw criticised state secondary schools, and claimed that many new 
teachers were leaving the profession because of “poor culture in the schools 
they are going into and poor behaviour ... and what they see as poor 
leadership”.

“Something is going wrong in our secondary schools,” Wilshaw said, pointing 
out thepersistent gap in attainment 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jan/21/gcse-league-tables-show-schools-struggling-adjust-changes>
 between disadvantaged pupils and their peers.


“If you are going to improve social mobility, our secondary school performance 
is going to have to radically improve.”

The Department for Education rejected Wilshaw’s comments, saying that state 
schools are “increasingly matching the private sector” in performance.
“The assumption that state schools need to learn from the independent sector 
is outdated,” a DfE spokesperson said.
