
Jeremy Corbyn <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> faced 
further calls for a tougher crackdown on antisemitism within Labour on Sunday 
after one of his allies dismissed the crisis as a “smear” against the party and 
its members.

Diane Abbott <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/diane-abbott>, the shadow 
international development secretary, dismissed claims that the party had a 
problem with antisemitism, provoking fresh criticism of the Labour leadership.

She suggested the problem was procedural and instead lay within Labour’s rules 
governing antisemitic and other racist comments, which she said would be 
corrected following a review of the party’s guidelines.

“Every single claim of antisemitism – I think 12 – has resulted in a 
suspension. Ken was suspended within hours. That is 12 allegations when 200,000 
[new members] have joined the party,” Abbott said.

“It’s a smear to say that Labour <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> 
has a problem with antisemitism. It is something like a smear against ordinary 
party members.”

Her comments, made on the BBC’s Andrew Marr 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/andrewmarr> show on Sunday morning, was 
followed by more criticism of the leadership’s response to repeated claims of 
antisemitism by Labour MPs and one major party donor.


On Friday, Corbyn suspended Ken Livingstone from the party 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/28/ken-livingstone-suspended-from-labour-after-hitler-remarks>
 and announced an independent inquiry into antisemitism in Labour, to be led by
Shami Chakrabarti <http://www.theguardian.com/profile/shamichakrabarti>, the 
formerhead of Liberty 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/mar/31/liberty-names-barrister-martha-spurrier-new-director-shami-chakrabarti>
.

It follows incendiary comments 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/28/ken-livingstone-suspended-from-labour-after-hitler-remarks>
 by the former London mayor that appeared to claim that Adolf Hitler, whose 
regime was responsible for the deaths of six million Jews, supported Zionism.

Livingstone has refused to apologise to the Jewish community for the comments. 
He said this weekend the row was not about antisemitism but rather a plot by “
embittered old Blairite MPs 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/30/ken-livingstone-blames-embittered-blairite-mps-for-antisemitism-row>
” to destabilise Corbyn’s leadership.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tn43%2Fsfb%23img-1&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tn43%2Fsfb%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b25bc474011a4bbbf9559950de6077668cfbe5d%2F0_21_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Diane%20Abbott%20says%20claims%20of%20antisemitism%20within%20Labour%20are%20smear&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tn43%2Fstw%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Diane+Abbott+says+claims+of+antisemitism+within+Labour+are+smear&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tn43%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b25bc474011a4bbbf9559950de6077668cfbe5d%2F0_21_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Ken Livingstone on Saturday. Photograph: Neil Hall/Reuters 
In a heated exchange over the party’s response to the comments, Marr 
challenged Abbott to explain why, if Labour had no broader problem with 
antisemitism, the leader had announced an inquiry into the issue.

The shadow minister implied that the problem was with the rules of the party: 
“There are issues about process. There is nothing in the rules about racism, 
antisemitism and Islamophobia. We are going to make the rules explicit.”


Corbyn later reaffirmed his pledge to rid the party of all forms of racism. 
Speaking at a May Day rally in London, the Labour leader said the party “stands 
absolutely against racism in any form”. He said: “We stand united as a Labour 
movement recognising our faith diversity, our ethnic diversity, and from that 
diversity comes up strength.”

Related: Ken Livingstone blames 'embittered Blairite MPs' for antisemitism row 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/30/ken-livingstone-blames-embittered-blairite-mps-for-antisemitism-row>

However, Labour donor Michael Foster, who gave the party £400,000 before the 
general election in which he stood as a candidate, said some members of the 
party’s leadership continued to “vilify Jews as part of their political shtick”.

He called for the Chakrabarti inquiry to be widened, and said on BBC Radio 4’s 
The World this Weekend <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p03ssdrs> he would not 
donate to the party nationally because of the leadership’s approach.


Meanwhile, many others within the parliamentary party remained dismayed at the 
response from Abbott following contrite comments by the shadow chancellor, John 
McDonnell, on Saturday. Ben Bradshaw, the former culture minister, said Labour 
members were furious at how allegations of antisemitism had been handled.

“I’m increasingly of the view that Ken Livingstone 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/livingstone> is a Conservative party spy 
who’s been planted in the Labour party and has been sleeping and has now 
emerged to try to do as much damage as he possibly can.

“And that’s certainly the view of my loyal Labour party members and activists 
and voters who came up to me all day yesterday saying: what is going on? They 
were outraged by his comments. If he comes back into the party, they won’t vote 
for our party. It’s a really serious issue,” he said.


Louise Ellman, the Jewish MP for Liverpool Riverside, said the response had 
been “much too slow”. The party is investigating a complaint that she has been 
subject to antisemitic abuse at a meeting of the local party.


Len McCluskey, the head of Unite, Britain’s biggest union and the party’s 
biggest donor, criticised Livingstone and backed his suspension. However, he 
told Pienaar’s Politics on BBC Radio 5 Live: “This is nothing more than a 
cynical attempt to manipulate antisemitism for political ends because it is all 
about constantly challenging Jeremy Corbyn’s leadership.

“The idea that there is an antisemitic crisis within the Labour party is 
absolutely offensive but it is being used in order to challenge Jeremy Corbyn. 
Once the mood music of antisemitism dies down, then next week and the week 
after there will be another subject. It is an issue that comes up because 
somebody says something stupid and then immediately it becomes a crisis.”

Corbyn announced an independent review last week and pledged to tighten party 
codes of conduct in an attempt to control the row over antisemitism, which has 
seen theMP Naz Shah 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/27/naz-shah-suspended-labour-party-antisemitism-row>
 as well as Livingstone suspended by the party.

Related: Corbyn may not be antisemitic. But is he a real leader? | Matthew 
d’Ancona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/01/corbyn-anitsemitic-leader-slur-labour-anti-jewish-prejudice>

He has faced calls from Israeli politicians and diplomats to give a more 
“unequivocal” condemnation, and warnings – including from the party’s London
mayoral candidate, Sadiq Khan 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/30/sadiq-khan-antisemitism-row-damages-labour-poll-hopes>
 – that Labour would be punished in the 5 May elections.

Mark Regev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jun/06/mark-regev-israel-gaza-blockade>
, Israel’s ambassador to London, called for Corbyn to distance himself from 
Hamas, which he described as an antisemitic organisation. “The left has a 
wonderful, proud history of fighting antisemitism, but we have seen some 
language over the last two or three weeks which is very concerning,” Regev said.

“They have the right to criticise the Israeli government, Israeli citizens do 
it every day,” he said. “It is about demonisingthe Jewish state 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/1948/may/15/israel>. It is not about 
criticising this or that Israeli policy; it is about the demonising and 
vilification of my country and its very right to exist.

“It is important that the leadership is not neutral or agnostic about 
antisemitism. I’ll give you an example; you have had too many people of the 
progressive side of politics who have embraced Hamas and Hezbollah. Both of 
them are antisemitic organisations. You just have to read their charters which 
read like The Protocols of the Elders of Zion.


 “If you are progressive, you are embracing an organisation which is 
homophobic, which is misogynistic and which is openly antisemitic – what is 
progressive about that? There needs to be an unequivocal message from the 
leadership saying there is no solidarity with antisemites.”
