
The world of finance is dizzyingly complicated, as you’ve no doubt had cause 
to reflect while reading in detail through one of those chunky terms and 
conditions documents your bank sporadically sends in the post. (Youdo read them 
in detail, right?) So you might be inclined to doubt the premise ofThe Index 
Card <http://www.amazon.com/The-Index-Card-Personal-Complicated/dp/1591847680>, 
a new book by the American finance journalist Helaine Olen and the academic 
Harold Pollack, which is that all you need to know about money management could 
fit on one side of a three-inch by five-inch index card.Their specific advice 
<http://www.npr.org/sections/alltechconsidered/2016/01/08/462250239/when-an-index-card-of-financial-tips-isnt-enough-this-book-is-there>
 is US-centric, but the underlying principles apply wherever you are: try to 
save 10-20% of your money; pay off your credit card monthly; make full use of 
tax-protected saving allowances. Oh, and never buy or sell individual shares, 
because you’re notGordon Gekko <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gordon_Gekko> and 
you won’t beat the market. There are a handful more, but only a handful – and, 
come to think of it, if the index card argument’s right, isn’t it slightly 
cheeky to write a whole book on the matter?

But there’s a powerful truth here, which is that people dispensing financial 
advice are even less neutral than we realise. We’re good at spotting the 
obvious conflicts of interest: of course mortgage providers always think it’s a 
great time to buy a house; of course the sharp-suited guys from 
SpeedyMoola.co.uk think their payday loans are good value. But it’s more 
difficult to see that everyone offering advice has a deeper vested interest: 
they need you to believe things are complex enough to make their assistance 
worthwhile. It’s hard to make a living as a financial adviser by handing 
clients an index card and telling them never to return; and those stock-tipping 
columns in newspapers would be dull if all they ever said was “ignore stock 
tips”. Yes, the world of finance is complex, but it doesn’t follow that you 
need a complex strategy to navigate it.

Related: The art of taking action. Or not | Oliver Burkeman 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/feb/06/art-of-taking-action-philosophy-oliver-burkeman>

There’s no reason to assume this situation only occurs with money, either. The 
human body is another staggeringly complex system, but based on current science,
Michael Pollan’s seven-word guidance 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2007/01/28/magazine/28nutritionism.t.html> – “Eat food, 
not too much, mostly plants” – is probably wiser than all other diets. 
Happiness, too, may be as simple as prioritising experiences over possessions, 
relationships over achievements, and time overmoney 
<http://www.spsp.org/press_release/valuing-your-time-more-than-money-linked-to-happiness>
. Yet we’re drawn to complex strategies because they enhancethe illusion of 
control <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Illusion_of_control>: we feel we’re 
grappling with important stuff, exerting agency. Plus, we like the idea of 
detailed, personalised solutions when, actually, just doing the same as 
everyone else might be best.

Most sneaky of all is the way complex advice fuels the belief that you can, if 
you’re clever enough, become as rich, healthy or happy as you like. But maybe 
you can’t.As Olen has long argued <http://helaineolen.com/books/pound-foolish/>
, much money-related stress comes down to a broken, insufficiently regulated 
system that stacks the deck against all but the super-rich. The bad news is 
that self-help tips alone will never fix that. The good news is that, given 
this pitiful state of affairs, doing as well as you realistically can is 
probably much simpler than you think.

 * oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com <mailto:oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com> 