
Q What do you understand by the measurement term "a tablespoon". I was taught 
at school that it is equivalent to two dessertspoons.Sharon 

A When a cookery writer mentions a tablespoon in a recipe they generally mean 
a 15ml measuring spoon. It is slightly different from the "tablespoon" you get 
in a cutlery set. If you buy a set of measuring spoons, they measure as 
follows: teaspoon – 5ml; dessertspoon –10ml; tablespoon – 15ml. These are 
"official" measurements and most cookery writers use them so everyone's 
tablespoon is the same.

Q Do you have some tips for making parsley sauce? I have memories of holidays 
in Ulster and my grandparents making a gorgeous thick sauce poured over 
Cookstown beef sausages and fluffy potatoes. It was heaven. I've tried to 
recreate the sauce, but it is always bland.Anna

A Anna, the difference between good and superb is simply about the little 
things. So don't chop your parsley too early, and make sure you add a tiny knob 
of butter at the end. But I think the real trick is to let the sauce take its 
time and don't forget the bay leaf. So make the white sauce as normal, but let 
it simmer over a very low heat for a while before you put the parsley in. Be 
generous with the herb. I sometimes whiz it in the blender, which seems to 
deepen the flavour, and then add more parsley just before serving.

If you have a cooking question for Nigel, email ask.nigel@observer.co.uk

Q What do you understand by the measurement term "a tablespoon". I was taught 
at school that it is equivalent to two dessertspoons.Sharon

A When a cookery writer mentions a tablespoon in a recipe they generally mean 
a 15ml measuring spoon. It is slightly different from the "tablespoon" you get 
in a cutlery set. If you buy a set of measuring spoons, they measure as 
follows: teaspoon – 5ml; dessertspoon –10ml; tablespoon – 15ml. These are 
"official" measurements and most cookery writers use them so everyone's 
tablespoon is the same.

Q Do you have some tips for making parsley sauce? I have memories of holidays 
in Ulster and my grandparents making a gorgeous thick sauce poured over 
Cookstown beef sausages and fluffy potatoes. It was heaven. I've tried to 
recreate the sauce, but it is always bland.Anna

A Anna, the difference between good and superb is simply about the little 
things. So don't chop your parsley too early, and make sure you add a tiny knob 
of butter at the end. But I think the real trick is to let the sauce take its 
time and don't forget the bay leaf. So make the white sauce as normal, but let 
it simmer over a very low heat for a while before you put the parsley in. Be 
generous with the herb. I sometimes whiz it in the blender, which seems to 
deepen the flavour, and then add more parsley just before serving.

If you have a cooking question for Nigel, email ask.nigel@observer.co.uk 
<http://ask.nigel@observer.co.uk>
