
My boyfriend looks terrible for his age. His skin feels as fragile and 
wrinkled as used clingfilm; age spots pepper his face and arms. What hair he 
still has is faded to grey, and the laughter we have shared over the years has 
etched itself in the lines around his eyes. Mind you, I don’t look too hot, 
either. We have both been transformed by a makeup artist who, with latex and 
face paint, has fast-forwarded us from partners of four years into husband and 
wife of 60 years. It is a very odd experience; I feel a flash of nostalgia for 
30-year-old me, and immediately feel the urge to wear a bikini. It’s like an 
injection ofNora Ephron <https://www.theguardian.com/film/nora-ephron>: “Oh, 
how I regret not having worn a bikini for the entire year I was 26. If anyone 
young is reading this, go, right this minute, put on a bikini, and don’t take 
it off until you’re 34.”

These pictures are the result of an experiment. I wanted to explore a question 
that pricks the minds of many couples at our life stage. We are both 30; a year 
and a half ago we bought a flat together; we have started to think about 
marriage. Perhaps the phrase “started to think” is disingenuous; the truth is, 
Shaun grew so bored with my talking about it that he banned me from mentioning 
it until afterEuro 2016 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016>.

And so we find ourselves on the brink of a lifelong commitment, poised to make 
the same promise made by our parents, our grandparents and our 
great-grandparents, stretching back as far as our family trees will go, into 
countries I have never visited, from Yemen to Poland. But if and when we make 
that same promise, it will mean something very different. Because when our 
ancestors swore to love each other unto death, that meant 40 years together, if 
they were lucky. For us, thanks to improvements in healthcare and life 
expectancy (currently 79 for men and 83 for women in England and Wales 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/lifeexpectancies/datasets/lifeexpectancyatbirthandatage65bylocalareasinenglandandwalesreferencetable1>
, and set to rise), it could be more like 60 years. This is a radical shift, 
and one that forces us to question our assumptions about commitment and love. 
What does the age of longevity mean not just for individual marriages, but for 
the institution of marriage itself? What does it mean to say, “Till death do us 
part” in 2016?

As our life expectancy has improved (more than one-third of babies born today 
could live to 100 
<http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20160105160709/http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/lifetables/historic-and-projected-data-from-the-period-and-cohort-life-tables/2012-based/sty-babies-living-to-100.html>
), so have our expectations: we want a marriage to be great, not just good 
enough, all the way to the end. Dr Helen Fisher has been researching this issue 
for 40 years, and recently published an updated edition of her bookAnatomy Of 
Love: A Natural History Of Mating, Marriage And Why We Stray 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/anatomy-of-love-a-natural-history-of-mating-marriage-and.html>
. “The focus of modern marriage is not stability, it’s love,” she says. “A 
century ago, a woman wouldn’t have ended a marriage that was satisfactory, buta 
recent survey 
<http://www.multivu.com/players/English/7433451-match-singles-in-america/> 
showed that one-third of people would leave a satisfactory marriage if they 
weren’t in love with their partner. Today, we want it all, and we’ll walk away 
if we don’t have it.”

And so to the rise of the “grey divorce”. Recent figures from the Office for 
National Statistics 
<http://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/divorce/bulletins/divorcesinenglandandwales/2013#age-at-divorce>
 show divorce is falling in all age groups in the UK except for the over-50s, 
among whom it has risen by nearly 11% in a decade. Nearly 60,400 people in this 
demographic divorced in England and Wales in 2013, while the overall number of 
divorces fell to a 40-year low. The same trend has also been observed in the 
US, where in 2014 those aged 50 and over were twice as likely to go through a 
divorce than in 1990; the increase was evenhigher for those over 64 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/31/your-money/after-full-lives-together-more-older-couples-are-divorcing.html?_r=1>
.

I have always assumed that the “grey” part of marriage was the best bit. I 
watch with loving envy as my parents enter their fifth decade together, finally 
allowed to relax and enjoy themselves after all the child-rearing and careering 
and work-life balancing. But, for many, decades of marriage can simply bring 
boredom – that feeling of, “Is this all there is?” Of “meh”.

If you have 30 more years after retirement, why stick with the same old same 
old when you might find someone better?

Roger Jenkins, 68, ended his 33-year marriage at the age of 65. “For me, as 
for a lot of people, crunch time in a relationship comes when you retire,” he 
says. “Suddenly the person you saw for a couple of hours each night, mostly 
spent in front of the telly, you are now seeing 24/7. And all the problems, 
which you saw for only a few hours a week, you now see 24/7, too. My wife had a 
great social life, and when I finally retired and wanted a holiday, she said, 
‘No, I have my own life. I don’t want to go around with you all the time.’”

After trying marriage counselling and discussing the situation with his 
children, both in their 30s, Roger filed for divorce. It was not an easy 
decision – he had to overcome the stigma he had absorbed as a boy: “People of 
my generation grew up at a time when divorce was virtually unknown and viewed 
as terribly sinful. That burrows into your psyche at a fairly early age. But a 
lot of people my age are fit and reasonably affluent, because they’ve had the 
benefit of a property boom, and it’s now easier to get divorced than it used to 
be – so why should I spend the rest of my life in misery?”

Relate counsellor Barbara Bloomfield 
<http://www.relate.org.uk/users/barbarabloomfield> agrees: “Women and men are 
feeling so much younger than they did in previous generations, and they 
fervently believe they have 30 more years after retirement. Some think, why 
stick with the same old same old if you might be able to find someone better?”

Older couples have always had to deal with an onslaught of potentially 
stressful factors: boredom, yes, but also hormonal changes that can lead to 
mismatched sex drives, children leaving home, retirement. Bloomfield explains: 
“There are quite a few mothers and fathers who can’t get used to being a couple 
after children have left home and they have stopped working, when they’re under 
each other’s feet all day. Either the marriage crumbles or they find a new way 
to be together.” But people are refusing to accept these changes as inevitable 
– even at 80, because five, 10 years is too long if you are unhappy.

Divorce lawyer Kerry Russell <http://www.gorvins.com/people/kerry-russell/> 
says she has seen many couples like Roger and his ex-wife. “The main trend I 
have seen is couples divorcing due to the realisation that there is more in 
life. They sometimes describe their marriage as tedious, and many feel trapped 
in a routine. They often care very much for their spouse, but the differences 
between them seem more apparent. They see divorce as a way to gain some 
independence and live life to the full.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tftz%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tftz%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fddbe034f78d0c961f49cc7eb9d99346d47c06d32%2F332_912_3171_4273%2F3171.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Love%20in%20the%20age%20of%20living%20for%20ever%3A%20could%20your%20marriage%20last%2080%20years%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tftz%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Love+in+the+age+of+living+for+ever%3A+could+your+marriage+last+80+years%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tftz%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fddbe034f78d0c961f49cc7eb9d99346d47c06d32%2F332_912_3171_4273%2F3171.jpg>
 Will you still love me tomorrow? Moya and Shaun reimagined. Photograph: David 
Yeo for the Guardian 
Roger met his new partner through work two years ago. “We’re blissfully 
happy,” he says. “Sixty is the new 50 – we’re not old gits, we love life, we 
travel. I’m deeply in love with my partner and looking forward to spending the 
rest of my life with her.”

After speaking to Roger, I find myself questioning my naive, unmarried 
assumptions about what constitutes a “failed marriage”. Can you really consider 
two children, 30 years together, an amicable end and a second happy 
relationship a failure?

For Fisher, the rising divorce rates among the over-50s represent one part of 
a sea change. She says, “I think the concept of ‘till death do us part’ is 
going by the way. What we’re going to see is serial monogamy, a series of pair 
bonds.” Much of marriage as we know it we owe to the agrarian revolution, she 
argues: “On the farm, you had to marry the right girl, from the right kin 
connection, from the right social standing, and hopefully from the farm next 
door. And you really had to stay married for life – because you couldn’t leave 
the farm.”

She thinks we’ll have more civil unions, and that it will become easier to 
marry and easier to divorce. Does this mean we’ll drop that line, till death do 
us part? “No, we’re very schmaltzy people. And there’s something called 
cultural lag: our marriage habits may change much more rapidly than our 
marriage belief systems. So even though a great many people don’t really know 
if it will be forever, they’ll use the term, and have it in their heads, along 
with a whole lot of hopes and dreams.”

You grit your teeth and stay married, despite being very unhappy. My daughters 
grew up in a war zone; I wish they hadn’t

Jessica Graham sees this as a positive development. She married her ex-husband 
at 22 and divorced at 52, 10 years ago. They got engaged a few months after 
meeting, and this, she suggests, is another reason for the spike in divorce 
among the over-50s. A speedy engagement is more unusual now: this wasn’t true 
of her generation of “grey divorcees” back when they were lustrous newlyweds.

Jessica is a fiercely intelligent, witty, compassionate woman, a proud 
northerner with a sense of humour. She can’t recall any happy times from her 
marriage. So why did she wait 30 years? Her answer – she wanted to protect her 
daughters – is another explanation for the increase in later-life divorce, and 
reminds me of the punchline of a dark joke: a 96-year-old is asked by his 
divorce lawyer, why did you wait so long? He replies, “We wanted to wait until 
the children had died.”

Jessica tells me, “You feel bound to it, so you carry on, grit your teeth and 
stay married, despite it being very, very unhappy. My daughters grew up in a 
mild war zone; I look back and wish they hadn’t had to experience it.” She had 
planned to delay divorce until her daughters went to university, but they 
intervened earlier.

When I ask if she wants to meet someone else, Jessica is adamant in her 
refusal. “I am happy being single, and financially secure. I like being able to 
do pretty well what I want, when I want. I can commute to London, go to the 
theatre, to concerts.” Although she felt lonely to start with, she says, “I 
felt lonelier in my marriage than I do now.” What is the hardest thing about 
her situation? “I don’t find anything hard right now. I’m OK.” And yet: “I 
wouldn’t say I’m yabadabadoo happy, and I don’t think I ever will be.” She 
thinks this is because that kind of happiness comes from sharing a life with 
someone.

As plan Bs go, there are far worse, says relationship psychologist Susan 
Quilliam <http://susanquilliam.com>. “I would argue that the best option is a 
happy partnership, but the next best option is happy singledom. I’ve known many 
friends and clients who are much happier now that they’re not in their 
relationship. Of course, there are single people who are unhappy without a 
companion, but from what I’ve seen, the unhappiest option is an unhappy 
marriage, because you don’t just have yourself to cope with.”

When I speak to Lucy Taylor, 59, she seems politely, quietly, yabadabadoo 
happy. After her divorce, she swore she would never marry again. She was 
traumatised by the breakdown of her marriage. Her then husband called her his 
soul mate, and she believed him. Then he came home from work one evening and 
said he had fallen in love with somebody else, and wanted to be with her. “The 
door opened, the grenade rolled in, then the door was closed.”

Her husband was a corporate high flyer, and Lucy worked part-time in IT while 
their son was young, before returning to full-time work as a facilities 
manager. She was 46 when they divorced. “It was shocking, devastating. When you 
meet somebody that you really care for, they give you a piece of their soul. 
And when they leave, they take that part back. You feel as if you’ve been 
amputated from their life.

“In some ways, I despise myself because it took me so long to get over him – 
years and years. It was a scary, lonely time. When you have loved deeply, it’s 
very difficult to trust people. That’s why I said I would never marry again. 
Because to intertwine your heartstrings and your finances with somebody else’s, 
well, the prospect of being hurt or abandoned again is in the background of 
your mind all the time.”

She met Joe at a dance class a couple of years after the divorce. Their first 
date was a lunch that lasted 12 hours, but she wanted to take things very, very 
slowly. Over a number of years, and with the blessing of her daughter, Joe 
moved in “one sock at a time”. They married two years ago, when Lucy was 57.

She still believes in marriage, and that you have to give it everything, even 
if it may fail. “Joe and I didn’t have a pre-nup – that was my choice, against 
my solicitor’s advice. I felt it’s not a great way to start a marriage, if 
you’re immediately saying I don’t trust you. When we made our vows, I 
absolutely thought, I want to be with this man, I will always be good to him 
and I won’t betray him. I loved hard and I lost, and I’m loving hard again. 
And, hopefully, that’s the way it will end, and we will die in each other’s 
arms. That’s what I would like.”

Related: How to have sex with the same person for the rest of your life 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/16/have-sex-same-person-rest-life-keep-exciting-bedroom-work>

The “happy marriage” is so ingrained in us as the only acceptable happy 
ending, from Shakespeare toWhen Harry Met Sally 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/when-harry-met-sally>, that many of us 
(myself included) must subconsciously absorb the idea that any other ending is 
a failure. When I was younger, I never thought I would get married. “It’s just 
a piece of paper,” I would say. I wanted my partner to wake up every morning 
and choose to stay with me because he wanted to, not because of some promise he 
had made decades earlier. But as the years have passed, and I’ve cried at the 
weddings of so many friends, and watched my parents grow old, I’ve come to feel 
differently. I see the value that these pieces of paper have in our lives – 
passports, birth certificates, job contracts; these documents mark out the 
minutiae and the momentous in our lives, and marriage is both of those. I want 
our names to be written next to each other in that register, for them to be 
buried deep in the council archives, gathering dust. But perhaps I need to be 
more open-minded.

Emily White, 72, cast a light on the assumptions I never knew I had about 
finding happiness in old age: it doesn’t have to mean going to bed with your 
husband every night. She was a widow when she met her second husband, but 11 
years into that marriage, she realised he had transformed into a “Jekyll and 
Hyde character”. She divorced him four years ago and, she says, “I’m much 
happier now. I’ve got a new partner, he’s 77, and I get ruined rotten – he 
takes me out for dinner every Saturday night. I keep getting told by my 
daughter that I have a better social life than she does. I’m inthe University 
of the Third Age <http://www.u3a.org.uk>, I’m in a history group. I go to keep 
fit and do all sorts of daft things. When you’re over 70, you can decide for 
yourself what you do. My partner and I each have our own houses, and we have a 
great time. I get a phone call every night, but we don’t get under each other’s 
skin.”

It’s sad. People who have been married for 60 years should be enjoying peace 
and comfort instead of emotional distress

It’s never too late to find an expression of love that works for you, and that 
may well not involve marriage.Sue Andrews 
<http://www.bpcollins.co.uk/people/profile/sue-andrews>, partner at the law 
firm BP Collins, has 35 years’ experience in family law and has represented 
many older clients, ranging in age up to their 90s: “It was lovely to be told 
by an elderly client that I had enabled them to enjoy the rest of the time they 
had left,” she says.

But there is also a darker side, especially at a time when loneliness among 
the elderly is such a compelling issue. Ruth Langford, community manager at
Wikivorce <http://www.wikivorce.com/divorce/>, a social network for people in 
the UK going through divorce, says this year she has spoken to more people 
divorcing in their 70s and 80s than ever before. “It’s quite sad. These are 
people who have been married for 60 years, who should be enjoying their 
remaining years in peace and comfort, instead of entering into a legal 
situation that is fraught with emotional distress and expense.” Langford says 
divorce for older people can be even more painful than it is for younger 
couples: “It can often be a very lonely experience, losing long-term friends 
and causing family members to fall out. Often the disputes are over things of 
sentimental rather than real value, such as photograph albums of their children 
and grandchildren.”

All the people I spoke to told me they married for life, all of them got 
divorced, and not one of them felt he or she was to blame. This is an alarming 
thing to hear when you are thinking about getting married yourself. No matter 
how fiercely you believe in your relationship, no matter how much you love your 
partner, you cannot see into the future, especially 80 years ahead; you cannot 
know for certain if boredom, unhappiness or personality changes will mean you 
are parted not by death but before. You have to take a punt. But I am comforted 
by Susan Quilliam, who tells me, “In some ways, longer life expectancy is a 
threat; in others, it’s a huge opportunity, because unless you’re very unlucky 
or closed and unreflective, your later life relationships can be better. They 
can be worse because of the Pandora’s box of baggage you bring with you. But 
they can also be informed by the wisdom you bring.”

Most of my interviewees felt no regrets about marrying their partners; they 
saw the value in the happy times they had spent together, the children they had 
raised. Jessica Graham felt she had failed because she had broken her vows, but 
she thinks a younger generation won’t feel that: “Younger people have the 
confidence to hold their hands up and say, it isn’t a failure, it just hasn’t 
worked.”

After speaking to so many people about why their marriage ended, I feel less 
afraid of commitment. The desire to get married remains a gut instinct. I think 
Fisher gets closest to explaining why: “I have studied the brain circuitry for 
romantic love and marriage, and these brain systems aren’t going to die. They 
evolved more than 4m years ago, and they’ll be with us, if our species survives 
on the planet, for another 4m. The drive to fall in love and form a pair bond, 
rear your children as a team and make it a socially sanctioned relationship 
through marriage is not going to go away.”

So what did I see at that photoshoot, when Shaun came out of makeup? My voice 
caught in my throat, in a rush of emotion I hadn’t expected. I saw the man I 
love, but a future version of him, softer around the edges. He looked kind and 
wise and handsome, and, if I squinted a little (OK, a lot), a bit likeGeorge 
Clooney <https://www.theguardian.com/film/georgeclooney>. I thought, I want to 
grow old with you. A week later, Shaun bought me a bunch of flowers. Inside the 
flowers was a photograph of us, and a postcard. On the postcard he had written 
a funny little poem, including the lines, “Since you make me, and I hope I make 
you, just as happy as Larry, how about we marry?” I felt terrified and 
overwhelmingly happy. Perhaps it was my age spots that made him forget about 
Euro 2016; we’ll never know. All we can do, like the generations before us, is 
take our chance.

• Some names have been changed.

How to stay together, for ever: relationship therapist Andrew G Marshall’s 
advice

Learn how to argue
We have this idea that we will find a soul partner who will agree with us on 
everything. This is a myth and often makes people feel that they are not 
allowed to disagree with their partner, which can be disastrous. The important 
phrase is, “I can ask, you can say no, and we can negotiate.” Argue about one 
thing at a time. Don’t attack your partner’s personality, and don’t bottle 
everything up, because one day it will all come pouring out. People sometimes 
have affairs because they haven’t had their needs met. But remember that you 
must articulate what those needs are.

Embrace change
Accept that, even after 35 years of marriage, your partner might change in 
ways you never expected. I think couples should go out every 10 years and have 
a first date again to meet the “new” person they’re married to. Ask your 
partner, “What are your hopes and dreams?” They may not be what you expect. 
Don’t let this make you anxious. Be open to finding out that your partner isn’t 
exactly as you had imagined.

Have separate interests
Spending periods of time apart – studying or travelling or having different 
hobbies – can bring energy back into the relationship. It’s important to have 
joint endeavours, but make time to be apart, too. If you stop your partner 
doing what they want, it makes your relationship vulnerable.

Make each other a priority
What often happens is that after retirement, or when children leave home, a 
couple realise that they have been on separate train tracks for years. It was 
just hidden by the business of life.Family 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/family> time and couple time are two 
totally different things. You might think that your partner will understand if 
you ignore them for 25 years and focus on your children. But if you feel bottom 
of the pecking order, it can get to you.

Flirt
We often tell people what we don’t like, but we’re bad at communicating the 
positives. Flirting with each other is fabulous. It shows you care. You need to 
learn how to touch each other, too. Make sure it doesn’t only happen when 
initiating sex. Make time to hug and kiss and stroke each other. It keeps you 
feeling connected.

Appreciate the magic
When talking about newlyweds, people often say, “It’s all downhill from here.” 
I disagree. Yes, falling in love is beautiful, but after more than 35 years 
together it can be just as magical as when you first met. At first it’s about 
the promise of a life together. Later on, it’s about the reality of the life 
you have made together. What could be more romantic than that?

• Andrew G Marshall <http://andrewgmarshall.com/> is author of I Love You But 
I’m Not In Love With You: Seven Steps To Saving Your Relationship 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/363846/>.

