
In January 2015, feminists memorably kicked off the new year with excellent 
responses to amagazine tweet 
<https://twitter.com/EverydaySexism/status/554623321791139841> asking: “What 
diet will you be on in 2015?” Replies included “I’m on the ‘resisting ongoing 
pressure from the media to be skinny’ diet”, “The ‘why the fuck would I be on a 
diet’ diet” and, my personal favourite, “Cake, wine and unabashed body 
positivity”.

To start 2016 in a similarly feminist fashion, why not consider adopting one 
or two feminist New Year’s resolutions? It’s true that no one person can create 
a feminist utopia overnight, but if we each took a few simple actions to 
challenge sexism in our own small sphere, together we could make a very big 
difference indeed. Here are a few ideas to get you started.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fa9t%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fa9t%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb6f190ce6db97ad16fb73ff9b2e37bfabccf524a%2F12_56_1550_2088%2F1550.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20are%20your%20feminist%20resolutions%20for%202016%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fa9t%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What+are+your+feminist+resolutions+for+2016%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fa9t%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb6f190ce6db97ad16fb73ff9b2e37bfabccf524a%2F12_56_1550_2088%2F1550.jpg>
 Persephone Books in London. Photograph: Ming Tang-Evans/Rex/Shutterstock 
Celebrate female writers

2014 was declared the “Year of reading women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jan/22/year-of-reading-women-2014-bias-male-writers>
” in a conscious effort to offset a bias that sees far more books by male than 
female authors reviewed in major literary publications. But combatting 
generations of inequality in the literary canon is an ongoing struggle, so try 
doing your own bookshelf audit this year and take inspiration from the
#readwomen hashtag <https://twitter.com/search?src=typd&q=%23readwomen>, the 
@womenwriters <https://twitter.com/WomenWriters> Twitter account and pioneering 
female-focused publisherPersephone <http://www.persephonebooks.co.uk/>. 

… and artists

Why limit yourself to literature? There’s plenty of imbalance to be offset 
elsewhere, too. When the East London Fawcett Group audited 134 commercial 
London galleries in 2013, they found thatonly 31% of the represented artists 
were women 
<http://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2013/may/24/london-art-audit-female-artists-represented>
. So take special notice of exhibitions such as the Scottish National Gallery 
of Modern Art’sModern Scottish Women 
<https://www.nationalgalleries.org/whatson/on-now-coming-soon/modern-scottish-women/>
, which will highlight the work of Scottish female painters and sculptors until 
June 2016. Or see the work of feminist artist Margaret Harrison in the 
exhibitionAccumulations 
<http://www.visitmima.com/whats-on/single/margaret-harrison/> at Middlesbrough 
Institute of Modern Art until 24 January. For further inspiration, check out the
Society of Women Artists <http://www.society-women-artists.org.uk/index.php> 
and theAssociation of Women Art Dealers <http://womenartdealers.org/>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fa9t%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fa9t%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6061499c4fd8f3a67c7cf495a32792e62b9f838%2F0_0_4385_3403%2F4385.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20are%20your%20feminist%20resolutions%20for%202016%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fa9t%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What+are+your+feminist+resolutions+for+2016%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fa9t%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6061499c4fd8f3a67c7cf495a32792e62b9f838%2F0_0_4385_3403%2F4385.jpg>
 The Margaret Harrison: Accumulations exhibition is at the Middlesbrough 
Institute of Modern Art until 24 January 2016. Photograph: Margaret Harrison 


Volunteer or donate to your local Refuge or Rape Crisis centre

In 2008, it was reported that one donkey sanctuary received more public 
donations than three national domestic abuse services combined 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2008/apr/23/charitablegiving.childprotection?gusrc=rss&feed=networkfront>
. Now, I have nothing against donkeys, but maybe we could redress the balance a 
little by supporting our austerity-stricken rape and domestic violence 
charities, too? This applies especially to black and minority women’s 
specialist services, which have beenparticularly hard hit by recent cuts 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/womens-blog/2015/nov/30/womens-support-services-save-lives-so-why-is-the-government-cutting-their-funding>
.




Take a leaf out of Bradley Cooper’s book – share your salary details with 
co-workers

After it was revealed that Jennifer Lawrence was paid less than her male 
colleagues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/12/sony-email-hack-jennifer-lawrence-paid-less-american-hustle>
 in the filmAmerican Hustle <https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-hustle>, 
her regular on-screen partner Bradley Cooper declared his intention to start 
sharing salary information with female co-stars during the negotiating process 
to help beat the gender pay gap. But even outside of Hollywood, this kind of 
conversation among colleagues is a practical way to start exposing wage 
disparity and a simple way to arm women with the information they need to ask 
for a raise.



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fa9t%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fa9t%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F119674ff0a5188e7c19b73499ef4e0553a25e7da%2F0_0_3000_1750%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20are%20your%20feminist%20resolutions%20for%202016%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fa9t%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What+are+your+feminist+resolutions+for+2016%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fa9t%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F119674ff0a5188e7c19b73499ef4e0553a25e7da%2F0_0_3000_1750%2F3000.jpg>
 Amy Adams, Bradley Cooper, Jeremy Renner, Christian Bale and Jennifer Lawrence 
in American Hustle. Photograph: Francois Duhamel/AP 
Watch films that pass the Bechdel test

The test <http://bechdeltest.com/>, created by American cartoonist Alison 
Bechdel, simply requires a film to have two named female characters, who have a 
conversation together that isn’t about a man – yet a staggering number of 
movies fail to pass it. Only watching Bechdel-approved films in 2016 might be 
difficult in practice, especially without detailed prior knowledge of each 
film, but at least try to up your Bechdel count by looking out for movies with 
diverse casts. You can also raise your women-in-film quotient by keeping up 
with theLondon Feminist Film Festival <https://twitter.com/LdnFemFilmFest>. 

Get better at talking to young people 

Make it your resolution to speak to children in a way that doesn’t reinforce 
gender stereotypes. For example, try to find other ways to compliment girls, 
without automatically focusing on their appearance. Use your role as an auntie, 
uncle, godparent or grandparent as an opportunity to source gender-neutral 
gifts. Don’t be afraid to give a boy a doll or a girl a mechanics set; theLet 
Toys Be Toys <http://www.lettoysbetoys.org.uk/recommended-retailers/> campaign 
has a list of recommended retailers.

Something else to think about for the new year is talking to young people 
about the importance of consent. Untilcampaigns for consent to be included on 
the National Curriculum <http://campaign4consent.co.uk/> are successful, the 
only way to guarantee young people grow up with an awareness of their sexual 
rights and responsibilities is to talk to them openly about what a healthy 
relationship looks like. We need to have this conversation with children of all 
genders, and it should focus on teaching all parties to gain enthusiastic 
consent, not telling girls it’s their job to say “no”.





Whether you decide to attempt one or more of the above, or simply resolve to 
challenge sexism in the workplace or call out street harassment, you can be 
part of the fight against gender inequality. This year, instead of throwing 
your hands up in despair at the scale of the problem, roll up your sleeves and 
get stuck in.
