
“‘I worry about being caught out, drying up or saying something stupid.” Julia 
Barry, former deputy editor of BBC Breakfast, is reading out answers to a 
questionnaire she sends to those about to embark on her media training course 
for female academics. “That’s from an incredibly senior scientist and a dame of 
the British empire.

“Here’s another,” she continues, “from a professor: ‘I’m concerned about 
looking incompetent and being misquoted.’”

Barry, who founded her company, MediaWoman <http://www.mediawoman.co.uk/>, to 
help female experts develop the skills they need to engage with journalists , 
says these concerns are typical of what she hears from “some of the cleverest 
women in Britain”.

Expertise and knowledge are never the problem. Confidence is. So Barry focuses 
on building a sense of security in her clients’ ability to get their points 
across.

Interview techniques

Today, she’s training a group of female academics who are here thanks to the 
Academy of Medical Science’sSustain project 
<http://www.acmedsci.ac.uk/more/news/supporting-womens-careers-in-science-sustain/?project=31708>
, which supports and encourages women at the midway stage of their careers. A 
scarlet sofa – reminiscent of breakfast telly – is set up in front of dark 
studio drapes. Each researcher takes her turn to practise being interviewed by 
broadcaster Charlotte Hume.

News gathering takes place in a variety of ways, Hume explains to the 
trainees. Sometimes a presenter will be sent out to ask questions with a camera 
or radio microphone; but at others, the interviewee is left to converse 
animatedly with the round black lens of a camera in a remote studio, while the 
presenter fires questions through an earpiece.

“What if somebody’s rude or aggressive?” asks one participant. 

“Don’t be defensive or aggressive back, and don’t repeat negative language in 
answering the question,” advises Barry. “Think about what lies behind the 
negative question and answer that.”

Related: Four steps to killing off sexism in science 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/sep/08/four-steps-to-killing-off-sexism-in-science>

The group is shown a clip of a disastrous interview with a chief executive who 
is under attack for not answering a question. “Always address the question, 
don’t ignore it,” Barry says. The group nods: it’s easy to see how simply 
repeating a corporate line can alienate both presenter and audience.

Why women?

Getting across why your work matters is particularly important for mid-career 
female academics, says Imperial College London’s Dr Victoria Salem, because 
they are trying to emerge from the show of their more senior – and often male – 
research leads.

Women in their mid-30s, who are often mothers too, are sometimes overlooked 
for high-profile media opportunities by well-meaning colleagues trying not to 
pile on extra pressure. But if a female academic isn’t proactive in building 
her profile, she ends up “being considered a very safe pair of hands and an 
excellent scientist, but not necessarily a leader”.

High stakes 

The scientists here today say the stakes are very high when it comes to media 
engagement: they can’t afford an on-air bungle. Dr Eva Hoffman, from the 
University of Sussex, does research into chromosomes in embryos and eggs. It’s 
an area of science in which there is enormous public interest, she explains, 
but it is also highly emotive, and particularly sensitive for women and 
families who are living with the effects.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fd8c%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fd8c%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b13a634a200a1c8d9347f734e97b86cb2c99ac1%2F0_0_5401_3240%2F5401.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Making%20media%20stars%20of%20women%20academics&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fd8c%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Making+media+stars+of+women+academics&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fd8c%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b13a634a200a1c8d9347f734e97b86cb2c99ac1%2F0_0_5401_3240%2F5401.jpg>
 Discussions of chromosomes and DNA can become highly charged. Photograph: Alamy
Hoffman is keen to communicate the work she does, but says: “If I messed up, I 
would worry about how the public would perceive the science that we do. I feel 
a big sense of responsibility.”

If an interview were to be set up in an adversarial fashion, “there’s a risk 
that, in the tension of that environment, I wouldn’t be able to fairly 
represent a side of the argument,” she explains.

Women don’t get as much leeway to fail as men do, particularly in public, says 
another mid-career academic who asks not to be named. “I think we are judged 
more harshly. If a male colleague doesn’t do very well on air, it’s made a bit 
of a joke of afterwards, but if a woman does the same, the eyes on us are more 
judgmental. We might not be put up for things afterwards.”

A professor sitting next to her agrees. “You have to work very hard at being 
better in a male-dominated environment. So with live TV and radio, you think 
why would you put yourself forward for something that’s so stressful and so 
risky?”



Expert women still aren’t asked to appear on air as often as men; research 
conducted by professor Lis Howell of City University in 2013-14 found thatmale 
experts outnumbered female ones on flagship news programmes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/apr/03/male-experts-female-tv-radio-research>
 by an average of four to one. Some editors have made efforts to redress the 
balance – but progress has hardly been rapid. Howell’smost recent findings show 
a marginal 
<http://womeninjournalism.co.uk/city-university-london-research-reveals-success-of-campaign-to-increase-proportion-of-women-in-news/>
 average improvement: men now outnumber women by an average of just over three 
to one.

Related: Academics: leave your ivory towers and pitch your work to the media 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/sep/23/academics-leave-your-ivory-towers-and-pitch-your-work-to-the-media>

Step up

While disappointed at the slow pace of improvement, Barry says that women 
themselves need to step up. She recalls that, when she edited news programmes, 
“one of the worst things is when you have someone booked to appear, who would 
then get cold feet and pull out. You want someone who’ll say ‘yes’ and turn up 
and deliver.”

At the Academy of Medical Sciences, communications director Nick Hillier says 
female fellows and award-holders are being actively encouraged to sign up to the
Science Media Centre’s database of experts 
<http://www.sciencemediacentre.org/working-with-us/for-journalists/>. By the 
end of this year, he expects that 100 will have been added to their list, and 
56 will have been put through media training.

“Its a slow burner, but we are starting to see an impact,” Hillier says. Some 
have appeared on the Today programme, 5 Live, Woman’s Hour and Inside Science 
as well as doing print and web interviews with news media.

Barry acknowledges that engaging with the media takes a considerable time 
commitment. She says women tend to think: “If men want to grandstand and show 
off what they know on the Today programme, I’ll just get on with what’s 
important and do my job.”

But women should step into the limelight. “If you withdraw from the debate,” 
she points out, “you marginalise yourself in the longer term.”

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
