
Sir Jeremy Heywood has said government ministers campaigning for Brexit will 
be given access to documents relating to theEU referendum 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>, in a move that MPs have 
described as a climbdown.

The cabinet secretary insisted to MPs that his guidance to civil servants was 
not meant to deny their ministers “factual material” but only “briefing and 
speech material” supporting the leave campaign.

“The civil service is not going to be supporting ministers who are against the 
government’s position to make that case,” he told the Commons public 
administration and constitutional affairs select committee.

But he added: “If there is factual material that is generally available in the 
department – I would have discuss that with the prime minister – but I am 
pretty sure he would be comfortable about that being shared.

Related: EU referendum: MPs question Heywood over papers ban for Brexit 
ministers - Politics live 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/mar/01/eu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live>

“We are not going to deny ministers information they need to run their 
departments,” he said.

Heywood’s guidance to civil servants triggered fury on Conservative 
backbenches, with MPs seeing it as an attempt by the government to gag 
ministers who disagree with them on the issue of the EU. The document said it 
would not be “appropriate or permissible” to provide briefing or speech 
material to ministers opposing the government’s position, adding that “official 
departmental papers” were included in that.

Bernard Jenkin, chair of the public administration committee and one of the 
MPs who protested at the move, said he felt “reassured” by Heywood’s 
explanation.

“It was made clear to us that whatever understandings existed before our 
meeting, it is now not the intention that any facts, information or papers 
relating to the referendum should be withheld from dissenting ministers,” he 
said.


“We do think that this contradicts the cabinet secretary’s letter ... and we 
suggested it should be withdrawn and re-issued, but nevertheless we welcome 
this clarification.”

The session also turned to the royal family – with accusations that Heywood 
had tried to “politicise” the Queen andPrince William 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/prince-william> by urging interventions in the 
Scottish and European referendums.

The Labour <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> MP Paul Flynn asked 
about suggestions that the government had turned to the monarch for help in the 
run-up to the Scottish vote. He suggested that Heywood was involved when the 
Queen remarked to well-wishers outside a church in Balmoral: “I hope people 
will think very carefully about the future.”

“I am accusing you of ... politicising the royal family,” said Flynn. The 
cabinet secretary said he would “never dream” of trying to politicise the Queen.

The MP then cited comments by the prince this month, which appeared to signal 
support for Britain remaining in the EU, as further evidence of the government 
“collaborating” with the royal family.

In campaigners seized on a speech by the prince in which he said Britain’s 
ability to work with other nations was the “bedrock of our security and 
prosperity”.

Heywood insisted that there had not been any attempt to involve the royal 
family in the referendum campaign.

Related: Can Britain's bureaucracy handle a Brexit? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/mar/01/britain-bureaucracy-brexit-whitehall-eu>

It came as the government published another report on the risks of Brexit, 
which was quickly branded a “third dodgy dossier” by leave campaigners.


The report – which will be the basis of a speech by the oreign secretary, 
Philip Hammond <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/philip-hammond> – claimed 
that all the alternative models were too risky to consider. It highlighted the 
fact that Norway and Switzerland still had free movement of people though they 
were outside the EU.


It added that the Canadian model – often cited by out campaigners – took a 
long time to agree and provided “only partial access to the EU single market”. 
Hammond said it was “hard-headed analysis”, which concluded that all the 
alternatives would leave Britain “weaker”.

Pro-Brexit Iain Duncan Smith 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/iain-duncan-smith>, the secretary of state 
for work and pensions, said: “It’s increasingly clear that the real uncertainty 
is the future of the EU project. As each day passes we see yet another example 
– from the utter failure to cope with the migrant crisis to the increasing 
disaster of the euro.

“That’s why we need to take back control and vote [to] leave. This dodgy 
dossier won’t fool anyone, and is proof that [the] remain [camp] are in denial 
about the risks of remaining in a crisis-ridden EU.”
