
Nepal is grappling with the aftermath of a second earthquake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/12/nepal-hit-by-second-huge-earthquake>
, just weeks after the 7.8-magnitude quake that killed 8,000 people and 
destroyed homes and livelihoods. As aid was rushed to the country after the 
first quake, Haitian aid worker Prospery Raymond warned organisationsnot to 
repeat the mistakes 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/06/earthquake-building-a-new-nepal-why-the-world-must-heed-the-lessons-of-haiti>
 made in response to the 2010 Haiti earthquake. Raymond called for 
acknowledgment of local NGOs, transparency of aid spending and a greater focus 
on the recovery process beyond the initial search and rescue efforts.

Meanwhile, risk-management specialist Katie Peters emphasised the importance 
for Nepal toinvest in “building back better” 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/29/nepal-earthquake-disaster-response-risk-management>
 or risk more devastation in the future. You can also see some of themain 
appeals 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/27/nepal-earthquake-how-you-can-help-donate-aid>
 that have opened for Nepal quake survivors.

Elsewhere on the site

 * ‘I just want to go to school’: how Afghan law continues to fail child brides
 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/11/afghanistan-child-brides-want-to-go-to-school>
 * Needs must as Sierra Leone gets back to business after protracted Ebola 
crisis 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/08/sierra-leone-ebola-crisis-economy-business-farmers>
 * Indigenous Amazonians fear eviction from Lima, their home for three decades 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/04/indigenous-amazonians-fear-eviction-from-lima-their-home-for-three-decades>
 * Thailand human trafficking death toll far greater than feared, claims 
rights group 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/06/thailand-human-trafficking-mass-grave-burma-rohingya-people>
 * Central African Republic facing chronic healthcare crisis as scars of 
conflict abide 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/03/central-african-republic-chronic-healthcare-crisis-malaria-msf>
 * Coffee catastrophe beckons as climate change threatens arabica plant 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/01/coffee-catastrophe-beckons-as-climate-change-threatens-arabica-plant>
 * Peace activists at The Hague decry $1.8tn global military spend in 2014  
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/29/peace-activists-the-hague-18tn-global-military-spend-in-2014>
Opinion

While legislative changes in Brazil have paved the way for ending violence 
against women, more needs to be done on the community level to change social 
norms,argues Melanie Hargreaves 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/12/brazil-tough-laws-violence-against-women-stymied-by-social-norms>
 from Christian Aid. Hargreaves says that funding for women’s rights 
organisations is vital in challenging the view that violence against women is 
normal. Meanwhile, Meena Bhandari proclaims the power of radio in South Sudan 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/08/south-sudan-nile-radio-project-calming-community-tensions>
, where a local radio project is helping to calm community tensions. Bhandari 
says Nile FM plays a critical role in providing people with the fair and 
accurate information they need.

Multimedia

Pictures: South Sudan: how conflict shapes life in local communities 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2015/may/11/south-sudan-conflict-communities-exhibition-saferworld>

Pictures: Bringing phone reception to a remote mountain town in the Democratic 
Republic of the Congo 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2015/may/07/phone-reception-numbi-south-kivu-democratic-republic-of-the-congo-vodacom>

Podcast: Water and sanitation in health centres in Mali 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/audio/2015/apr/28/water-and-sanitation-in-health-centres-in-mali>

Video: Sierra Leone: ‘Schools are opening, but I can’t afford food or to pay 
the children’s school fees’ 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2015/apr/28/sierra-leone-education-ebola-schools-video>

Video: Cutting risk of mother-to-baby transmission of HIV 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2015/may/10/hiv-cutting-risk-transmission-mother-baby-antiretroviral-drugs>

Take part

As part of our coverage of the state of maternal health, we’re collecting 
stories of pregnancy and childbirth around the world 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/07/maternal-healthcare-childbirth-your-stories>
. Did you or someone close to you give birth with health workers present? How 
far did you have to travel to get assistance? Did you receive pre- and 
post-natal care? What birth practices are specific to where you live? Tell us 
via theform in this article 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/07/maternal-healthcare-childbirth-your-stories>
, orupload your story and photos to GuardianWitness 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/554a0a77e4b05aa7d42b50d8#contribute>
, and your stories will help to complement our coverage.

What you said: top reader comment


On the piece Pakistan’s burqa-clad cartoon superhero makes foray into India 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/30/pakistan-burka-avenger-cartoon-superhero-india-women>
, Gobinda Baruah wrote:

It is good to see and feel the thaw between both the countries through films, 
cartoons and other forms of arts and sports at a time when we face each other 
as enemies on the borders. Hope we could live like two separated brothers 
living in each one’s house!

Highlight from the blogosphere

Overseas Development Institute: As countries get richer, junk food gets 
cheaper – and obesity rises 
<http://www.odi.org/opinion/9528-infographics-countries-richer-junk-food-cheaper-healthy-diet>

And finally …

Poverty matters will return in two weeks with another roundup of the latest 
news and comment. In the meantime, keep up to date on theGlobal Development 
website <http://www.theguardian.com/global-development>. Follow @gdndevelopment 
<https://twitter.com/gdndevelopment> and the team – @swajones 
<https://twitter.com/swajones>, @LizFordGuardian 
<https://twitter.com/lizfordguardian>, @MarkC_Anderson 
<https://twitter.com/MarkC_Anderson> and @CarlaOkai 
<https://twitter.com/CarlaOkai> – on Twitter, and join Guardian Global 
Development on Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardianglobaldevelopment>.
