
Many things happen in the first week of December: Christmas songs get played 
incessantly in supermarkets and restaurants; you have to turn the thermostat up 
to 23 degrees; and for many students, mock exams start. It may be a stretch to 
get students excited about these, but here are five ways they can help students 
make sure they’re on the path to exam success:

Motivating students to start revision early 

Research suggests that 75% of students consider themselves to be 
procrastinators (pdf) 
<http://studiemetro.au.dk/fileadmin/www.studiemetro.au.dk/Procrastination_2.pdf>
, with 50% doing so regularly and to a level that is considered a problem. The 
author of one of the biggest studies on procrastination, researcher Piers 
Steel, states that “the further away an event is, the less impact it has on 
people’s decisions.”

Related: How to teach … coping with exam stress  
<http://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/teacher-blog/2014/may/05/how-to-teach-exam-stress-lesson-ideas-resources>

In essence, summer exams feel like a lifetime away for teenagers so some will 
only really start working hard for them after Easter. By having mock exams 
halfway through the year, students have the opportunity to focus their 
attention and effort earlier.

Practising effective revision strategies 

Some of the most commonly used techniques to aid revision are actually the 
least effective, including highlighting or re-reading key passages. One reason 
for their ineffectiveness is they do not force you to think deeply and 
critically about the topic, so they often end up being done on auto-pilot.

Mock exams let students practise revision strategies that are proven to be 
more helpful and discover what works best for them. There are severalmemory 
strategies that have been found to be effective 
<http://www.innerdrive.co.uk/Release_Your_Inner_Drive/maximise-memory/>. In one 
of the mostcomprehensive reviews on memory 
<http://www.indiana.edu/~pcl/rgoldsto/courses/dunloskyimprovinglearning.pdf>, 
researchers found that the following strategies are useful: spacing out 
revision sessions (so that there is enough time to forget and then re-learn); 
teaching the material to someone else (this forces you to think about the 
material in a clear and structured way); and switching between topics every now 
and then (which helps you build on previous revision sessions).

Another technique is what psychologists call “elaborative interrogation”. This 
is essentially asking yourself “why”. In a fascinating study on memory,students 
were divided into three groups and asked to remember sentences such as “the 
hungry man got in his car” 
<https://www.wku.edu/senate/documents/improving_student_learning_dunlosky_2013.pdf>
 (pdf). The first group just read the sentence. The second group was given an 
explanation (ie because he wanted to go to a restaurant), and the third group 
was asked to consider why he might have got in his car. The results? Students 
who were prompted to ask “why” remembered 72% of the sentences when tested 
later, compared to only 37% in the other two groups.


Improving knowledge

Testing yourself is an effective way to improve your knowledge and ability to 
recall information. In astudy on mock exams (pdf) 
<http://learninglab.psych.purdue.edu/downloads/2006_Roediger_Karpicke_PsychSci.pdf>
, researchers found that students who did a practice test after a period of 
revision did better on the final exam than those students who didn’t do the 
mock exam and had just spent the whole time revising.

Instead of seeing an exam as a potentially threatening event or as some sort 
of judgement on their ability, it would be great if we could help students to 
see their mock exams as a handy way of improving their knowledge and memory.

Also, if students have a particularly bad mock exam, better to have the shock 
in the mock, than the final exam. It can act as a call to action that perhaps 
they need to do more work, change revision strategies and develop skills needed 
to perform under pressure.

Practising under exam conditions

Pressure can do funny things to students. For some, it can lead to nerves, 
anxiety, frustration and sloppy mistakes, culminating in a poor performance. 
For others, pressure allows them to concentrate more, work harder and perform 
better. It takes time and practice to perform well under pressure. If the final 
summer exams are the first time students experience these conditions, it is 
lottery as to how they react.

Mock exams are a great opportunity for students to figure out and practise 
what works best for them. Techniques tomanage exam nerves could include 
actively slowing down, channelling any nerves into helpful behaviour or 
listening to some relaxing music beforehand 
<http://www.innerdrive.co.uk/Release_Your_Inner_Drive/managing-exam-nerves/>.

Identifying topics that need attention

Doing mocks early enough in the year gives you time before the real thing to 
target areas that need improvement. Mock exam results can identify how best to 
spend the coming months for students.

Once these areas are identified, it is then a case of putting in the hours. It 
is not enough to think about what you need to do better, it is the action and 
the doing that really makes a difference.

Being comfortable and confident enough to ask someone else for help, be it a 
teacher, parent or carer, is abig part of having a growth mindset 
<http://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/nov/15/four-questions-encourage-growth-mindset-students>
. Mock exams can be used as a way of getting students to feel comfortable 
receiving feedback, which paves the way for further improvement and learning.

Related: How to teach … revision 
<http://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/apr/13/how-to-teach-exam-revision>

In summary

Mock exams, if framed right, can be incredibly beneficial for students. 
Helping them to see that is part of the challenge. They can help students to 
start revising early, to practise effective revision strategies, to improve 
their knowledge, to familiarise themselves with pressure, and act as a guide 
moving forward.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<http://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx?CMP=dis_42> for lesson 
resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.



