
In a nutshell
Three limestone caves, slap bang in the middle of the Brecon Beacons, dating 
back 350 million-odd years. Slimy rocks, subterranean waterfalls and more 
stalactites than you can throw a stick at (be advised: don’t). It’s all 
well-lit and spacious, so uncomfortable mining helmets aren’t needed, nor is 
there any squeezing through potholes. Outside, the attraction is 
dinosaur-themed, with life-size models of T rex and co dotted about the place – 
creating a sort of 1970s-style Welsh Jurassic Park. Afree app with maps 
<http://www.showcaves.co.uk/app.html> and “treasure hunt” is available but 
download it beforehand because the phone signal is stone age. There’s also a 
farm and play barn, with crazy golf coming soon.

Related: Wales’ perfect new wave: Snowdonia’s inland surfing lake 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/aug/01/surfsnowdonia-surfing-lake-wales-snowdonia>

Fun fact
Stalagmites grow one cubic millimetre a decade. One cave has a 2m by 40cm 
pillar. Do the maths.

Best thing(s) about it 
The audio tour in Dan-yr-Ogof cave – it’s priceless. Tommy and Jeff, the local 
farmers who “discovered” the caves in 1912, chat as though they’re down the 
pub. As the name suggests, the Cathedral Cave boasts an awe-inspiring vaulted 
ceiling and crystal-clear river for an aisle. It’s open for weddings, too, for 
those up for a big family day out.

What about lunch?
Fairly standard stuff at the on-site cafe, so a picnic is the best option. 
Otherwise, there’s thePen-y-Cae Inn <http://penycaeinn.com/> about a mile away 
that does no-nonsense pub grub.
 Listen up … for an audio tour in the Dan-yr-Ogof cave. Photograph: Alamy 
Related: World's largest underground zipline course opens in Wales 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/may/20/worlds-largest-underground-zipline-course-opens-in-wales>

Exit through the gift shop?
Unavoidable, so steel yourself for requests for shiny pebbles and toy 
dinosaurs.

Getting there
In the middle of hilly nowhere (between Brecon and Swansea) so a car is the 
only option. Parking is free.

Value for money?
£13.75 adults, £9.50 kids (3-16 year-olds) – but after three hours you’ll have 
done everything.

Opening times
10am (last entry at 3pm), seven days a week from April to October, 
showcaves.co.uk <http://www.showcaves.co.uk/>.

Verdict: 6/10
