
When I talk about my PhD 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/phd>, I usually end with 
the proviso: “But I’m not really a bird person.” Most people look confused at 
this point, as I’ve just described my research aim of understanding the decline 
of one Britain’s rarest breeding birds.

So if I’m not a bird person, what am I? In the years before my PhD I would 
have described myself as a freshwater entomologist, a bug person to my friends. 
My first roles in research involved looking at what my colleagues termed “bird 
food” and I insisted on calling “insect communities” (I was a bug person in a 
bird person’s world).

Related: My PhD takes me into a world of space molecules and alien fart jokes 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jan/04/my-phd-takes-me-into-a-world-of-space-molecules-and-alien-fart-jokes>

Knowing what a bird is eating can be key to understanding species decline. 
There are two main ways of doing this: by looking at what’s available to go 
into a bird’s beak, and looking at what’s coming out of the other end. My PhD 
does the latter, but by applying a non-bird technique to a bird-related problem.

The bird in question is the common scoter 
<https://www.rspb.org.uk/discoverandenjoynature/discoverandlearn/birdguide/name/c/commonscoter/>
, which, despite the name, is in serious trouble in the UK. It’s had more than 
a 50% decline in population over the past 20 years, and less than 50 pairs are 
thought to remain today. To compound its misfortune, the species is a rather 
unexciting looking black duck, which breeds on remote lochs in Scotland. But 
that’s something I love about my PhD; I get to draw people’s attention away 
from pandas and eagles to consider the plight of unexciting black ducks.

So if I’m not a bird person and I’m no longer just a bug person, how am I 
going to solve the mystery of the common scoter’s decline? I’m going to use 
mud. More precisely, I’m going to use mud from lakes in Scotland. It’s a 
technique known as palaeolimnology and it involves taking cylindrical cores of 
sediment from the bottom of lakes. These cores allow us to reconstruct a lake’s 
ecological history by examining plant and animal remains laid down with the mud.

Each core is finely sliced and represents a window of deposition which can be 
dated using radio-isotopic techniques. Using this sediment archive, we can 
identify species that were present in the lake at any period and infer details 
about the environmental conditions. We are essentially using mud to look back 
in time.

 This means we can answer questions that modern ecological studies struggle to 
address. We can look at what has changed for common scoter breeding in Scotland 
over the past hundred years and work out how these changes could have affected 
population numbers. Hopefully we will be able to come up with solutions.

Related: My PhD busts the old stereotypes about 'selfish, smug' only children 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jan/18/my-phd-busts-the-old-stereotypes-about-selfish-smug-only-children>

That’s the thing I love most about my PhD: being able to apply a non-bird 
person’s approach to solve a bird problem. Wildlife conservation can be 
surprisingly factional, with different groups of specialists rarely consulting 
one another. Luckily for me, my four-person supervisory team has expertise in 
freshwater ecology, entomology, ornithology and palaeolimnology.

As well as having enough people to field our own five-a-side football team, we 
bring a broad range of views to the table. This cross-disciplinary approach has 
been invaluable over the past two-and-a-half years and my supervisors have been 
nothing short of excellent, supporting me with their expertise and continuing 
to provide alternate viewpoints to the scoter problem.

I’m not sure where life will take me after my PhD. Perhaps I will end up as a 
bird person after all; I am developing a fondness for those unexciting black 
ducks. And hopefully I’ll be visiting the very common common scoter in Scotland 
when I’m an old woman.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
