
It has already prompted a national debate about domestic abuse and a huge 
fundraising campaign, but now the story of Helen Titchener’s treatment in Radio 
4 drama The Archers has led the justice secretary,Michael Gove 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove>, to push for greater prison 
reform.

In recent episodes, the pregnant Helen has been refused bail for stabbing her 
abusive husband and agrees to move to a dedicated mother and baby unit (MBU) in 
a prison miles away from her home and young child.

Gove told the Radio Times <http://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-times> that 
the Radio 4 show and its “gripping” storyline was “required listening in our 
house”.

Related: Playing Helen in the Archers, I hope to show domestic abuse can 
happen to anyone | Louiza Patikas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/01/helen-archers-domestic-abuse-husband-louisa-patikas>

“As well as being superb drama, it has exemplified one of the virtues of 
public service broadcasting,” he said. “Helen’s story has brought welcome 
attention to the real problems many women face from coercive and controlling 
men. Now Helen’s plight has shone a light on the position of women in our 
prisons and reinforces the case for reform.”

In February, the prime minister, David Cameron, called for a rethink 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-35515003> of the way the prison system treats 
pregnant women and mothers with babies. Ministry of Justice figures suggest 100 
babies spent time living with their mothers in prisons in 2015.

The Archers’ storyline, which first introduced Helen’s partner Rob as a 
charming man two years ago before slowly revealing his violent and coercive 
nature, has already led to acampaign to support “real-life Helens” raising more 
than £130,000 <https://www.justgiving.com/fundraising/helentitchener>.

Following the controversial episode in which Helen was provoked into stabbing 
Rob, listeners have learned that she faces either six years for wounding with 
intent or 12 for attempted murder, as well as the certainty of giving birth 
while in custody.

According to new figures, audiences requested 3,559,940 downloads of The 
Archers <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-archers> via BBC iPlayer 
Radio in March 2016, a 42% increase from the previous year.

In February, Gove said: “We need radically to reform how we treat women 
offenders. At the moment, too many women are in jail. A prison sentence not 
only punishes them, but also makes life much tougher for their children.”

With only 64 MBU places in England and Wales and fewer prisons for women than 
men, women are often held further from their homes than men, even though they 
tend to serve shorter sentences on average.

The Archers’ editor, Sean O’Connor, who will shortly leave the Radio 4 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/radio4> hit to take over at the BBC1 soap 
EastEnders, made a direct comparison between the two very different shows. “In 
the past, it’s been soaps like EastEnders who have covered women in prison. We 
aimed to show how shocking it is when you are hit by the full force of the law. 
And we wanted to represent the greater injustice women experience in the prison 
system.”

The BBC director general, Tony Hall,  
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/04/05/former-archers-editor-vanessa-whitburn-defends-stabbing-plot/>
has already praised the storyline for the show achieving its highest 
appreciation ratings in the show’s 65-year history. “The much talked-about 
Archers storyline has brought about unprecedented public focus on domestic 
violence,” he said. “It’s important that our programmes can tackle difficult 
issues – and the public seem to agree.”


The programme has worked closely with domestic violence charities such as 
Women’s Aid and Refuge to develop the story.

Sandra Horley, chief executive of Refuge, said: “Now in custody, Helen is more 
isolated than ever ... Like many abused women, Helen is struggling to resist 
Rob’s narrative: that everything is her fault and that she is a bad mother. I 
hope that, as the storyline continues, Helen receives the empathy she deserves.”

Following Sunday night’s episode, Refuge tweeted its support.

Women’s Aid has previously reported a 20% increase in calls to the National 
Domestic Violence Helpline in the year to February. Polly Neate, chief 
executive, said she thought this was “in part down to the ‘Archers’ effect’.”

In speaking to the Radio <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> Times, 
Gove would not say whether Titchener should be freed. “Judicial independence is 
a precious thing. It’s for the court hearing each case to determine the 
outcome,” said a spokesman.
