
Thornbridge Chiron American Pale Ale (£2.45, 50cl, waitrose.com 
<http://www.waitrose.com/home/inspiration/about_waitrose/about_our_food/drink/beer.html>
)
Based in the Peak District National Park, but drawing inspiration from the 
full-on flavours of the US craft brewing scene, Thornbridge’s pale ale has an 
invigorating slap of redcurrant-like fruitiness to go with its 
toffee-and-Twiglet maltiness and a clean, tangy finish.

Brewdog Punk IPA
(£1.75, 30cl, sainsburys.co.uk 
<http://www.sainsburys.co.uk/shop/gb/groceries/ale-stout/punk-ipa---modern-classic-pale-ale-300ml>
)
Successful as it has been, Aberdeenshire brewery Brewdog’s in-yer-face 
marketing is sometimes in danger of obscuring just how good its beers are. And 
the sheer intensity of tropical fruit, creamy richness and pithy citrus 
bitterness of Punk IPA speaks for itself.

Goose Island IPA
(from £1.75, 35.5cl, tesco.com 
<http://www.tesco.com/groceries/product/details/?id=268769618>, sainsburys.co.uk
 
<http://www.sainsburys.co.uk/shop/gb/groceries/ale-stout/goose-island-ipa-355ml>
)
Goose Island may have lost a few friends since it sold up to Budweiser’s 
owners, Anheuser Busch, in 2011, but this Chicago-brewed beer I’ve loved for 
years doesn’t seem to have suffered: it’s still a complex, layered, but 
ultimately refreshing treat of aromatic, fruity-hoppy intensity.

Purity UBU
(£1.99, 50cl, waitrose.com 
<http://www.waitrose.com/shop/DisplayProductFlyout?productId=113672>)
A favourite of mine from the Purity brewery in Warwickshire, a glowing dark 
amber, medium-bodied brew that has a delicious core of tangy mandarin-orange 
fruitiness, malt and hoppy bitterness and just a touch of sweetness. Like all 
the beers here, it’s great with food. Try this one with a strong cheese.

Battersea Rye
(£1.95, 33cl, marksandspencer.com 
<http://www.marksandspencer.com/new-craft-beer-and-ale-range-battersea-rye-case-of-20/p/p60070945>
)
Part of M&S’s excellent new range of British craft beers, and made by 
Sambrook’s Brewery in south London, the malted rye in the recipe brings dark 
rye bread flavours but there’s fruit and a peppery finish, too, in an intense, 
spicy brew to wash down a barbie-charred steak.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F49ypd%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F49ypd%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434458604345%2Fbbca8c83-e75b-467e-9a83-3be566d096a9-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2010%20best%20summer%20beers&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F49ypd%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+10+best+summer+beers&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F49ypd%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434458604345%2Fbbca8c83-e75b-467e-9a83-3be566d096a9-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Crouch Vale Brewers Gold; Brew by Numbers Saison 01/06; Harviestoun 
Schiehallion Craft Brewed Lager; Meantime Yakima Red; Brooklyn Black Chocolate 
Stout. Photograph: Katherine Anne Rose for Observer Food Monthly 
Brooklyn Black Chocolate Stout (from £3.59, 35.5cl, beersofeurope.co.uk 
<http://www.beersofeurope.co.uk/brooklyn-black-chocolate-stout>; realale.com 
<http://www.realale.com/product_info.php?products_id=375>)
At 10% abv, and with its dark colour, you might think this American stout is 
more of a winter beer. But sipped at the end of a meal, that intense, 
high-cocoa-content bitter chocolate and suave feel is irresisti

Brew by Numbers Saison 01/06
(£2.95, 33cl, realale.com 
<http://www.realale.com/product_info.php?department_id=345&products_id=2326>)
Brew by Numbers has a range of beers using fruits and spices inspired by 
Belgium’s saison ales, brewed in winter for summer drinking. The 01/06 uses 
lime zest and tangy Motueka hops for a beer that’s crisp, zippy and 
invigorating. Look out too for a cucumber and juniper combination.

Meantime Yakima Red
(£1.79, 33cl, waitrose.com 
<http://www.waitrose.com/shop/DisplayProductFlyout?productId=408818>)
Alastair Hook’s Meantime has just been absorbed into a multinational, but the 
beers remain superb. None more so than this blend of Anglo-German malts and 
five hop varieties from Washington State: a rich but balanced, beautifully 
coloured 4.1% abv, with its blast of citrusy flavour.

Harviestoun Schiehallion Craft Brewed Lager  (£1.79, 33cl, waitrose.com 
<http://www.waitrose.com/shop/DisplayProductFlyout?productId=14371>)
Very far removed from industrial lager, Scottish brewery Harviestoun’s classic 
retains the style’s drinkability but with a spectrum of floral, herbal, 
tropical fruit and barley sugar flavours, and a citric freshness that works so 
well with fish and chips.

Crouch Vale Brewers Gold  (£1.99, 50cl, tesco.com 
<http://www.tesco.com/groceries/product/details/?id=263821236>)
This delightful golden ale from Essex brewery Crouch Vale is the perfect 
summer beer: light (4% abv), soft and with plenty of citrusy-hoppy tang to go 
with the mellow orchard and exotic fruitiness, it works as solo accompaniment 
for lazy afternoons or as a partner for Thai curry.
