
As the 2016 election campaign turns ever more vicious, Donald Trump is 
reportedly longing to return to the less competitive world of TV – even to the 
point of starting his own cable news network according toVanity Fair. 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/news/2016/06/donald-trump-tv-network> But people 
familiar with the barest fundamentals of the TV economy call the idea laughably 
absurd.

The cable TV industry is in crisis as a generation of viewers “cut the cord” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/us-money-blog/2015/may/21/ive-cut-the-cord-but-byzantine-cable-bundle-pricing-still-has-me-baffled>
 ditching high-priced subscriptions for TV over the internet. News that Trump 
is exploring a “mini-media conglomerate 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/news/2016/06/donald-trump-tv-network>” based on a 
cable network struck media investor and adviser Bruce Tuchman as ridiculous. “I 
understand that he says he’s a great businessman but smart money isn’t going 
into linear cable any more,” said Tuchman, calling the idea “very amusing to 
say the least”.

Tuchman has worked for cable television networks and conglomerates in many 
capacities across the world over three decades, at companies from Viacom to MGM 
to AMC Global, where he was president.

Related: Inside the topsy-turvy world of Trump: what I learned on the campaign 
trail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/10/inside-donald-trump-campaign-trump-voters-republican-party>

“For a guy who’s a master at Twitter, I’m kind of astonished that he’s not at 
the level of understanding that capital in media today is running toward 
digital and apps,” he said.


Trump’s spokeswoman Hope Hicks has denied the story: “While it’s true Mr Trump 
garners exceptionally high ratings, there are absolutely no plans or 
discussions taking place regarding a venture of this nature.”

Her boss is more unreadable: “The press is so totally biased that we have no 
choice but to take our tough but fair and smart message directly to the 
people!” He tweeted shortly after Hicks gave her response to Vanity Fair.

Trump would hardly be the first politician – step forward Sarah Palin, Mike 
Huckabee – to turn bomb-throwing interviews into glorified screen tests and 
lucrative contracts with news networks. But even those relationships can lose 
their luster: Palin left Fox last year amid acrimony, and Huckabee’s regular 
show ended in January 2015, though he was rehired as a contributor in April 
this year.

In fact, the only consistently successful politician-turned-host is MSNBC’s 
Joe Scarborough, of the network’s Morning Joe. That’s not counting former 
Cincinnati mayor Jerry Springer, of course. Trump, whom Vanity Fair says “has 
become irked by his ability to create revenue for other media organizations 
without being able to take a cut himself”, may find that revenue hard to come 
by.

Starting a cable network is a frighteningly more costly affair than securing a 
contract with an established media player. It is in fact one of the riskiest 
financial propositions in the contemporary media world and one that is 
effectively impossible to undertake alone.

Trump’s attractive personality isn’t a hook that guarantees success, either: 
the Oprah Winfrey Network (Own) struggled for years despite Oprah’s own 
following and the massive institutional backing of Discovery Communications, 
which could leverage pre-existing cable agreements to arrange carriage on cable 
systems like Time Warner andComcast <http://www.theguardian.com/media/comcast>.

The last time a politician tried to start his own cable outfit outside 
corporate support was Al Gore’s Current TV, which ended when the former 
vice-president sold its assets to Qatar’s Al-Jazeera for a US network. The 
independent news network in turn lasted just over two and a half years before 
folding.

Related: The ideal NFL coach: Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/may/17/donald-trump-nfl-coach-endorsements-rex-ryan>

“[The reason] this is has been such a great business for so long is that if 
you’re on basic cable in the US, you have 90-100 million subscribers and you’re 
getting paid for each of them, and then you have that base on which to sell 
advertising, additionally,” Tuchman said. But a new player who comes calling 
with a new network is likely to find the door locked and the lights off. 
“Advertising rates have been declining year on year on year,” he explained.

“The big cable operators have said, ‘I’m seeing churn and cord-cutting and 
cord-shaving – I’m certainly not going to be able to raise rates as much, which 
will accelerate all that. Netflix is putting so much pressure on me. This 
stranglehold I’ve had over the consumer has changed!’ This is the environment 
thatDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> will face.”

Jonathan Klein, former president of CNN US and currently head of a digital 
video and audio subscription service called Tapp that hosted Palin until 
recently, said that if Trump wanted to monetize the audience that has given CNN 
asurge in viewership of more than a third, according to Pew 
<http://www.journalism.org/2016/06/15/cable-news-fact-sheet/>, cable probably 
wasn’t the way to go.

Klein was more optimistic than Tuchman: “Donald Trump epitomizes the reality 
of media today, which is that a galvanizing figure with a tribal fan following 
does not need traditional outlets,” Klein said, pointing to Glenn Beck as a 
figure whose unconventional political opinions have survived a break with 
traditional media – Beck left Fox News abruptly in 2011.

Of course, the bedrock of Beck’s empire is talk radio, notably a contract with 
Sirius XM, whichrecently suspended him for a week 
<http://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2016/may/31/glenn-beck-suspended-by-siriusxm-over-brad-thor-in/>
 for his interview with bestselling novelist Brad Thor, who suggested to Beck’s 
approval that were Trump to win the election, he should be assassinated by “a 
patriot”.

Still, there is a large and vocal base of Americans disenchanted with the US 
media, Klein said – the same phenomenon that drives Beck’s own popularity. “A 
lot of what’s driving the Trump phenomenon is the feeling of being ignored by 
institutions,” Klein said. “It’s a matter of discipline and a businesslike 
approach and sticking with it.”

And Klein thinks that if Trump wants simply to license his name and image, 
which is after all his most significant financial accomplishment, he may find a 
willing partner irrespective of the froth of racism in his supporter base. “I’m 
sure that the upside is too tempting,” he said.
