
The Queen has reportedly been asking dinner party guests to give her “three 
good reasons why Britain should be part of Europe”, in a move that hasonce 
again raised questions over her position on the EU referendum 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/may/18/the-queen-brexit-and-the-sun-did-the-lady-protest-too-much>
.

Her Majesty’s biographer, Robert Lacey, said she was “impeccably non-political 
in public”, but he argued that it was a very different story in private, where 
she could be “refreshingly outspoken among friends”.

He described how a comment at her recent birthday celebrations 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/13/eu-referendum-morning-briefing-labour-steps-up-cameron-steps-back>
 in favour of the “many benefits that can flow when people come together for a 
common purpose – as family, friends or neighbours” had been taken as a coded 
endorsement of the government’s remain policy.

Related: Sun editor defends 'Queen backs Brexit' headline as watchdog rules it 
inaccurate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/18/queen-backs-brexit-headline-in-the-sun-was-inaccurate-press-watchdog-rules>

But, writing for the Daily Beast 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2016/06/21/why-the-queen-should-oppose-brexit.html>
, Lacey also revealed the question she had apparently been posing to friends.

A spokesman for Buckingham Palace said: “We would not comment on private 
conversations the Queen may or may not have had, but the Queen is above 
politics, has remained politically neutral for the 64 years of her reign and we 
are very clear that theEU referendum 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> is a matter for the British 
people.”

Sources pointed out that the monarch was reported to have asked a question and 
not made any statement about the referendum.

However, despite her neutral position, the Queen was seen as having intervened 
during the Scottish referendum on independence in 2014 by telling a member of 
the public in a way that would inevitably be reported thatshe hoped Scots would 
“think very carefully” before the vote 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/sep/14/scottish-independence-queen-remark-welcomed-no-vote>
.

Last month, the Sun was forced to apologise for a “Queen backs Brexit” headline
 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/may/18/the-queen-brexit-and-the-sun-did-the-lady-protest-too-much>
. The tabloid newspaper had reported that the Queen had complained about the EU 
to Nick Clegg, when he was deputy prime minister.
