
The decision to retire from racing last year was tough. It was hard to accept 
I wasn’t going to achieve my goal of getting on to the starting grid for a 
Formula 1 race. But I believe in gut feelings, and mine told me this journey 
was coming to an end.

Bernie Ecclestone supported me every step of the way during my career as a 
test and development driver. I got hounded when I supported him [afterhe 
recently said female F1 drivers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/14/female-f1-driver-bernie-ecclestone>
 would not be taken seriously]. But I can only speak from experience.

I had an idyllic childhood on the west coast of Scotland. I hated reading – I 
was not a “good kid” – but I was determined when I put my mind to something.

I loved the speed of go-karting, but didn’t have a lot of natural talent. The 
first time I went out on the track I found it scary; other karts were flying 
past and bumping into me. I came into the pits and said I didn’t like it and my 
dad said: “OK, you’ve got two options: you call it a day and put the kart back, 
or you go out and try to improve.” I took the second option.

I have never put my helmet on and wondered what could go wrong. There’s 
respect, but never fear. There are lots of things in life that have danger. I’d 
never get on a horse – an animal is frightening – but that’s a sport that 
society sees as something girls can do, while karting is not.

I never really thought about being a woman in a man’s world. Then at the World 
Championships in 2000 I finished 15th. I was called on to the podium just for 
being a woman, and I realised things were going to be different. There have 
been pluses and minuses – I’ve had it tougher than the guys in some ways, but 
I’ve also had a lot more media attention.

My husband, Toto Wolff [executive director of the Mercedes F1 team] is 
Austrian; I’m Scottish. His first language is German; mine is English. I love 
the culture clash. It can take the heat out of a conversation when you have to 
pause and say: “Sorry, I don’t understand what you’re saying.”

I live in Switzerland, where they are very strict on speeding, so that can 
drive me mad. I don’t mind being driven by my husband, but it can be tricky 
with other people. Because I’m a racing driver, people often think they need to 
show how good they are and end up out of their comfort zone.

I never thought of myself as a role model, but I’ve had so many messages from 
girls, women, mothers saying I was an inspiration. That led me to start my new 
initiative,Dare to be Different <https://daretobedifferent.org/> [a foundation 
which aims to develop talent in male-dominated professions].

María de Villota 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/oct/12/maria-de-villota-died-injuries-crash-claim-family>
’s death was a huge shock [the test driver died in 2013]. It was a stupid 
accident that should never have happened, and she was such a nice lady and a 
good friend. The one thing you can say is that she died doing something she 
loved, but it was tragic.

I think the way I look and the way I feel are very connected. As a woman you 
always wish that you had this or had that. But I’m healthy and I wake up 
feeling good, so I’m thankful.

Susie Wolff is a presenter on Channel 4’s Formula 1 coverage this season. Visit
channel4.com/F1 <http://f1.channel4.com/> for more information
