
They are the sartorial equivalent of a Christmas bauble. And this December 
they are everywhere, sprouting from woollen beanie hats, embellishing shoes and 
dangling from handbags. Meet the fluffy pom-pom, the undisputed fashion smash 
of Christmas 2015.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f6yb%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f6yb%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29ec905fc93bfbf3561b17e669a83e92ec4e1214%2F0_0_3352_4627%2F3352.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pom-trend%3A%20how%20the%20pom%20pom%20won%20Christmas&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f6yb%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pom-trend%3A+how+the+pom+pom+won+Christmas&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f6yb%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29ec905fc93bfbf3561b17e669a83e92ec4e1214%2F0_0_3352_4627%2F3352.jpg>
 Cara Delevingne with the Fendi ‘bag bug’. Photograph: REX/Shutterstock 
Retailers are reporting a rise in sales of anything adorned with a bright 
fluffy pom-pom attached. Topshop says that sales of pom-pom bobble hats are up 
100% on last year and the brand is optimising their popularity by stocking 14 
different styles of pom-pom beanies. Almost an entire wall at the brand’s 
flagship Oxford Circus store is dedicated to the accessory – not just on hats, 
but on bags and scarves too. At Gap, this year’s version of its knitted holiday 
season hat has a jaunty woollen pom-pom on top, making them a likely contender 
for a “suits everyone” present. Meanwhile, Asos reports that shoes with a 
pom-pom attached are huge for them this season. Over at luxury online retailer
mytheresa.com <http://mytheresa.com/>, designer pom-pom keyrings are selling at 
speed, making them a contender for the posh, pointless but jolly “It gift” this 
Christmas. Instagram, with its undisputed power to turbo-boost a trend, 
provides more evidence of the pom-pom’s ownership of the season. Those who 
elevate their Christmas wrapping to artform status are even using the accessory 
to adorn their gifts under the tree.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f6yb%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f6yb%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ee7e5f61f690c6588142a259ab6344ed5c07f4f%2F0_145_1911_1697%2F1911.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pom-trend%3A%20how%20the%20pom%20pom%20won%20Christmas&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f6yb%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pom-trend%3A+how+the+pom+pom+won+Christmas&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f6yb%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ee7e5f61f690c6588142a259ab6344ed5c07f4f%2F0_145_1911_1697%2F1911.jpg>
 Pom-pom keyrings designed by Sophie Hulme at mytheresa.com. Photograph: PR 
company handout 
The pom-pom represents the perfect Christmas fad storm. It somehow strikes the 
balance between jaunty, upbeat fashion befitting of the season, and yet still 
looks stylish. Kenya Hunt, fashion features director at Elle magazine, 
describes the pom-pom as “an an inherently cheery, festive thing, and tis the 
season for all of that.”

There is also an element of knowing in the pom-pom that is appealing. “It’s 
kind of like you wear it thinking: ‘I get this is not cool but that’s why I 
like it,’” explains Justin O’Shea, buying director at Mytheresa.com. “They are 
also a lot of fun; those hats are very kitsch. I think people love the idea 
that fashion is becoming fun again.” Nicola Rose, creative director of fashion 
at Red magazine and someone who has lost “at least five pom-pom bobble hats 
this month”, agrees with the fun analysis of the trend. “They provide the 
opportunity to add a splash of colour to your wardrobe, or to update a neutral 
handbag. They semaphore fun, and fashion should be about that really.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f6yb%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f6yb%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa8607ad4671bc04c7b3cfcb5e58f9850f6b2348%2F0_0_2057_3184%2F2057.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pom-trend%3A%20how%20the%20pom%20pom%20won%20Christmas&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f6yb%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pom-trend%3A+how+the+pom+pom+won+Christmas&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f6yb%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa8607ad4671bc04c7b3cfcb5e58f9850f6b2348%2F0_0_2057_3184%2F2057.jpg>
 Pom-pom shoes at the Gucci Autumn Winter 2015 show. Photograph: 
SGP/REX/Shutterstock 
Pom-poms have been gathering pace in fashion for the past two years. Luxury 
brands such as Sophie Hulme and Fendi spearheaded the trend for handbag 
jewellery – keychains with pom-poms attached bearing googly eyes. Cara 
Delevingne was often spotted swinging her so called Fendi “bag bug” around. As 
the price of handbags skyrocketed, these charms were seen as an entry point 
into the brand. The high street quickly followed suit. Hunt points to pom-pom 
shoes at LK Bennett and Henry Holland as early as last year, but believes that 
the tipping point was this year, when mass retailers such as Next adopted the 
style.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f6yb%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f6yb%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F494ae81f1d87f480ccddd84ffe2352eed811a149%2F0_0_2761_4256%2F2761.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pom-trend%3A%20how%20the%20pom%20pom%20won%20Christmas&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f6yb%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pom-trend%3A+how+the+pom+pom+won+Christmas&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f6yb%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F494ae81f1d87f480ccddd84ffe2352eed811a149%2F0_0_2761_4256%2F2761.jpg>
 Pom-poms on the Fendi catwalk last year. Photograph: SIPA/REX/Shutterstock 
But it was arguably Gucci who sealed the high-fashion status of the pom-pom on 
its autumn/winter 2015 catwalk. The Italian brand has had a standout year with 
designer Alessandro Michele at the helm; it can seemingly do no wrong. Kay 
Barron, fashion features director at Porter magazine, says: “It’s the Gucci 
effect again. Michele finished his lace-up pumps with pom-poms and suddenly 
they become fashion’s most wanted. They have always been fun and frivolous, but 
now they are cool too.” O’Shea agrees, describing that as a “that is so 
awesome” moment.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f6yb%2Fsfb%23img-6&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f6yb%2Fsfb%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad8202205f93cf06aaafb40519a5b0e74c32c093%2F0_0_920_1380%2F920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pom-trend%3A%20how%20the%20pom%20pom%20won%20Christmas&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f6yb%2Fstw%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pom-trend%3A+how+the+pom+pom+won+Christmas&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f6yb%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad8202205f93cf06aaafb40519a5b0e74c32c093%2F0_0_920_1380%2F920.jpg>
 Pom-pom beanie hat by Eugenia Kim. Photograph: Handout 
Fashion commentators are in agreement that the pom-pom is a great styling 
piece and segues easily into most wardrobes. Jacqui Markham, global design 
director at Topshop, believes they have wide appeal and look great with 
“everything from feminine looks through to more masculine and grungy outfits”. 
While O’Shea says that pom-pom keychains can instantly upgrade an old bag: “the 
whole idea of bedazzling your accessory has become really popular.”

Fun, versatile and widely available the trend may be, but does it have the 
power to outlast Christmas? There are signs that it could. Fashionable 
Instagrammers are rapidly pressing “like” on posts of Elina Linardaki’s 
multi-coloured handmade pom-pom gladiator sandals, which already have cult 
status. But Hunt is not so sure: “It feels more like a fun moment than a bigger 
shift to me.”
