
Under the new Sustainable Development Goals 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-united-nations>
, 193 countries have pledged to deliver water for all by 2030. With the UN 
recently publishing a list of indicators to evaluate progress, now is the time 
for the business sector to step up and contribute.

Why should companies care about water?

Data from the US space agency Nasa 
<http://www.nasa.gov/jpl/grace/study-third-of-big-groundwater-basins-in-distress>
 reveals that 13 of the world’s 37 most important groundwater basins are being 
depleted far faster than they can be recharged.

This has a major impact on business, say water experts. Agriculture accounts 
for <http://www.fao.org/nr/water/aquastat/infographics/Withdrawal_eng.pdf> 69% 
of global water use, with industry claiming a further 19%. At an operational 
level, water scarcity pushes up water rates, as is happening indrought-hit 
California <http://www.myladwp.com/2016_2020_rate_request>. Water is a 
potentially toxic brand issue too. Take Coca-Cola, whose image has come in for 
criticism for itsalleged over-use of groundwater 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jun/18/indian-officals-coca-cola-plant-water-mehdiganj>
 in various Indian bottling plants.

Related: Nestlé lawsuit claims food and beverage giant is illegally bottling 
California water 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/oct/13/nestle-california-drought-bottled-water-permit-forest>

Are companies setting water targets? 

Despite a string of widely reported droughts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/mar/08/how-water-shortages-lead-food-crises-conflicts>
 in recent years, the private sector still generally treats water as though it 
were an abundant resource. Don’t underestimate companies’ sheer ignorance about 
their own water use either. “A lot of businesses have no idea how much water 
they consume nor where that water comes from, where it goes or what their 
exposure to water-related risks are,” says Morgan Jones, an associate director 
at the Carbon Trust, which has developed its ownwater certification system 
<https://www.carbontrust.com/client-services/footprinting/footprint-certification/carbon-trust-water-standard/>
.

The ones that do know are setting a variety of targets. SAB Miller aims 
<http://www.sabmiller.com/sustainability/resilient-water-supplies> to use three 
litres of water per litre of beer (it currently uses 3.3 litres). Swiss food 
giant Nestlé says it will reduce the water consumption in all its European 
production sites by40% by 2020 
<http://www.nestle.com/media/newsandfeatures/europe-water-commitment> (compared 
to 2010 levels), while Coca-Cola has pledged more opaquely to “replenish 
<http://www.coca-colacompany.com/stories/collaborating-to-replenish-the-water-we-use/>
” all the water it uses.

Do corporate water targets make sense?

Unlike carbon dioxide, where a tonne of emissions has more or less the same 
impact on the atmosphere wherever it occurs, the effects of water consumption 
are highly localised. When and where water is used matters. How a maize-farmer 
consumes groundwater indrought-hit Mozambique 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/17/mozambique-drought-hopes-harvest-evaporate>
 has different implications to, say, how a water utility company draws from an 
aquifer during the dry season.

When companies think of their water “footprint”, most have in mind the gallons 
they use in their factories, stores or offices. But that accounts for only a 
small part of the picture. What about the water that went into growing the 
cotton for the T-shirts a manufacturer stitches and sells? Or the vast 
quantities of water that go into washing those same T-shirts?

“However efficient you are within the four-walls of your operation, if the 
water basin you depend on is mismanaged then your business will still be at 
risk,” says Jason Morrison, head of theCEO Water Mandate 
<http://ceowatermandate.org/>.

What would meaningful water targets look like? 

Targets must respond to where a company’s main impact lies. Cate Lamb, head of 
the water programme at CDP, an investor-led data transparency organisation, 
cites the example of a chemical company that sets tough reduction targets for 
its water use but says nothing about water quality or contamination.

The targets need to be genuinely ambitious. US retailer Target 
<https://corporate.target.com/corporate-responsibility/goals-reporting>, 
car-makerFord 
<http://corporate.ford.com/microsites/sustainability-report-2014-15/environment-water.html>
 and beverage giantCoca-Cola 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/aug/25/coca-cola-replenish-water-goals-early-watersheds>
 are among those to have announced the early achievement of their water goals. 
According to Lamb, 98% of the large companies submitting data to CDP last year 
claim to be on track with their internal water targets. It’s difficult to shake 
off the sense that the bar is being set way too low.

Related: The madness of drinking bottled water shipped halfway round the world 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/jul/09/bottled-water-shipped-halfway-round--world-madness>

They also need to be locally specific. So argues Paul Reig, a water specialist 
at the World Resources Institute (WRI), a US non-profit: “They [corporate 
commitments] must account for the unique watershed and aquifer conditions at 
each location across a value chain, from raw material sourcing to manufacturing 
and consumer product use.”

Any global industry using raw resources, for instance, is potentially 
affecting hundreds of individual watersheds. One way of simplifying the 
challenge is to identify water “hot spots” and prioritise actions there, an 
approach adopted byAnheuser-Busch InBev 
<http://www.ab-inbev.com/social-responsibility/environment/water-use.html>, for 
instance. The Belgium-based brewer requires all its operations in 
water-stressed regions to set up or join watershed management initiatives.


Is there any sign of change? 

Some initial industry standards are beginning to emerge around water 
efficiency, withISO 14046 
<http://www.bsigroup.com/en-IN/ISO-14046-Water-footprint/> perhaps the best 
known. Experts are also debating measurement methodologies on forums such as the
Water Footprinting Network <http://waterfootprint.org/en/>. Talk of “
science-based targets 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/sep/03/diageo-results-drinks-multinational-sustainability-targets-corporate-commitments>
”, already widespread in the carbon debate, is beginning to gain momentum, too. 
Groups such as WRI are currently pushing hard to force the topic up the water 
policy agenda.

Accurate information about individual watersheds is imperative to local water 
management efforts. In much of the world, such hydrological data simply doesn’t 
yet exist. TheMurray-Darling Basin 
<http://www.mdba.gov.au/publications/maps-spatial-data> in south-eastern 
Australia provides a stellar example of how government action can correct this. 
Companies can contribute too. In California, for instance,US food giant General 
Mills 
<http://www.generalmills.com/en/News/NewsReleases/Library/2016/March/global-water-stewardship/4cc3b208-9024-47c1-8d10-2a2d461791f2>
 is working with various environmental charities to map hydrological conditions 
in the Los Angeles River and San Joaquin River watersheds.


