
The civil service’s human resources profession is overwhelmingly white and 
female, so as a black, male graduate from inner city London, Tomiwa Jimoh is 
bucking the trend. The 23-year-old in his first year on the coveted civil 
service fast stream is based in Sheffield, where he’s the only non-white member 
of his team.


The civil service recognises there is still more to be do to attract diverse 
candidates to its fast stream scheme, not just in HR, but across all its 
professions, and not just black and minority ethnic (BME) graduates but also 
those with disabilities, those from lower socio-economic backgrounds and those 
who identify as lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT). But despite 
efforts, a stereotype that all civil servants area version of Yes Minister’s 
Sir Humphrey Appleby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/feb/05/civil-servants-sir-humphrey-not-funny>
 – white, pompous and elitist – still lingers.

Jimoh laughs when asked what he thinks of that stereotype. To him, having a 
mainly white team in Sheffield is not a big deal, but in the capital it’s a 
bigger problem. “It’s much more noticeable in London because the staff aren’t 
as diverse as the real people outside the office. But I think the civil service 
is really trying to change its stereotype. My friends on the fast stream are 
from all different backgrounds so it helps,” he says.

He doesn’t think his background has either helped or hindered him. He says: “I 
don’t think being different matters first of all. In my team, everyone is 
caucasian but it’s never really been an issue to me. Everyone has been really 
welcoming.”

According to the latest figures 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/457600/Civil_Service_Fast_Stream_-_Annual_Report_2014__web_.pdf>
, there were 2,342 fast streamers in total in 2014, accounting for just over 
0.5% of the civil service. Of this total, 48% were women, 12% were from an 
ethnic minority, and 10.9% were disabled.

In the wider civil service the proportions are similar, although they decrease 
significantly as you look at data from further up the career ladder. According 
toa National Audit Office report 
<http://www.nao.org.uk/report/diversity-equality-and-inclusion-in-the-civil-service/>
, just 7% of staff in the senior civil service are from an ethnic minority 
background. At the highest level, it’s even more elite. Only 16% of permanent 
secretaries went to a comprehensive school with the majority being schooled 
privately, according to a government report,Elitist Britain 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/elitist-britain>. The report also 
found that 57% of permanent secretaries went to Oxford or Cambridge, compared 
with less than 1% of the public as a whole.

We’re supporting the government that's supporting the public, which isn’t made 
up of Oxbridge graduates who speak Greek
Sarah Pinder, fast streamer 
In a blog 
<https://civilservice.blog.gov.uk/2015/04/28/social-mobility-in-the-civil-service/>
 published earlier this year, John Manzoni, chief executive of the civil 
service, discussed the findings: “When we compare the socio­-economic 
background of civil servants to society at large … the difference is stark. 
This is particularly striking when we looked at the backgrounds of recent 
entrants to the SCS [senior civil service] and found that only 10% were from 
lower socio­-economic backgrounds.

“Improving social mobility just makes sense. Like race, gender or age, there 
should be no social barriers to developing a successful career in the civil 
service.”

The fast stream is an obvious tool to begin improving these figures and some 
progress has been made in recent years. The proportion of successful applicants 
from ethnic minority groups rose slightly to 14.2% in 2014 from 13.6% in 2013. 
This represents 127 graduates from ethnic minority groups, which is the highest 
it has ever achieved.

Related: How to join the civil service fast stream 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/sep/01/civil-service-fast-stream-how-to-join-graduate-careers>

There is still some way to go with disabled fast stream candidates. Despite 
18% of the UK population being disabled, the proportion of applicants with a 
disability increased only slightly to 8.5% from 7.5% in 2013. Figures for 
socio-economic background are harder to analyse as they are currently measured 
in terms of parents’ occupation. The proportion of successful applicants whose 
parents work in manual labour was 4.4% in 2013.



Working with other organisations to support young people in the application 
process 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/sep/01/civil-service-fast-stream-how-to-join-graduate-careers>
 is one of the ways the fast stream recruitment team is trying to tackle the 
diversity problem.upReach, a social enterprise 
<http://www.theguardian.com/social-enterprise-network/2012/aug/30/social-mobility-improving-access-professions>
 that helps students and graduates from less privileged backgrounds access 
internships and graduate schemes, is one such organisation.


So far they have supported 30 young people in accessing civil service schemes, 
including its summer diversity internship and the fast stream. Deborah Joseph, 
upReach’s interim chief executive, says: “Lots of people we work with have 
never even heard of [the fast stream]. Some students are not aware that it’s an 
opportunity or that the opportunity might suit them.”

Joseph believes that diversifying the workplace is important for all sectors 
but crucial for the civil service. “The civil service produces public policy so 
if you are designing a policy and you don’t have anyone who has had experience 
of x, y or z working on it then you won’t have a broad range of perspectives.”

Sarah Pinder, 21 from Devon, was supported by upReach to apply for last year’s 
summer diversity internship. Those on the internship were then encouraged to 
apply for the fast stream. Pinder, who is the first in her family to go to 
university, was successful and has just started her first placement.

Related: What is it like to work in the civil service fast stream? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/sep/04/civil-service-fast-stream-like-to-work-advice>

“The stereotype didn’t put me off,” she says. “I think it’s because of the way 
I found out about it. Firstly through upReach whose target is to encourage 
people from lower incomes to pursue these kinds of careers and then because of 
the diversity internship. I never got that Oxbridge feel from any of the 
application process.”


“We’re supporting the government that is supporting the general public and the 
general public isn’t made up of Oxbridge graduates who speak Greek and have 
been on their gap years so I think it’s important to have a range of 
backgrounds.”

Niall Goulding, an active member of the LGBT community within the civil 
service, has found the workplace welcoming since he began on the fast stream. 
The 27-year-old from London is currently on a placement as a data scientist for 
the Department for Media, Culture and Sport.

He says his sexuality has not really been an issue, and recently became chair 
of an LGBT network within his department. The role involves relaying any issues 
to HR and sometimes commenting on policy issues. There are similar networks to 
support staff from other minority groups, including race and disability.

Matthew Hancock, minister for the Cabinet Office, is calling for a one nation 
civil service, more reflective of those it serves. He says: “Nobody should be 
defined by the circumstances of their birth and a one nation civil service will 
give every young person who joins the chance to reach their full potential.

“We are calling on young people from all backgrounds, from every corner of the 
UK and those who might not have thought the civil service was for them.”

Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> here for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday. Follow us on Twitter via@Guardianpublic 
<https://twitter.com/guardianpublic>
