
The study showing that more than 50% of all web users treat social media as a 
news provider 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/15/facebooks-news-publishers-reuters-institute-for-the-study-of-journalism>
 may make some journalists blink... but it will not surprise too many people.

And the most popular of those providers is, of course, Facebook. The research 
by the Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism found that 44% of people 
use it as their main news source.

In a recent speech to the Irish Press Council 
<http://www.presscouncil.ie/_fileupload/Press%20Release%20-%20Speech%20by%20Roy%20Greenslade%20at%20Launch%20of%202015%20Annual%20Report%20-%20May%202016.pdf>
, I identified Facebook as a major threat to the existence of newspapers - 
whether in print or online. With the RISJ findings in mind, what I said on that 
occasion about Facebook being “the final nail in the coffin of newspapers” 
bears repeating.

In April, Facebook stunned stockbroking analysts by returning first-quarter 
profits of some $5.38bn 
<http://www.cnbc.com/2016/04/27/facebook-reports-first-quarter-earnings.html> - 
10% better than any so-called “expert” had expected.

More than three million businesses now advertise through Facebook, and most of 
them are the small and medium-sized businesses that used to buy newspaper space.

Its founder and chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, has been transparent about 
his goal: it is to monopolise digital news distribution. He says he wants 
Facebook Instant Articles to be people’s“primary news experience.” 
<https://www.americanpressinstitute.org/need-to-know/shareable/mark-zuckerberg-instant-articles-should-be-the-primary-news-experience-people-have/>

In fact, it already is, as RISJ’s survey has revealed. For millions of users, 
Facebook is their window to the world, their “Daily Me”. It provides intimate 
personal news through postings by friends and, in so doing, has largely 
destroyed the use value of local newspapers.

Plus, of course, it offers access to national and international news through 
its trending news lists.

People spend longer on the site than they ever did reading newspapers. A study 
last year by the Pew Research Center 
<http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/08/19/the-demographics-of-social-media-users/> 
revealed that 30% of adult Americans regarded Facebook as their key source of 
all news. Overall, Facebook commands more than 80% of the social networking 
market.

As Emily Bell remarked in her 2015 Cudlipp memorial lecture: journalism is but 
“a thin thread in a vast new global tapestry of conversation and information.” 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jan/28/emily-bells-2015-hugh-cudlipp-lecture-full-text>
 Thin, in my view, and likely to get thinner.

Why? Because Facebook is a parasite: it feeds off its host, journalism, and is 
gradually draining its lifeblood. Facebook wants us to believe thatits 
relationship with the media is one of landlord and tenant 
<http://fortune.com/2015/11/09/facebook-media/>, a mutually beneficial 
partnership.

But the reality is that the landlord, Facebook, by drawing away audiences from 
the mainstream news providers and luring away their funders, the advertisers, 
it is gradually bankrupting those journalistic tenants.

In a swift change of analogy, the danger is that Facebook could well be in the 
process of killing the goose (newspapers) that lays the golden egg - content.
