
On the banks of the Godavari river, 170km north-east of Mumbai, Nashik is one 
of India’s holiest places. Every 12 years it hosts millions of predominantly 
teetotal Hindu pilgrims for the Kumbh Mela, the largest religious gathering on 
Earth. But this central Indian city now has another, rather unlikely, claim to 
fame. Surrounded by 37 vineyards, Nashik is the capital of India’s rapidly 
expanding wine industry.

Domestic sales of Indian wine rose almost 20% in 2015, and a record 18 million 
litres are expected to be produced this year, and the quality is improving too: 
wines aimed at the Indian market are generally too sweet for international 
palates, but drier export varieties havewon awards and a place on supermarket 
shelves (including in Marks & Spencer 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/12/indian-wine-review-fiona-beckett-curry-drink-match>
). Although there are vineyards scattered across India, Nashik district is at 
the heart of the industry, accounting for 80% of output, thanks to a favourable 
climate, fertile soils and a long grape-growing history.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j66n%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j66n%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab005872374fbe2d464cf57c46faba603f991976%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20India%20ready%20for%20wine%20pilgrimages%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j66n%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is+India+ready+for+wine+pilgrimages%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j66n%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab005872374fbe2d464cf57c46faba603f991976%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Picking grapes at the Sula vineyard in Nashtik, the ‘wine capital of India’. 
Photograph: Alamy 
Wine tourism is taking off too, with several vineyards offering tours, 
tastings and accommodation. At the forefront isSula <http://www.sulawines.com/>
, the country’s biggest producer. Its swish terrace bar, overlooking rows of 
vines, attracts a steady stream of hip Mumbaikars, as well as a few foreign 
tourists. Sommeliers are on hand to guide visitors through Sula’s wine list: 
the smoky merlot-malbec blend, refreshingly fruity sauvignon blanc and rich, 
oak-aged shiraz were my highlights, especially when matched with homemadekhakhra
, spiced Gujarati crackers served with a tangy tomato and cashew nut chutney.

Gazing across the vineyard towards Gangapur lake and pink-brown hills beyond, 
I could almost imagine myself in the Napa Valley – until my auto-rickshaw 
spluttered into view, the driver tooting his horn and the exhaust sending up a 
plume of smoke.


Shafik Meghji is co-author of The Rough Guide to India (£20.99). To order a 
copy for £16.79 including UK p&p, visitbookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/rough-guide-to-india.html>

