
Ribena was the superior fruit drink of my youth, and over the years I've 
consumed a fair amount of blackcurrants in liquid form, though more as cassis 
in kir and the like. I've even tried to make cassis with blackcurrants from the 
solitary bush in my garden, but it wasn't a success. But until meeting Edward 
Thompson, engineer, fruit farmer and guiding force of Pixley Berries, I'd never 
given much thought to cordial production or growing blackcurrants on a large 
scale.

And here they were, row upon row of them, different varieties with different 
qualities, with names such as Ben Hope, Ben Tirran, Ben Gairn and Pixley Black, 
300 acres of them in all. There were raspberries and apples, too, but the 
blackcurrants are the backbone of this business.

"Ribena is God," Thompson said. He's a tall man, with unruly, white hair, a 
ruddy face and an insistent enthusiasm for his products. "It's easy to 
criticise them, but they've put a lot of money into research and development. 
And we supply them with a lot of blackcurrants. But Ribena is a clear cordial, 
which means it's been refined to take out the natural cloudiness of the juice. 
And the more you refine something, the more you take out the flavour. And I'm 
preoccupied by flavours. Pixley Berries cordial is cloudy, and I'd say it packs 
more flavour."

Thompson is especially fond of the Pixley Black, which he selected after a 
worldwide search, having become concerned about the effect that global warming 
was having on the seasons (less winter chill, more summer heat). This, he felt, 
is a superior blackcurrant - superior in flavour, that is, not in productivity. 
"Here," he said, stripping off a handful of plump berries, "try them."

They burst easily in my mouth, and sent the sweet/sour juice gushing down my 
throat. The flavour was as full and rich as the fruit looked. "See?" Thompson 
said.

The thing about blackcurrants, it seems, is not only do different varieties 
taste different - "The question is, do they taste good?" Thompson said - but 
they have different ripening times, because they have different time clocks and 
respond differently to different temperatures, which differ according to which 
field they grow in, because fields have different microclimates. "Vive la 
diff√©rence," Thompson said.

No, his currants aren't organic. For all its robust flavour, the blackcurrant 
is a delicate shrub, prone to spider mite, leaf spot and aphids, but they'd cut 
down pesticides and built a cordon sanitaire of hedgerow and grass around each 
field to promote bird life and insects that feed on insects that would 
otherwise infest the crop.

Then, from July to August, pickers strip the fruit from the bushes, using 
machinery that Thompson adapted for the purpose - in a former incarnation, he 
had an engineering business. The pickers, as seems customary these days, come 
from eastern Europe, in some cases two or more generations of them. (It makes 
you wonder what will become of British agriculture, not to mention our 
restaurants, hotels and hospitals, when the xenophobia promoted by a sad 
alliance of cheap politicians and cheaper newspapers reduces the flow of 
itinerant labour on which we rely to do the jobs we are too lazy or too snooty 
to do ourselves. But that is by the by.)

Then it's off to the juicing plant, all gleaming stainless steel and the heady 
smell of fruit. Even here, the fruit is treated with kid gloves, allowing time 
for maceration and natural filtration, so that the cordials retain the oomph of 
the natural fruit, ready for bottling as pure blackcurrant cordial, or mixed 
with juice from the farm's Cox's apples or elderflower or Scottish raspberry 
juice. Or champagne, cider, white wine or gin, come to that. ("We do try to be 
different," Thompson said. "We have to.") Or poured over ice cream. Or... well, 
I'm sure you get the picture.
