
One third of all food produced for human consumption isn’t eaten, and the 
hospitality sector is an important contributor to food waste.

The Winnow System “smart meter” aims to tackle the problem by helping chefs 
measure and analyse the food they’re putting in the bin. They can use a tablet 
app to identify the types of food they’re throwing away, and, combined with 
data collected from an electronic scale, the smart meter can tell them the 
value of what’s being binned. It’s hoped that an accurate insight into what is 
being wasted – and the value of that waste – will prompt chefs to improve 
production processes.

On average, Winnow says, 200 kitchens have cut their food waste in half using 
the smart meter. One London restaurant, Sam’s Brasserie & Bar, saved more than 
£5,000 in food costs in just four weeks.

Data from the Waste <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/waste> and 
Resources Action Programme (Wrap) estimates that in commercial kitchens, 21% of 
food waste arises from spoilage, 45% happens during food preparation and 34% 
comes from customers’ plates. The tablet app can be customised to reflect a 
restaurant’s menu, so chefs can quickly select the source and type of food 
that’s ending up in the bin.

One of the biggest challenges for Winnow is overcoming the idea that only 
poorly run, unprofessional kitchens have food waste, when the reality is that 
every kitchen does. Even high profile chef and activistHugh 
Fearnley-Whittingstall 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/hugh-fearnley-whittingstall> and his 
team at the River Cottage Canteen in Winchester, were able to reduce waste by a 
third in just over two months of using the meter.

Founded in 2013, the London-based company has quickly progressed from its 
pilot programme to working with global brands such as Compass Group and Accord 
Hotels. Fuelled by pressure mounting on businesses to address food waste, 
Winnow is now expanding its operations in the UK, Ireland, Norway, China, 
Singapore and Thailand.

Winnow is the 2016 winner of the waste management category of the Guardian 
Sustainable Business Awards 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/nov/11/guardian-sustainable-business-awards-2016-the-categories-and-awards-criteria>
.
