
Two senior executives who left a struggling small academy chain in 2015 
received a combined figure of nearly £500,000 from the taxpayer in 2014-15, 
seemingly including pay-offs, Education Guardian can reveal.

Annual accounts show that the unnamed executives at the five-school Woodard 
Academies Trust <http://www.woodardacademies.co.uk/> in London, sponsored by the
Woodard <http://www.woodard.co.uk/>group of private Christian schools, earned 
£280,000-£290,000 and £180-£190,000 respectively, despite what its new 
leadership team now describe as underperformance.

The trust would not say whether Canon David Bilton, the trust’s chief 
executive until May 2015 and a lay canon at Newcastle cathedral, received the 
larger figure. Whoever received it is the second highest paid academy leader in 
England, behind the Harris Federation’s chief executive,Sir Daniel Moynihan 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/feb/09/harris-academy-salary-chief-executive-daniel-moynihan-schools>
, who earned £395,000-£400,000.

Related: Harris academies boss’s salary nudges £400k after latest pay rise 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/feb/09/harris-academy-salary-chief-executive-daniel-moynihan-schools>

The figure for the top earner at Woodard Academy Trust in 2014-15 was more 
than £100,000 higher than the top-paid employee in 2013-14, even though two of 
the five schools were in special measures during 2014-15.

Mike Hartley, who took over as chair of the trust last month, said: “The 
numbers … do not tell the entire story. Unhappy with the trust’s performance 
and its management, significant changes were made during 2015 and … [a number 
of senior management and officials] left the organisation. This led to 
increased but necessary costs in the short term.

“Monies paid in 2014-15 were part of a confidential settlement agreement and 
were bound by contracts and negotiations prepared under a different leadership 
team. As a trust we acknowledge that this is an unacceptable situation, and it 
will not be repeated.”

Senior executives’ salary on par with PM’s

Surveying recently published accounts of other academy chains, we find they 
routinely pay senior executives salaries at least as high as the prime 
minister’s.

Of 22 high-profile chains whose 2014-15 accounts we looked at, 18 pay at least 
one member of staff at least £140,000-£150,000, which is in line with David 
Cameron’s £142,500. One chain, the Harris Federation, had 12 employees earning 
at least £140,000. Overall, the 22 multi-academy trusts had 43 people earning 
at least £140,000. Eight earned more than £200,000 in 2014-15.

This month, after a campaign by the Daily Mail and the Taxpayers’ Alliance, 
the Treasuryreissued guidance 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/public-sector-pay-and-terms-guidance-note/guidance-note-public-sector-pay-and-terms>
 stipulating that government departments wanting to appoint someone on £142,500 
or more a year had to get written permission from the chief secretary to the 
Treasury.

Local authorities wanting to pay anyone £100,000 or more are now supposed to 
give all councillors the chance to vote against the move. But will academies – 
which are also funded by taxpayers – be covered by similar stipulations? The 
Treasury told us academy staff were not civil servants, so salaries did not 
require Treasury sign-off.

Power couple take home even more

Meanwhile, the earnings of one of education’s leading power couples grew again 
in 2014-15. Steve and Paula Kenning received more than £400,000 between them 
from another small academy chain. As chief executive of the 12-school
Aspirations Academies Trust <http://www.aspirationsacademies.org/> (AAT), Steve 
Kenning received £225,000-£230,000 in salary and employer pension payments. 
This was unchanged from 2013-14, as the trust had told us when wewrote 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/mar/31/academies-school-governors-skills-qualifications>
 about the couple’s 2014 joint income last March.

But Aspirations did not tell us then that Paula, who is described by the AAT 
as its co-founder and executive principal, was to see her total pay and pension 
increase in 2014-15 by 12%, from £158,163 to £176,467.

Last week, AAT told us that Paula’s increase came mainly because of a bonus 
she was paid for “meeting targets”, as the school she led in 2014-15 was turned 
around to be judged outstanding by Ofsted. Both Steve and Paula Kenning’s pay 
has risen only 1% in 2015-16, it added.

The accounts also reveal that Vanessa Miner, a marketing and business 
consultant who was a trustee in 2014-15, received £70,282 in consultancy fees 
from the trust in 2014-15. The trust said she had supported AAT’s board with 
“strategic advice”, working on curriculum development and “commercial 
opportunities”. Miner told us that Aspirations had been a big part of her work 
advising academy boards, though did not answer our question asking how many 
days she had worked for the trust.

EBacc headache over teacher shortages

The opposition of groups representing subjects that have been excluded from 
the English baccalaureate – the school performance measure that shows how many 
pupils get good GCSE grades in English, maths, the sciences, a language and 
history or geography – is well known.

But now we’ve learned that even those representing subjects that are included 
in the EBacc have concerns about how a pledge by ministers to have 90% of 
pupils studying it is to be met.

In their official response to the government’s consultation on the plan, five 
scientific organisations, including the Royal Society, say that having so many 
pupils do so is “untenable”, given science teacher shortages.

And the Association for Language Learning raises “concerns about ongoing 
teacher supply” as well as “disaffection and behaviour management issues where 
challenging pupils are required to pursue any of the subjects in which they are 
no longer engaged”.

Some other subject associations – notably those representing geography – are 
much more enthusiastic. But the teacher shortage issue, in particular, seems a 
headache for ministers that is only going to get worse.

A Department for Education spokesman said: “While we recognise the challenges 
[on teacher recruitment] that school leaders face in particular areas, we are 
working with the sector to address them with constructive action.”

• This article was amended on 25 February 2016 to correct a description of 
Canon David Bilton as a “lay priest”.
