
1 Reverse cuts to social care budgets

David Oliver, (@mancunianmedic <https://twitter.com/mancunianmedic>) 
consultant in geriatrics and general internal medicine, president of theBritish 
Geriatrics Society <http://www.bgs.org.uk/>: Half my patients are either stuck 
waiting for community step-down services or were admitted partly because of 
inadequate responsiveness or capacity in those services. Social care is crucial 
to preventing readmissions and speeding discharges, but it has been brutally 
cut since 2010.

Phil McCarvill, (@Phil_McCarvill <https://twitter.com/Phil_McCarvill>), deputy 
director of policy,NHS Confederation <http://www.nhsconfed.org/>: The social 
care funding crisis, plus other pressures on local government and social care 
providers alike, is having a real impact on the NHS. Health and care must be 
seen as one system: under-resourcing of one has inevitable implications for the 
other.

2 Manage care to avoid hospital admissions

Michael Dixon (@MichaelDixonGP <https://twitter.com/MichaelDixonGP>), GP and 
former chair of NHS Alliance, former president of NHS clinical commissioners, 
chair ofeveryLIFE <http://www.everylifetechnologies.com/> advisory board: We no 
longer have one, simple point of contact – it used to be the district nurse, 
but now [as a GP] I have to call a number of different professionals in both 
health and social care when managing urgent patient needs. A single point of 
contact, for example a community matron, would make a huge difference. This is 
not about whole system change, but something that should be designed and 
commissioned locally.

Prof John Young, Academic Unit of Elderly Care and Rehabilitation 
<http://www.bradfordresearch.nhs.uk/research-teams/academic-unit-of-elderly-care-and-rehabilitation>
: Our health and social care system is poorly aligned to the needs of older 
people who are either becoming frail, or have established frailty. Frailty does 
not spring up overnight but develops over 10 to 15 years. But our health and 
social care system largely responds in a reactive fashion to the late 
manifestations of frailty, that is falls, confusion and poor mobility.

Related: Exercise classes for over 65s help cut falls risk 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/apr/19/over-65-exercise-classes-cut-falls-risk>

3 Provide better access to healthcare services in care homes

Paul Dunnery, (@PaulDunnery <https://twitter.com/PaulDunnery>), operations 
director,Alzheimer’s Society <https://www.alzheimers.org.uk/>: Recent research 
by Alzheimer’s Society has found that people living with dementia in care homes
often struggle to access secondary care services 
<https://www.alzheimers.org.uk/site/scripts/documents_info.php?documentID=2107> 
such as physiotherapy and mental health; accessing these services can prevent 
admissions to hospital at crisis point.

Léa Renoux, (@Lea_Renoux <https://twitter.com/Lea_Renoux>), health policy 
manager,Age UK <http://www.ageuk.org.uk/>: Due to the historic division between 
health and social care, many people living in care homes are not getting the 
full range of NHS services they need. Often residents don’t get access to GP 
services. This is despite the fact that that we know that proactive medical 
reviews and support for care home residents can improve wellbeing and reduce 
emergency hospital admissions.

4 Support carers properly

Prof Athina Vlachantoni, (@CPCpopulation <https://twitter.com/CPCpopulation>), 
associate professor in gerontology at theCentre for Research on Ageing 
<http://www.southampton.ac.uk/ageingcentre/index.page> and the Centre for 
Population Change <http://www.cpc.ac.uk/>: By supporting informal carers, the 
welfare state is essentially supporting two-in-one.Plenty of research 
<http://journals.cambridge.org/action/displayAbstract?fromPage=online&aid=9498048&fileId=S0144686X1300072X>
 shows that family is the first port of call for community care of older 
people. There are three key ways to support informal carers: respite care; 
support to combine care provision with paid work or other activities; and 
regular assessment of carers’ own physical and emotional needs.

Anna Dixon, (@DrAnnaDixon <https://twitter.com/DrAnnaDixon>), chief executive 
of theCentre for Ageing Better <http://www.ageing-better.org.uk/>: It is really 
important thatemployers have policies <http://www.employersforcarers.org> to 
support carers, enabling them to take time off, career breaks, flexible or part 
time working. There is a risk that the squeezed middle aged who are caring for 
relatives drop out of work and are at risk of financial insecurity in their own 
later life.

Renoux: The reality is the support that informal carers provide goes well 
beyond providing care and includes managing finances, negotiating with health 
and care services and acting as the person’s advocate, especially if the person 
does not have mental capacity to make decisions. Importantly, carers may 
continue to play these roles even where a person is receiving care services, 
including in a care home. Carers are currently entitled tolocal authority 
social services assessment. 
<http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/social-care-and-support-guide/Pages/carers-assessment.aspx>
 In assessing carers’ needs local authorities should take the wellbeing of the 
carer into account, rather than just the carers’ ability to continue caring. 
However, given the current state of social care resources, it seems it will be 
increasingly difficult to see the ambitions of the Care Act implemented in 
practice.


Related: Care home offers a step between hospital and home for patients 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/mar/11/care-home-step-between-hospital-home-patients>

5 Learn from effective projects

Richard Curtis, head of community healthcare contracting at Specsavers 
<http://www.specsavers.co.uk/> and former NHS commissioner: As a former 
continuing healthcare commissioner, we commissioned a few live-in care packages 
that provided patients with extensive 24-hour support to go out into the 
community, access their social network and continue to feel part of society. 
Unfortunately the cost was prohibitive, there were no opportunities to link 
together social care or voluntary social groups which would provide transport 
etc or have the required clinical skills to ensure the patient would be OK, so 
you can end up paying for three different services. But what we did learn is 
that the system focuses on treating the presenting physical issue and not 
enough time and effort is paid to the wider socialisation of the patient. This 
is a key role which the voluntary sector could assist with when care packages 
are designed.

Renoux: The results of our pilot of the Age UK personalised integrated care 
programme 
<http://www.ageuk.org.uk/professional-resources-home/services-and-practice/integrated-care/integrated-care-model/>
 in Cornwall, which includes evaluation of the impact of taking a 
person-centred approach to health and care services, together with the 
voluntary sector and welfare advice, have been very promising. There was a 31% 
reduction in hospital admissions and the project has helped to show how older 
people are more likely to respond positively to preventative and self-care 
strategies when they are actively engaged in their health.


6 Change the way older people are discussed

McCarvill: I think it is important that we all challengelanguage such as bed 
blockers and geriatrics. People become “stuck” because the system does not move 
quickly enough to sort out their care. The emphasis should be on the system, 
not the individuals.


Dixon: We need to change the way we all talk about and think about ageing. 
These negative terms and stereotypes are so pervasive. We need to see our 
ageing population as an opportunity for the whole of society, and our later 
lives as a fulfilling and positive stage. There are many inequalities in later 
life which need to be tackled so more people can enjoy later life. We are 
commissioning a scopingreview of the evidence 
<http://www.ageing-better.org.uk/our-work/other-activities> on inequalities in 
later life.


Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.

