
Vacation is the perfect time for travelers to abandon their comfort zones and 
try new things. Whether exploring new places and cultures or savoring exotic 
drinks and dishes, a visit to a new place can enrich a traveler’s body and 
mind. One of the easiest and most fulfilling ways to make the most of 
traveling? Connecting with nature and the environment. Here are some ways to 
fully experience the ecosystem at your destination.

Stop and smell the roses – literally 

Visiting other countries gives you the chance to see plants unique to the area 
– even, potentially, to one locale. The world hasroughly 400,000 species 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2010/sep/19/scientists-prune-world-plant-list>
 of flowering plants, and many sustainable hotels put great effort in 
maintaining their landscapes. That means a diverse selection of local greenery 
right on the property. In Mexico, for example, Dreams Tulum Resort & Spa has a 
44-acre garden with more than 5,000 indigenous plants from the region; it’s the 
perfect opportunity to relax or take a few photos.

Walk on the wildlife side

While on vacation, why miss the chance to see creatures found nowhere else? 
After all, the planet is home toabout 8.7 million species 
<http://www.bbc.com/news/science-environment-14616161> of animals. In the 
Dominican Republic, guests at Dreams Punta Cana Resort & Spa can walk with the 
flamingos in the hotel’s lush gardens. If you’re feeling especially inspired, 
you can even participate in a volunteer program helping wildlife.

Get away on your getaway

One of the best ways to explore a new destination is to get outdoors and view 
natural wonders not found in your hometown. Mexico is home to a natural 
aquarium, near the Now Jade Riviera Cancun hotel, known asXel-Há 
<http://www.xelha.com/about-xelha-park.php>, a Mayan term that means “where 
water is born”. Adventurers can snorkel and swim alongside hundreds of 
multicolored species of fish, and the park is easily accessible by bicycle and 
hiking trails. Not in the mood for a dip? Mayan pyramid ruins, scenic caves and 
evenbaby turtle nests 
<http://www.theguardian.com/am-resorts-partner-zone/2016/jan/20/be-a-hero-on-the-half-shell-release-baby-turtles-on-your-next-vacation>
 are nearby.

Work up a sweat

Outdoor exercises are a great way to stay active while connecting with the 
environment. Such workouts can include beach yoga, rising early to run on 
trails or swimming in the ocean. Guests staying at Mexico’s Zoëtry Paraiso de 
la Bonita can take advantage of the resort’s activities like kayaking and 
sailing. When in doubt, a simple walk outside among local flora and fauna can 
be fun. Just don’t forget the sunscreen!

This content is paid for by AMResorts
