
War, violence and persecution left one in every 122 humans on the planet a 
refugee, internally displaced or seeking asylum at the end of last year, 
according to a stark UN report that warns the world is failing the victims of 
an “age of unprecedented mass displacement”.

The annual global trends study <http://unhcr.org/556725e69.html> by the UN’s 
refugee agency, UNHCR <http://www.unhcr.org/cgi-bin/texis/vtx/home>, finds that 
the level of worldwide displacement is higher than ever before, with a record 
59.5 million people living exiled from their homes at the end of 2014.

UNHCR estimates that an average of 42,500 men, women and children became 
refugees <https://www.theguardian.com/world/refugees>, asylum seekers or 
internally displaced people every day last year - a four-fold increase in just 
four years.


By the end of 2014, there were 19.5 million refugees – more than half of them 
children – 38.2 million internally displaced people and 1.8 million 
asylum-seekers.

Were the 59.5 million to be counted as the population of a single country, it 
would be the 24th largest in the world and one with about the same number of 
people asItaly <https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F49z7c%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F49z7c%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434469891387%2F58801c60-d0c4-4b93-b898-0e9d43adba15-679x720.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=One%20in%20every%20122%20people%20is%20displaced%20by%20war%2C%20violence%20and%20persecution%2C%20says%20UN&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F49z7c%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=One+in+every+122+people+is+displaced+by+war%2C+violence+and+persecution%2C+says+UN&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F49z7c%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434469891387%2F58801c60-d0c4-4b93-b898-0e9d43adba15-679x720.png>
 21st century displacement Photograph: UNHCR/Guardian 
The numbers are up 16% on 2013 – when the total stood at 51.2 million – and up 
59% on a decade ago, when 37.5 million people were forced to flee their homes.


UNHCR says the four-year war in Syria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>
 is the single largest driver of displacement: by the end of 2014, the conflict 
had forced 3.88 million Syrians to live as refugees in the Middle East and 
beyond, and left 7.6 million more internally displaced. In blunter terms, one 
in every five displaced persons worldwide last year was Syrian.

The UN high commissioner for refugees, António Guterres 
<http://www.unhcr.org/pages/49c3646c8.html>, said that although the world was 
experiencing “an unchecked slide” into an era of massive forced global 
displacement, it seemed unwilling to tackle the causes.


“It is terrifying that on the one hand there is more and more impunity for 
those starting conflicts, and on the other there is [a] seeming utter inability 
of the international community to work together to stop wars and build and 
preserve peace,” he said.


The report also notes that the wealthy countries are relying overwhelmingly on 
poorer states to take in those who have been forced to abandon their homelands: 
in 2014, 86% of refugees were in regions or countries deemed economically less 
developed.

Twenty years ago, developing regions hosted about 70% of the world’s refugees; 
last year, countries ranked least developed by the UN were home to 3.6 million 
refugees – or 25% of the global total.

Guterres called on the international community to show resolve, tolerance and 
a proper financial commitment to helping those most in need.


“With huge shortages of funding and wide gaps in the global regime for 
protecting victims of war, people in need of compassion, aid and refuge are 
being abandoned,” he said.

“For an age of unprecedented mass displacement, we need an unprecedented 
humanitarian response and a renewed global commitment to tolerance and 
protection for people fleeing conflict and persecution.”

Guterres’ warning comes a year after the UNHCR reported that the number of 
people forced to flee their homes across the worldhad exceeded 50 million 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/20/global-refugee-figure-passes-50-million-unhcr-report>
 for the first time since thesecond world war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/secondworldwar>.

At the end of 2014, 53% of all refugees under UNHCR’s responsibility came from 
just three countries: Syria (3.88 million),Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> (2.59 million), and Somalia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/somalia> (1.11 million). A further 5.1 
million refugees were registered by UNRWA, the UN agency for Palestinian 
refugees.
 Conflict displacement Photograph: UNHCR/Guardian 
In Iraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq>, the march of Islamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> saw the number of internally displaced 
people jump from 1 million to in 2013 to 3.6 million by the end of last year. 
In Libya, 309,000 people were newly displaced in 2014.

Over the past five years, at least 15 conflicts have broken out or reignited: 
eight inAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> (Ivory Coast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ivory-coast>, Central African Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/central-african-republic>, Libya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya>, Mali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mali>, northeastern Nigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria>, Democratic Republic of the Congo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/congo>, South Sudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-sudan> and Burundi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/burundi>); three in the Middle East (Syria, 
Iraq, andYemen <https://www.theguardian.com/world/yemen>); one in Europe (
Ukraine <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine>) and three in Asia (
Kyrgyzstan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/kyrgyzstan>, and in several areas 
ofBurma <https://www.theguardian.com/world/burma> and Pakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan>). 

With few of those conflicts resolved and most still forcing people to flee, 
just 126,800 refugees were able to return to their home countries last year – 
the lowest number in 31 years.

In Europe, the number of forcibly displaced people increased by 51% last year, 
rising from 4.4 million to 7.6 million.

“More than 219,000 refugees and migrants crossed the Mediterranean 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/migration> sea during 2014,” says the 
report. “That’s almost three times the previously known high of about 70,000, 
which took place in 2011 during the ‘Arab spring’. Nearly half of these 
arrivals were coming from the Syrian Arab republic and Eritrea. UNHCR has 
received information of over 3,500 women, men, and children reported dead or 
missing in the Mediterranean sea during the year, clearly demonstrating how 
dangerous and unpredictable this situation has become.”

UNHCR noted that the record number of Mediterranean crossings and the huge 
number of Syrians hosted byTurkey <https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> 
had “broughtincreased public attention 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/24/katie-hopkins-cockroach-migrants-denounced-united-nations-human-rights-commissioner>
, both positive and negative, to questions to do with refugees”, adding that 
Germany and Sweden had received the largest volume of asylum applications.

Displacement was up 19% in the Middle East and north Africa; up 17% in 
sub-Saharan Africa; up 31% in Asia, and up 12% in the Americas.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F49z7c%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F49z7c%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434470136806%2Fd663c78a-449e-44c5-8779-0fb6f48d0145-707x720.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=One%20in%20every%20122%20people%20is%20displaced%20by%20war%2C%20violence%20and%20persecution%2C%20says%20UN&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F49z7c%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=One+in+every+122+people+is+displaced+by+war%2C+violence+and+persecution%2C+says+UN&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F49z7c%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434470136806%2Fd663c78a-449e-44c5-8779-0fb6f48d0145-707x720.png>
 Major refugee-hosting countries Photograph: UNHCR/Guardian 
Last year saw Turkey overtake Pakistan to became the largest refugee-hosting 
country worldwide, with 1.59 million refugees, the overwhelming majority of 
them Syrian.


Pakistan hosted the second-largest number of refugees – 1.51 million, almost 
all of them from Afghanistan – while Lebanon took in the most refugees in 
relation to its population, with 232 refugees per 1,000 inhabitants.

Iran hosted 950,000 Afghan refugees, Ethiopia 659,500 refugees from South 
Sudan, Eritrea and Somalia, while Jordan hosted 654,100 refugees from Syria and 
Iraq.

Justine Greening <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/justine-greening>, the 
international development secretary, said: “It is shocking that nearly 60 
million people are now without a home and dependent on the kindness of 
strangers. One in seven of those men, women and children have been forced to 
flee because of conflict or persecution in the last year alone.

“From Syria to South Sudan, the UK is getting emergency help to people who 
have lost everything. I have met some of these people and they tell me they 
just want the chance to return to their homes and get back to normal.


“That is why, as we give these families the basics they need to survive – 
food, clean water and shelter – we must also tackle the root causes of poverty 
and instability, in particular economic development.”

• This article was amended on 18 June 2015. An earlier version suggested that 
refugees from Syria, Afghanistan and Somalia made up more than half of all 
refugees worldwide. To clarify: they make up more than half of all refugees 
under UNHCR’s responsibility; 5.1 million of the total 19.5 million refugees 
come under the separate mandate of UNWRA.
