
Name: Pensioners.

Age: Elderly.

Appearance: The same.

What are they up to? Which ones?

The pensioners! Haven’t you heard? We’re no longer lumping pensioners 
together. Instead, we’redividing them into four distinct demographic categories 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/05/08/diamond-days-smartie-senior-security-or-vintage-value---which-ty/>
, each with its own name.

What four categories? Well, there are the Smarties (senior market town 
retirees) – old people who retire to market towns, instead of the traditional 
seaside.

I’m going to take your word for it that this is a thing. Then there are 
Diamond Days (affluent, mortgage-free suburbanites), Senior Security (well-off 
but risk-averse), and the Vintage Value (not so well-off).

Those aren’t very good names. Don’t blame me, blame the credit-checking company
Experian <https://www.theguardian.com/business/experiangroup>, in whose report 
these demographics are profiled.

I disagree with Experian’s patronising assessment of seniors. Not to mention 
their patronising assessment of my creditworthiness. I’m afraid this is only 
the latest attempt to demolish broad stereotypes of the elderly, and replace 
them with slightly more specific stereotypes with cute names.

What were some of the others? You will recall Grey Panthers 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2012/07/30/ageing-over-65s-prefer-grey-pantner-tag-pensioner_n_1718298.html>
 andSilver Surfers 
<http://www.theguardian.com/guardian_jobs_and_money/story/0,3605,991464,00.html>
. In the US, they are wont todivide pensioners 
<http://www.esri.com/library/brochures/pdfs/senior-demographics.pdf> into the 
Elders (retirees living in senior accommodation), Silver and Gold (old and 
wealthy) and Rustbelt Retirees (old couples who stay put in industrial cities).

Pensioners can’t enjoy being stereotyped in this fashion, can they? Probably 
not, but they don’t really like being called “pensioners”, either. Or 
“elderly”. A 2012 survey found that their top pick was “senior citizen”.

Well that’s that. Senior citizen it is. Except it doesn’t really address the 
increasing demographic spread as people live longer.

So, we need to distinguish between the medium old, the well old and the bare 
old?Exactly. A couple of years ago the term “Real Senior” was introduced to 
specify the 85+ bracket.

That’s not just terrible, it actually bespeaks of prejudice against the 
not-very-old. Who came up with that?A bunch of old people - but to be fair to 
them, they were choosing from a list that included the Very Oldies, the Long 
Lived, Wisdom Warriors and the Venerables.

Do say: “Of course we need terms that convey the range of diversity among the 
over-65s. But we also need some kind of government vetting procedure for the 
names.”

Don’t say: “Don’t forget the Solbios – Seniors Outside Lidl Before It Opens.”
