
“It was the rock and roll 60s, we were all kids. It sounds like name dropping, 
but it really wasn’t like that.” Toni Myers casually dismisses working with 
Yoko Ono and John Lennon. Like many pivotal moments in the documentary 
filmmaker’s early days, she claims her meeting with the musical icons was more 
serendipity than calculated career move.

Myers was living and working in London with her British husband at the time, 
making documentaries out of their Soho offices in Greek Street. Despite a 
shoestring budget, the pair were experimenting with shooting films to song. 
Word got out that the couple were producing the world’s first rock videos and 
it wasn’t long before some of the era’s musical legends began knocking on their 
door.

Santana asked them to make a feature-length documentary of their European 
tour, then they shot the last performance of Jimi Hendrix and Jim Morrison. And 
then there was Yoko Ono.

Myers explains that the 60s icon hired them to do a series of films that 
investigated the cult of celebrity. “Not many people knew that she was a 
conceptual artist in her own right in the gallery scene – a lot of people just 
saw her as breaking up the Beatles. But these were relatively serious attempts 
on her part to explore the subject.”

Yoko was firmly in the driving seat. I don’t say that pejoratively, she was 
just very impressive

Over a period of six to eight months, Myers worked closely with Ono and 
Lennon, filming the video for the autobiographical Beatles song The Ballad of 
John and Yoko, raiding the local stock footage library and picking out a piece 
of film for every line in the song.

“Yoko was firmly in the driving seat. I don’t say that pejoratively, she was 
just very impressive. She was someone who really knew what she wanted and what 
she was trying to explore. John was pretty passive.”

Myers cut her teeth as a filmmaker in the early 1960s after landing a job as 
personal assistant to a talented film editor in Toronto. Despite knowing 
nothing about the trade, she was fascinated by the process. “It was all 
scissors and glue and taking the shots apart.” She quickly learned the art, 
moving up the ranks to fill the role of assistant editor. During her time at 
the company she was exposed to genres from commercials to experimental 
arthouse, but it was documentaries she discovered a passion for.

Music was again the subject matter of her first doc, directed by her husband 
Michael Myers, in 1969. But instead of famous rock singers, she focused her 
camera lens on the street musicians of London. The idea came after the 
so-called “king of the buskers”, Don Partridge, followed through on a promise 
he made to his fellow public performers before he found surprise fame with his 
1968 single Rosie. The singer songwriter vowed that if he ever had a hit record 
he would use the proceeds to hire the Albert Hall for his busker friends to 
perform at. Myers was there to capture the moment on film.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k572%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k572%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf294b60f6d318fc85ce008afe4ac973115c9bd0%2F0_40_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98It%20was%20the%2060s%2C%20we%20were%20all%20kids%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20why%20I%20spent%20a%20lifetime%20filming%20stars&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k572%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98It+was+the+60s%2C+we+were+all+kids%E2%80%99+%E2%80%93+why+I+spent+a+lifetime+filming+stars&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k572%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf294b60f6d318fc85ce008afe4ac973115c9bd0%2F0_40_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 A Beautiful Planet is Toni Myers’ latest epic Imax space documentary. 
Photograph: Imax 
“It was nuts, completely crazy. His pals were the escapologists who worked 
Tower Hill and Mike [Myers] had to go and drag them out of doss houses in the 
morning of the shooting. It was just a cast of characters who you would not 
believe you would see at the Albert Hall. Everyone was bickering like movie 
stars about who was on first and the pecking order. It was hilarious. That’s 
something that I remember very fondly and it can only have come out of that 
era. It was a one-off event that we just decided to go and cover.”

By the 1980s, Myers had turned her attention up from the streets to the stars. 
Hail Columbia! was a short documentary covering the maiden voyage of the first 
space shuttle, with footage of the mission shot both on the ground and in 
space. It’s a theme which has come to define Myers’ career since.

From the groundbreaking space trilogy The Dream is Alive, Blue Planet and 
Destiny in Space to the award-winning Space Station 3D and Hubble 3D, each of 
her films explores a different theme, from the experience of living and working 
in zero gravity to the solar system and the Earth itself. And all shot for the 
awe-inspiring Imax screen. Her latest Imax epic, A Beautiful Planet, is filmed 
by the crew of the InternationalSpace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/space> Station and features breathtaking 
panoramas of the Earth from above, revealing not only its magnificent geography 
but the impact humanity has had on our home over time.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k572%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k572%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3de2043d653b8e9f14e5e5a2e47d3c8c5d880e1%2F0_4_2100_1260%2F2100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98It%20was%20the%2060s%2C%20we%20were%20all%20kids%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20why%20I%20spent%20a%20lifetime%20filming%20stars&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k572%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98It+was+the+60s%2C+we+were+all+kids%E2%80%99+%E2%80%93+why+I+spent+a+lifetime+filming+stars&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k572%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3de2043d653b8e9f14e5e5a2e47d3c8c5d880e1%2F0_4_2100_1260%2F2100.jpg>
 Director of photography James Neihouse, director Toni Myers and Commander 
Barry (Butch) Wilmore during an Imax camera training session. Photograph: Imax 
A fascination for the unknown keeps bringing Myers back to the subject. She 
says: “Everybody, at least most people, would like to go some place that they 
know they can’t. Space certainly is one of them for me. Imax itself is 
fulfilling that desire because it takes ordinary people where perhaps they 
can’t go.”

Myers reveals that the first time she saw the footage her team had captured 
from the early space shuttle flights on the gargantuan Imax screen she was 
“blown away” and “utterly captivated”.

Of course producing a documentary shot entirely in space is not without its 
challenges. The astronauts had to be taught how to be filmmakers – everything 
from operating the cameras, lighting and sound recording to directing their 
fellow crew mates. Then of course they need to be able to create footage that 
audiences will want to watch.

“Once they are proficient in the mechanics of filming, then we turn them loose 
in the simulators [used for training astronauts] and they have to make their 
own little movie,” she explains.

“They have to do everything, so recording the sound and putting up the lights. 
Then we put it up on an Imax screen. There is no better tool for teaching than 
that. Imagine watching your home movies on a 60ft screen. If the penny hasn’t 
dropped by then, it sure has when you see it that large. If everything is 
shaky, jerky and out of focus, then they understand. But it seldom is, they are 
that good.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZEnhWHAlslM&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZEnhWHAlslM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZEnhWHAlslM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZEnhWHAlslM&media=>
So where next for the filmmaker? While Myers is keen to continue exploring 
what’s possible using the large screen format, she admits that there’s nothing 
waiting in the wings.

“The medium that I know best is Imax so you need a subject matter that is 
suited to that. I haven’t really thought about the next project because they 
take three to four years to delivery. I don’t feel in any rush. There is 
nothing sitting there waiting to be done. So I thought I’d go and be a 
grandmother now.”

A Beautiful Planet is showing at Imax screens nationwide now.

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
