
The outgoing chief schools inspector, Sir Michael Wilshaw, was on fiery form 
last week, sending anopen letter 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/focused-inspections-of-academies-in-multi-academy-trusts>
 to the education secretary critic

ising seven major academy chains – just as ministers are reputedly considering 
making all schools become academies.

We wonder whether Wilshaw reads this column, as among his concerns was the 
soaring pay of the chains’ chief executives, an issue that has beenpreoccupying 
us lately 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/feb/23/senior-executives-struggling-academy-chain-big-payoff-warwick-mansell>
, while he also highlighted the staggering £8.5m total paid to consultants by 
the seven trusts.

But he didn’t mention severance pay: where individuals receive money on 
leaving that a trust may or may not have been obliged to offer. “Gagging clauses
 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/public-accounts-committee/news/confidentiality-clauses-por/>
” included in such payments across the public sector have caused controversy.

Academy accounts show the seven trusts, which include three of England’s four 
largest chains, spent £621,683 between them on severance payments in 2014-15. 
More broadly, the accounts of the 12 largest school chains list £1.6m being 
paid in severance, with the Harris Federation, lauded by ministers, the top 
spender, with £284,000. With money in classrooms in short supply, spending it 
on outgoing staff will continue to be contentious.

Related: Senior executives leave struggling academy chain – and take big 
payoff with them | Warwick Mansell 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/feb/23/senior-executives-struggling-academy-chain-big-payoff-warwick-mansell>

De Souza to head Ofsted?

Meanwhile, could the Department for Education move to replace the increasingly 
outspoken Wilshaw with a perhaps more supportive figure, by appointinga 
favourite of this column 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jul/28/academy-trust-sick-hewett-school-norwich-ofsted-inspiration-trust>
 as chief inspector?

We hear rumours that Dame Rachel de Souza – briefly a part-time Ofsted 
inspector and currently CEO of the Norfolk-based Inspiration Trust – might be 
in pole position for the £180,000-a-year post.

Intriguingly, Inspiration hired headhunters recently to seek out a new 
“director of education” 
<http://www.wildsearch.org/director-of-education-the-inspiration-trust/>, on up 
to £100,000 a year, to support De Souza and her headteachers. Having such a 
figure as well as a chief executive might seem top-heavy in an organisation 
that from September will run just 13 schools. So could the new appointee 
actually be intended as a replacement for De Souza?

A trust spokesman did not deny De Souza might become the next chief inspector 
of schools, saying only that it was “speculation”. And, he added, the trust 
could afford a director of education because it ran its schools efficiently.

Incidentally, last week, the trust had to defend itself 
<http://www.edp24.co.uk/news/education/hewett_academy_defends_talk_highlighting_self_confidence_of_donald_trump_1_4451995>
 after an assembly at the Hewett school, Norwich, reportedly saw pupils 
encouraged to consider the “self-confidence” of the Republican presidential 
front-runner Donald Trump. The Hewett was taken over by the Inspiration Trust 
in September despite a big parental campaign. The trust’s defence was that the 
assembly was not meant to endorse Trump’s views.

Phonics favourite 


Relations between the DfE and one of its favourite advisers, Ruth Miskin, are 
in the spotlight again after ministersannounced 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/government-drive-to-help-more-children-become-confident-readers>
 that her company is to run a series of roadshows promoting reading for the 
government, in a contract worth up to £50,000. Ruth Miskin Training is running 
10 roadshow events, free to schools, which the department says will allow them 
to “share best practice in the teaching of phonics and early reading and 
support the government’s aim of ensuring high-quality systematic synthetic 
phonics in every primary school”.

By a happy coincidence, Miskin’s company provides phonics training in support 
of its Read Write Inc teaching scheme. Ruth Miskin Training was alsorevealed 
last month 
<http://schoolsweek.co.uk/eef-gives-3-6m-for-trial-of-phonics-maths-reading-and-grammar-tools/>
 as joint winner of the largest grant provided by the Education Endowment 
Foundation to trial new approaches to core subject teaching in schools. Miskin 
has served repeatedly as a government adviser, including on the 2011 Bew 
inquiry into primary assessment and on the coalition’s national curriculum 
review.

Asked for details of the roadshow contract, the DfE did not want to offer any 
response in writing, instead reading out a statement for our “guidance”. This 
said that Ruth Miskin Training had gone through a competitive bidding process 
for a contract worth up to £50,000.

A selection panel of DfE officials and an “independent phonics expert” had 
assessed several bids, against criteria specified in advance. The DfE added 
that “a broad range of phonics schemes” would be promoted through the 
roadshows. However, questions about this relationship seem unlikely to go away.

Hounslow school battle


Finally, controversial and expensive plans to build a 1,400-pupil free school 
on a protected green space in Hounslow, west London, seem likely to be delayed 
after residents launched a judicial review application against the move.

As we reported in November 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/nov/10/tory-donor-misuse-funds-free-school-warwick-mansell>
, the government spent £11.75m in February 2015 buying a sprawling tract of 
metropolitan open land – the urban equivalent of green belt – in Osterley for 
the Sikh-ethos Nishkam school west London.

Hounslow council granted planning permission in December, expecting the school 
to open in September 2017. But residents began the judicial review process last 
week, arguing the council had failed to follow procedures. They say the school 
is unlikely to be built to schedule now.

The council said it was “resisting” the judicial review application. Its 
leader, Steve Curran, added: “The planning permission is effectively halted by 
this legal action. This delay may have a significant impact on the school being 
built and opened to take the first pupils in September 2017.”
