
The British public faces daily waves of claim and counter-claim 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/07/eu-referendum-fact-check-david-cameron-leave-campaign-claims>
 over the UK’s membership of the EU, but many are hard to substantiate. My 
hunch is that leaving the EU will cause significant economic turmoil in the 
short term, but economic predictions into the medium term are always 
speculative.


However, there is one criterion against which Brexiters and Remainers agree 
the decision should be made: what is best for Britain.

This Britain-centred perspective appears so obviously correct that it is 
hardly ever challenged. To suggest that British voters should weigh up the pros 
and cons of EU membership according to what is best for the world would be 
treated as absurd by most media.


Related: European leaders told to keep aid for poor people, not hosting 
refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/16/european-leaders-aid-poor-people-hosting-refugees-security-poverty>

But internationalists care as much about people in other countries as people 
in their own, and judge a policy or action not just on how it affects their own 
country, but on itsregional and global impacts as well 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/04/dear-britain-letters-from-europe-referendum>
. And while all peoples and countries should adopt an internationalist 
perspective, the greatest responsibility is on wealthy countries to do so.


So this is precisely the perspective any internationalist voter should have in 
mind.

In this referendum, what outcome would best serve not just Britain, and not 
justEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, but the world?

While you might assume that an internationalist would enlist into the remain 
camp, there are fairly strong reasons to vote out. Regional collaboration, 
especially in a relatively wealthy part of the world, may run counter to what 
is best for marginalised communities internationally.


For instance, freedom of movement within Europe has increased the number of EU 
immigrants to Britain, with a direct impact on the chances of people from much 
poorer countries to migrate to the UK. And alarge-scale redistribution of money 
(via the structural and cohesion funds) 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2014/may/07/europe-aid-eu-middle-income-countries>
 to countries that are relatively poorer in European terms but still very 
wealthy in global terms may be in competition with the need to increase 
international public spending to deliver thesustainable development goals 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-united-nations>
.


However, neither argument is ultimately compelling – there is no reason to 
believe that money saved from spending on Europe will be redirected to poorer 
countries, nor that the broad historical trends behind huge migration numbers 
will shift because of this decision.


And it is in those expansive terms that we should consider our vote, and why 
mine will be to remain.


There was a time when the world seemed to be on an inexorable path towards 
increased internationalism and multilateralism as an inevitable consequence of 
a shrinking global village, as communications and international relationships 
evolved and multiplied.


Related: Will giving fat cats some of the cream help to cut poverty? | 
Jonathan Glennie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/09/cut-poverty-africa-china-economic-boom-self-interest-development>

But that assumption has turned out to be naive – collaboration between 
countries seems to be under threat and its alternative, increased competition 
between countries, is rising.


Internationalism needs its defenders today more than ever, just as its 
opposite, nationalism, appears to be ever stronger in the UK and around the 
world.


That is why the message the EU sends to the world about the possibility of 
peacefully working out regional tensions, and jointly capitalising on regional 
opportunities, is so powerful. Conversely, the message that would be sent if 
the EU were to start to unravel, a real possibility in a post-Brexit scenario, 
would be very damaging.


In Africa, attempts at meaningful regional groupings have not been hugely 
successful, and thedream of pan-Africanism 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2013/may/21/african-union-serve-africa-50-years>
 remains far off. There are many reasons for this, both economic and political, 
including conflict in the continent.


But attempts are constantly under way to improve regional integration. A 
negative sign from the EU, implying that costs of integration are greater than 
benefits, would damage these.


In South America, Unasur <http://www.unasursg.org/en> still feels like it is 
close to the beginning of a journey of integration, as doesCaricom 
<http://www.caricom.org/>, the grouping of Caribbean countries, which has 
explicitly set out a vision of asingle market <http://csmeonline.org/>.


And in Asia, the most developed grouping, the Association of South East Asian 
Nations <http://asean.org/>, wants to create an economic community, based 
ostensibly on the European model, by 2020.


In all regions of our world, attempts are under way by countries to work 
together towards ever deeper integration, both economically and politically. 
These processes are fraught and complex, but they are critical for development 
and poverty reduction. There is no bigger barrier to development than conflict, 
and the investment in collaboration between countries is a crucial 
counterweight to the inevitable competition that follows the logic of an ever 
more powerful global marketplace.


This is the bigger picture that was in the minds of the founders of the EU. To 
vote to undermine this imperfect but important process would not only let 
Europe down, but also the many countries that seek to follow its lead.

