
The G7 summit has drawn to a close, and as world leaders depart Germany so too 
do the many anti-poverty campaigners whoprotested at the summit 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/06/g7-thousands-gather-munich-for-action-against-poverty>
. But is the public movement to end poverty and inequality as effective as it 
used to be? Researcher Alex Evans argues thatdevelopment activism is in decline 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/06/g7-anti-poverty-protesters-climate-activists-environmental-campaign>
 and anti-poverty campaigners have much to learn from climate change activism, 
which has attracted a new generation of supporters. We asked readers who 
protested at the G7 to share their photos; here aresome of the best 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2015/jun/08/your-stories-campaigning-germany-g7-in-pictures>
.

A study has attempted to place a dollar figure on women’s contribution to 
global healthcare. A Lancet report foundwomen contribute around $3tn 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/05/women-backbone-healthcare-3tn-contribution>
 to healthcare, but almost half of it is unpaid and unrecognised. The unpaid 
work is mostly domestic care for family members, which is only officially 
acknowledged and compensated in a small number of countries, such as the UK, 
Turkey and Costa Rica.

Elsewhere on the site

 * Eritrea human rights abuses may be crimes against humanity, says UN 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/08/human-rights-abuses-eritrea-may-be-crimes-against-humanity-un-report>
 * The phone app challenging violence against women in a Mumbai slum 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/02/phone-app-challenging-violence-against-women-mumbai-slum-dharavi>
 * Tax dodging by big firms ‘robs poor countries of billions of dollars a year’
 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/02/tax-dodging-big-companies-costs-poor-countries-billions-dollars>
 * Asian refugee crisis: trafficked migrants held off Thailand in vast ‘camp 
boats’ 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/28/asian-refugee-crisis-trafficked-migrants-held-off-thailand-camp-boats>
 * Your stories on childbirth and maternal healthcare around the world 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/28/your-stories-childbirth-maternal-healthcare-around-the-world>

Opinion

Addis Ababa is set to host the financing for development conference in July, 
where leaders will negotiate how to fund thenew development agenda 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-united-nations>
. Butas Jonathan Glennie argues 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/05/without-leadership-development-finance-addis-talks-cannot-succeed-sdgs>
, the conference is missing the leadership required to make funding commitments 
possible. Instead, Glennie says, “the conference is in danger of not being 
remembered at all, as lower-level ministers and bureaucrats argue the toss over 
the jargon, with no era-defining clarion calls to speak of, and few timetables 
for action”.

As part of our review of the millennium development goals 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/series/millennium-development-goals-the-final-countdown>
, two experts shared their views on the state of progress on reducing child and 
maternal mortality. The World Health Organisation’s Dr Flavia Bustreo argued 
thattackling inequality 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/28/infant-child-death-inequality-surviving-childhood-global-postcode-lottery>
 should be the highest priority when addressing preventable deaths in 
childhood, while Amref Health Africa’s Dr Joachim Osur called for leaders to
keep their promises 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/28/maternal-health-african-mothers-dying-preventable-diseases-mdg5>
 on healthcare funding in order to prevent mothers dying in childbirth.

Multimedia

Podcast: What causes conflict and how can it be resolved? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/audio/2015/may/17/conflict-resolution>

Video: Protecting women and girls in India: building a toilet for an urban 
community 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2015/jun/01/india-toilet-sanitation-protect-women-girls-video>

Pictures: Refugee children in Tanzania find stability at school 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2015/jun/08/refugee-children-tanzania-nyarugusu-education-school-pictures>

Pictures: Around Lake Chad: Boko Haram’s legacy of ruin and fear 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2015/may/29/lake-chad-boko-haram-legacy-of-ruin-fear-in-pictures>

Coming up

How far has the world progressed on the sixth millennium development goal – 
combat HIV and Aids, malaria and other diseases? We take a look at what the 
world has achieved, what has failed, and what action is required for the next 
15 years.

What you said: top reader comment

On the piece What can G7’s dwindling anti-poverty protesters learn from 
climate activists? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/06/g7-anti-poverty-protesters-climate-activists-environmental-campaign>
,SteB1 wrote:

Instead of seeing all these matters as separate issues, poverty, development, 
wealth distribution, social justice, climate change, biodiversity loss, the 
depletion of the oceans, and a whole host of other sustainability issues, we 
need joined-up thinking that sees them as one big, joined-up interrelated 
problem, dealt with by the same focused analysis, and dealt with by the same 
focused problem solving …As the article hints at, what has created the rebirth 
of the climate movement is turning it into a moral issue ie something that 
really matters, and why we need to do the right thing. What motivates people is 
“meaningfulness”.

Highlight from the blogosphere

Overseas Development Institute: What if growth had been as good for the poor 
as everyone else? 
<http://www.odi.org/publications/9588-income-inequality-poverty-growth>

And finally …

Poverty matters will return in two weeks with another roundup of the latest 
news and comment. In the meantime, keep up to date on theGlobal Development 
website <http://www.theguardian.com/global-development>. Follow @gdndevelopment 
<https://twitter.com/gdndevelopment> and the team – @swajones 
<https://twitter.com/swajones>, @LizFordGuardian 
<https://twitter.com/lizfordguardian>, @MarkC_Anderson 
<https://twitter.com/MarkC_Anderson> and @CarlaOkai 
<https://twitter.com/CarlaOkai> – on Twitter, and join Guardian Global 
Development on Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardianglobaldevelopment>.
