
Think about how parents train kids to get ready for sleep. Dinner. Bath. Milk. 
Book. Bed. The same things, in the same order, every night of the week, each 
week of the year, until they’re old enough to start negotiating, or steal car 
keys. How does that compare with your own night-time story?

Related: Chill out, it's bedtime … here's how to relax into sleep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/estee-lauder-sleep-tips/2016/may/06/chill-out-its-bedtime-heres-how-to-relax-into-sleep>

If this has made you pause for thought, and you’d like to wake up with zest 
rather than the trace panic of the rubbish sleeper, it’s time to address your 
bedtime self-parenting. “We can train ourselves to get ready for sleep,” says 
life coach and writer Fiona Buckland. “The psychological phenomenon of 
entrainment means you can set your internal clock using external cues. Unless 
there’s a biological problem, light is the number one environmental contributor 
to sleep issues, so start by dimming lighting at home – and on your devices. 
There are clever apps [such as Twilight, and f.lux] that mediate the brightness 
of digital screens, tuning them from blue hues, towards twilight yellows, for 
example.”


Buckland also advises that the beginning of a bedtime routine starts two hours 
before you want to be asleep. “Anthropologists tell us personal rituals are 
important in life, and the point is precisely that: it’s personal, so play with 
what works for you.” A simple way to move into a more relaxed, ritualistic mood 
is to surround yourself with objects that invoke a sense of gratitude. “Use 
pictures of places and people you love to transport you,” says Buckland. “One 
client of mine turns her phone off at 9pm every night, and wraps it in a 
beautiful cloth bag to start to separate herself from the wakeful world, as 
part of her sleep preparation.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4te6v%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4te6v%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b2744cadcb59868b9a76c39bb1661bbbb0fa523%2F0_155_5714_3428%2F5714.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Good%20news%20rubbish%20sleepers%2C%20a%20simple%20routine%20can%20transform%20your%20night&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4te6v%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Good+news+rubbish+sleepers%2C+a+simple+routine+can+transform+your+night&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4te6v%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b2744cadcb59868b9a76c39bb1661bbbb0fa523%2F0_155_5714_3428%2F5714.jpg>
 Estée Lauder Advanced Night Repair serum has the feeling of a daily treat. 
Photograph: Victoria Adamson 
Psychotherapist and beauty journalist Jess Henley underlines why a calm, 
positive process of readying for bed is key. “As the familiar steps unfurl, 
your mind slows, and doesn’t have to think about what you’re doing. It moves to 
autopilot, so that by the time you’re between the sheets, your brain is exactly 
where it needs to be in terms of switching off,” she says.


“In my routine, scent is my thing. I use a lovely essential oil and inhale it 
really deeply before putting it on my face, and give myself a one-minute 
massage immediately before bed. This is what works, doing the same thing every 
night sends your brain a signal that says: ‘Hey friend, we’re 20 … 10 … one 
minute away from lights out, so you can switch off now.’”

Holistic skincare rituals aren’t exactly new. But like all good and useful 
habits, it’s annoyingly easy to slip backwards into sloppiness. However, a boon 
like bankable sleep is a pretty strong motivating force. So keep your fresh 
faced, well-slept self at the front of your mind as the day closes, and you 
lovingly apply your serums, oils and creams as a reward. For example, Estée 
Lauder Advanced Night Repair serum has the feeling of a daily treat due to its 
calming, velvety texture. And if your new routine is proving tricky to bed 
down, the concentrated ingredients are the perfect sleep aid for keeping under 
eye circles at bay, and coaxing tired skin into looking healthy and glowing.

As with all things, patience is required – from rebirthing your skin (a cell 
cycle takes about 28 days), to embedding a valuable new behaviour, such as a 
reliable bedtime routine. “It takes two to three months to get entrainment 
going,” says Buckland. But try this one small mental exercise tonight and 
you’re already helping your body to clock off. “The problem isn’t with your 
sleep. It’s with how you manage your day. People who end the day with a ‘done’ 
list, as opposed to a ‘to-do’ list, are more productive.” No pencil required.

