
At first light, we are sitting in a boat, engine cut out, waiting in the calm 
chill. A ripple suddenly materialises – something turning, fast, in the water 
below.

“We’ve got a run,” says my guide, Mark Watson, seizing one of four rods 
protruding from our boat. He quickly pulls it in. The bait has disappeared. The 
hooks and the titanium “trace” which attached them to the line – designed to 
haul in an 80lb fish – have been bitten clean off. “Shitbag,” exclaims Watson 
mildly.

This is my first encounter with a pike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/11/country-diary-sandy-niemann-pike-shoals-mill-canal>
. Britain’s waterways may be short on sharks or crocodiles but down there lurk 
river monsters which are just as lethal – if you are a roach. Ancient pike 
bones show that this aquatic attacker has barely changed in five million years. 
Why evolve, when you are one of nature’s winners?

The pike <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Northern_pike> is an ambush predator. 
It loiters in muddy rivers, barely moving, before seizing whatever is passing – 
fish, ducklings, grass snakes, mice, frogs. To do this in the murkiest waters, 
it possesses incredible senses: a keen nose, a row of what look like stitches 
down its side which pick up vibrations and fluid-filled pits all over its face 
that can,shark-like <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ampullae_of_Lorenzini>, 
detect electrical vibrations.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evp6%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evp6%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446734798778%2Fb08c08ed-8e8d-4281-b47e-96527dddfd69-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20search%20of%20the%20river%20monster&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evp6%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In+search+of+the+river+monster&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evp6%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446734798778%2Fb08c08ed-8e8d-4281-b47e-96527dddfd69-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Got one! A heron makes off with its catch. Photograph: Graham Turner 
These superpowers make pike fishing a particularly challenging mission. I’ve 
only been fishing once before and so I need a guide. Watson has been fishing on 
the Norfolk Broads for 40 years (since he was three) and holds the pike record 
on the River Bure: just under 35lb. Like all modest but supremely skilled 
people, he makes his craft look simple. His rod is an extension of his forearm 
and there’s no fancy technology, just home-made triple hooks and basic floats 
(although he confesses his reel cost £600). “I’m just one of those strange 
people who can catch fish from an empty puddle,” he shrugs. A good angler 
understands their quarry. Pike “are a little bit like married couples – they 
sleep, they eat, they have sex once a year,” says Watson, deadpan. I hold the 
rod. “When you get a run, you have to strike really quickly, hit them as soon 
as the float starts to wander off.”

Fishermen may be notorious for their tales but Watson has some compelling 
evidence of the pike’s predatory power: a scar around his little finger – 19 
stitches after one severed his tendon. His gloves, made of Kevlar (the 
body-armour material), were recently shredded by a pike. The fish will hold 
large prey in its mouth until it bleeds to death.

I’m not sure I want to catch a pike and we don’t, all morning, despite laying 
out a buffet of mackerel, herring, sardine and live roach. After the bliss of a 
warm pub, we head farther downstream, past gorgeous wooden-thatched bungalows 
built on the riverbank during the Broads’ Edwardian heyday. A marsh harrier 
flaps overhead but nothing moves in the water. I’m freezing – pike fishing 
season runs from October to March – and Watson is crestfallen that we’ve caught 
nothing all day. The next morning, we go upriver, entering a wild world of 
swamp and alder thicket.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evp6%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evp6%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446735105701%2F84c336ae-66db-4a1a-b8c7-94edb4d95fa1-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20search%20of%20the%20river%20monster&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evp6%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In+search+of+the+river+monster&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evp6%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446735105701%2F84c336ae-66db-4a1a-b8c7-94edb4d95fa1-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Floats, weights and traces. Photograph: Graham Turner 
Watson never kills his pike but has he ever eaten one? “I tried one that my 
grandfather brought home,” he says. “It was absolutely awful.”

After half an hour, a float makes – to me – an imperceptible move: a run. 
Watson is on to the line in a flash. What he picks out of the water with his 
Kevlar-gloved hand is not pretty but it has presence. A blotchy grey-green pike 
with those mighty pock-marks on its face. I marvel that this fish belongs to a 
species far older than the landscape – the Norfolk Broads were created by
medieval peat diggings 
<http://www.visitnorfolk.co.uk/explore/Broads-history-of-the-Broads.aspx>. 
After some pictures, it is returned, uninjured, to the water. (Another reason 
to have a guide: Watson removes the hook from the pike’s mouth with the 
expertise of a surgeon.)

We pass two other angling boats. There’s no “have you caught much?” chat. Pike 
fishermen are a secretive bunch because, explains Watson, “pike thrive on 
neglect”. If you catch the same fish three times “you’ll move it and lose it, 
or you’ll damage it,” he says.

Critics say fishing is cruel but Watson’s livelihood depends on returning pike 
uninjured and not “putting pressure” on their population along the 12-mile 
stretch of river he knows so intimately. “I never fish the same spots twice in 
a week. You try to look after the fish.”

Drifting down the Bure, we catch our second. This time, I do it myself. Point 
the rod at the fish, yank and reel in hard. It feels enormous but this is a 
smaller pike. I lower it back into the water and it regards me for a few 
seconds as if surprised that a fellow predator has shown mercy. Then it arrows 
away, disappearing into the murk. After another day on the water, I fall into a 
dreamlike trance. In the end, we catch seven pike. As we held them briefly, 
they weren’t trophies but a window into a five-million-year-old world.

Half-day pike fishing on the River Bure from £100, norfolkangling.co.uk 
<http://norfolkangling.co.uk/>
