
As the whirlwind success of the marijuana social network Massroots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/16/marijuana-social-network-massroots-ceo-isaac-dietrich>
 has demonstrated, there is a substantial appetite for cannabis-related 
services. This is especially true in US states such as Colorado and Oregon, 
where, in October,buying marijuana for recreational use 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/09/oregon-marijuana-recreational-sales>
 from dispensaries became legal. But while the app’s success shows what an 
online service can achieve, tackling the practical issues of consumption, and 
tourism, are more complicated.

Tourists in Colorado, for example, face the Amendment 64 conundrum, which 
allows the consumption of marijuana, but only in a private home and with 
permission from the owner. There are some hotels that allowvaping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/e-cigarettes> in rooms but the law allows 
a maximum of 25% of rooms to be marijuana-friendly. Enter Greg Drinkwater, who 
while discussing this puzzle with friends on a visit to Denver in 2013, had a 
lightbulb moment: AirTHC. Yes, an Airbnb-style service for the 
cannabis-inclined. Launched in April 2014, AirTHC (the name has since been 
changed toTravelTHC <http://travelthc.com/> due to potential copyright 
infringement) helps tourists fulfil the dream of getting stoned legally in a 
stranger’s home. Pro-marijuana property owners can list (unlimited) 
accommodation for a flat rate of $199 a year. Rentals range from the grandiose
Blue Sky Ranch <http://travelthc.com/properties/blue-sky-ranch/> vacation 
estate in Black Hawk, Colorado, from $999 a night, to a modest room in a 
private Denver home for $80. It boasts hundreds of properties in Colorado and 
an expanding presence in Washington state and Alaska.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ec2a%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ec2a%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce19fcc194b30585a53f04c5f7f28ab395ac19cf%2F0_51_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bed%20heads%3A%20Colorado%E2%80%99s%20Airbnb-style%20website%20for%20cannabis%20lovers&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ec2a%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bed+heads%3A+Colorado%E2%80%99s+Airbnb-style+website+for+cannabis+lovers&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ec2a%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce19fcc194b30585a53f04c5f7f28ab395ac19cf%2F0_51_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
 The Blue Sky Ranch in Black Hawk, Colorado – from the TravelTHC website 
Only licenced retailers can sell marijuana legally, so TravelTHC does not 
facilitate the sale of marijuana, though property owners are not prohibited 
from sharing the weed. Hosts may leave a loaf of extra-special banana bread 
waiting for guests on arrival, for example. Furthermore, travellers who visit 
Colorado for the purpose of enjoying pot often buy more then they can consume 
during one visit but cannot legally take their stash home. Even if they live in 
a state where the drug is legal, Denver airport won’t allow it on its premises 
– so people leave their bud behind for the next guests.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ec2a%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ec2a%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F606e01db7913cb1b438c9513a5e29ee33a80717d%2F0_205_2592_1557%2F2592.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bed%20heads%3A%20Colorado%E2%80%99s%20Airbnb-style%20website%20for%20cannabis%20lovers&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ec2a%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bed+heads%3A+Colorado%E2%80%99s+Airbnb-style+website+for+cannabis+lovers&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ec2a%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F606e01db7913cb1b438c9513a5e29ee33a80717d%2F0_205_2592_1557%2F2592.jpg>
 Bear’s Den accommodation – from the TravelTHC website 
“People’s eyes are bigger than their lungs,” says Ricardo Baca, editor of the 
Cannabist <http://www.thecannabist.co/author/rbaca/>, the Denver Post’s 
marijuana magazine. “Hosts end up with a drawer full of weed and tell guests to 
help themselves.” This might be illegal if room prices were much higher than 
market value due to the inclusion of bud, but rooms on TravelTHC are reasonable 
so they can hardly be accused of selling a “package deal”. In Colorado, an 
adult can share up to an ounce of marijuana with another adult, and since those 
sharing are private residents it’s legal despite the fact that money changes 
hands.

This frustrates institutions such as Denver’s Adagio Bud + Breakfast which 
incurred a finefor sharing with their guests 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/nov/12/denver-colorado-cannabis-adagio-bud-breakfast-weed>
 because it is considered a business. Such strange juxtapositions characterise 
the fledgling movement that has not yet been fully embraced by the judicial 
system. With time, Colorado will no doubt incorporate cannabis culture – until 
then, potheads will just have to sit back and smoke some more bowls as the laws 
stumble awkwardly through their infancy.
