
Sexual harassment and assault are serious and alarmingly common problems in UK 
universities. The NUS’s 2010Hidden Marks report 
<http://www.nus.org.uk/Global/NUS_hidden_marks_report_2nd_edition_web.pdf> 
found that 68% of female students suffered sexual harassment at university and 
16% had experienced unwanted kissing, touching or molesting, the majority of 
which took place in public.

It is our responsibility not only to debate such issues, but also to act. We at
Soas University of London <https://www.soas.ac.uk/> want to be at the forefront 
of the drive to eliminate these crimes from our school, which is why we launched
new guidance on preventing and responding to gender-based violence 
<https://www.soas.ac.uk/equalitydiversity/gender-based-violence/file107475.pdf>.

Related: Universities are reluctant to tackle sexual violence for fear of PR 
fallout 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/feb/02/universities-reluctant-tackle-sexual-violence-fear-pr-fallout>

Our drive comes from our commitment to equality and diversity. We want all Soas
 <http://www.theguardian.com/education/school-of-oriental-and-african-studies> 
students to have a good experience – embracing not only academic education and 
preparation for the world of work, but also social life, community atmosphere, 
campus environment and sports and cultural facilities. This brings with it an 
expansive duty of care.

I am heartened by the commitment to change demonstrated by many institutions. 
I also welcome the government’sinvitation to Universities UK to establish a 
task-force to examine violence against women, harassment and hate crimes 
affecting students 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/business-secretary-calls-on-universities-to-tackle-violence-against-women-on-campus>
.

We can also learn a lot from other countries. In the US, Barack Obama’s 
administration has taken significant steps to address gender-based violence on 
campuses. All federally funded institutions are now required to demonstrate 
that they investigate allegations of sexual assault.Higher education 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/higher-education> institutions are 
required to abide by the gender equity laws and must address and eliminate 
sexual violence and harassment on campus, regardless of whether or not police 
are involved in a case.

This approach has not been without its critics – but it sends a message to 
students and staff that it is an issue that is taken seriously at the highest 
level.

In the development of our new guidance, we recognised that prevention is key. 
We are adopting the excellentIntervention Initiate materials developed by 
University of the West of England 
<http://www1.uwe.ac.uk/bl/research/interventioninitiative/thetoolkit.aspx>, 
which prompt students of both genders to consider what is and what is not 
appropriate behaviour. These resources have been proven to have a positive 
impact, in particular by avoiding stigmatising male students or further 
entrenching misogynistic attitudes.

Related: Universities, don't conflate ‘lad culture’ with ‘drink culture' 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/jun/24/universities-dont-conflate-lad-culture-with-drink-culture>

Our guidance also provides detailed, pragmatic advice to staff on how to give 
the best support in such situations, including signposting to external 
agencies. This will be reinforced by training for academic and student services 
staff.

The higher education sector’s approach was defined by the 1994 Zellick report 
<http://nusdigital.s3-eu-west-1.amazonaws.com/document/documents/19993/NUS_Zellick_report_briefing_.pdf?AWSAccessKeyId=AKIAJKEA56ZWKFU6MHNQ&Expires=1451929954&Signature=JNgprGu%2F3v7c%2BxqAA3AvRsWfCkE%3D>
, which gave the police responsibility for investigating allegations of 
gender-based violence. There is widespread agreement that this is no longer 
appropriate: as employers, we would routinely investigate such allegations from 
our staff – so why not from our students?

We have therefore committed to investigating allegations of gender-based 
violence in clearly defined circumstances – rather than simply saying that they 
are a matter for the police to deal with.

However, we will only undertake such investigations when a victim makes an 
informed decision not to report an incident to the police. We recognise that we 
are not equipped to undertake criminal standard investigations, and nor should 
we attempt to do so. But we can and should impose proportionate and appropriate 
sanctions in cases of serious misconduct, as we would with other cases of 
physical assault.

The main issue is to find a way to tackle the prevalence of gender-based 
violence – the levels of malicious allegations are far lower than some media 
reporting might lead us to believe. A2012 Crown Prosecution Service survey 
<https://www.cps.gov.uk/publications/research/perverting_course_of_justice_march_2013.pdf>
 found only 35 false allegations out of a total of 5,651 prosecutions for rape 
over a 17-month period.

We are conscious that we must ensure fairness in our processes by offering 
support to alleged perpetrators and by providing expert training to those 
involved in investigating such allegations.

Related: Call to start sex education earlier to stem sexual violence on campus 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/oct/19/call-to-start-consent-sex-education-earlier-in-schools-to-stem-sexual-violence-on-campus>

Our approach is an inclusive one. We are conscious of not demonising male 
students, and recognise that they can also be victims of sexual harassment and 
assault.

By adopting the measures set out in the new guidance, and by working closely 
with our students’ union, we are determined to be at the forefront of the 
campaign against gender-based violence both within and beyond higher education.

We will scrutinise and record the outcomes of our new approach and share the 
results widely, working towards creating the healthy, sustaining and 
stimulating environment in which our students wish to study.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
