
The following all have something in common: a multinational, mass vaccination 
campaign across Africa to tackle meningitis outbreaks; a government program in 
Vietnam to encourage people to wear motorcycle helmets; and cash payments to 
families and caregivers of children orphaned in Kenya due to Aids.

They might seem disparate, but they’re all public health programs that were 
rolled out on a large scale in the past decade – and they were all hugely 
successful. Meningitis A was virtuallywiped out 
<http://millionssaved.cgdev.org/case-studies/eliminating-meningitis-across-africas-meningitis-belt>
 in more than a dozen countries. Thousands fewer people were killed or hurt on
Vietnam’s roads 
<http://millionssaved.cgdev.org/case-studies/vietnams-comprehensive-helmet-law>
. And many more Kenyan orphansstayed in school 
<http://millionssaved.cgdev.org/case-studies/kenyas-social-cash-transfer-program>
 longer and experienced far fewer teen pregnancies.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t4jm%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t4jm%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd576088a574ebb59baaff9bdbcf5f699416406bd%2F0_0_1561_937%2F1561.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20motorcycle%20safety%2C%20meningitis%20vaccines%20and%20money%20transfers%20are%20signs%20of%20a%20global%20health%20revolution%20%E2%80%93%20podcast&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t4jm%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why+motorcycle+safety%2C+meningitis+vaccines+and+money+transfers+are+signs+of+a+global+health+revolution+%E2%80%93+podcast&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t4jm%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd576088a574ebb59baaff9bdbcf5f699416406bd%2F0_0_1561_937%2F1561.jpg>
 Rajesh Mirchandani, vice president of communications and policy outreach at 
the Center for Global Development. Photograph: Center for Global Development 
In a new podcast, I speak with Amanda Glassman 
<http://www.theguardian.com/health-revolution/2016/mar/22/millions-saved-book-healthcare-global-aid-policy>
, director of global health at the Center for Global Development and co-author 
of the new bookMillions Saved: New Cases of Proven Success in Global Health 
<file:/C:/Users/lpost/AppData/Local/Microsoft/Windows/Temporary%20Internet%20Files/Content.Outlook/WJYG97UZ/millionssaved.cgdev.org>
, which details what made these health programs successful. The book contains 
22 case studies from around the world, from Haiti to Pakistan, Ethiopia to 
Peru. In 18 of the cases, major health improvements were recorded – but in four 
instances, well planned, trial tested programs failed to have the expected 
results. Glassman explains why success and failure equally matter and what she 
has learned from them both.

You can listen to the podcast here 
<http://www.cgdev.org/blog/millions-saved-what-works-global-health-podcast-amanda-glassman>
.

Related: Millions saved: how to make sure global health programs work 
<http://www.theguardian.com/health-revolution/2016/mar/22/millions-saved-book-healthcare-global-aid-policy>

While each case is unique, we can connect the dots across the programs to 
learn what made them successful and how we can make greater progress in global 
health in the future. All of these schemes were based on the best available 
scientific evidence. They benefited from sustained political will across 
administrations, even during periods of unrest. They involved partnerships that 
mobilized domestic and international resources. And they were continuously 
evaluated so that improvements could be made mid-program.

Of course, success is never guaranteed. But these features can only help to 
ensure that foreign aid and domestic budgets are being spent more effectively – 
and that more people are living healthier lives.

Rajesh Mirchandani is vice president of communications and policy outreach at 
the Center for Global Development. He was formerly an international news 
correspondent and anchor at BBC News.

This content is paid for by the Center for Global Development
