
In recent months, headlines from Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> have been dominated by Big Men who 
just won’t go away.

On 18 February, Ugandans went to the polls, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/18/ugandans-cast-votes-presidential-elections-delays>
 with President Yoweri Museveni, who has ruled the country since he came to 
power as a victorious rebel leader in 1986, looking to extend his 30-year rule.

It went according to script: arrest and harassment of opposition rivals, a 
chaotic vote, stuffed ballot boxes, Facebook and Twitter blocked, and the chief
emerges victorious 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/20/ugandan-election-yoweri-museveni-wins-arrests-opposition-leader-besigye>
.

Related: Democrats v autocrats in Africa: is there a winning formula? – podcast
 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/audio/2016/feb/25/democrats-autocrats-africa-winning-formula-uganda-podcast>

Museveni sits at the high table of Africa’s longest-serving leaders: 
Equatorial Guinea’sTeodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/11/equatorial-guinea-human-rights-africa-dictatorship-tutu-alicante>
, Angola’sJosé Eduardo dos Santos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/aug/30/angola-jose-eduardo-dos-santos> 
and Zimbabwe’s 92-year-oldRobert Mugabe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/21/robert-mugabes-lavish-birthday-plans-attacked-as-drought-plagues-zimbabwe>
 have all been in charge for 36 years – the latter as prime minister then 
president; and Cameroon’sPaul Biya 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-20219549> has been in power for 33 
years.

Though not an exemplary democrat, Museveni nevertheless still has a passable 
report card. Heturned around a broken economy 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/13/uganda-oil-production-yoweri-museveni-agriculture>
, and his government has reduced thecountry’s poverty level to about 19% (pdf) 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0ahUKEwjGkKD3qY7LAhUGVxQKHRZ3ChUQFggcMAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.finance.go.ug%2Findex.php%3Foption%3Dcom_docman%26Itemid%3D7%26task%3Ddoc_download%26gid%3D423&usg=AFQjCNFE5IgtAzfUjsEDv2NuUzlJ5U0_PQ&sig2=t5YBjMVFBduUexJtoGVdmw&bvm=bv.114733917,d.d24&cad=rja>
.

The corruption and repression of latter years have taken some of the shine off 
those achievements, but still don’t add up to a definitive case against 
long-term leaders.

 Ethiopia, the hottest economy on the continent, is a dictatorship-lite. The 
ruling EPRDFtook all 546 seats in parliament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/22/ethiopias-ruling-party-win-clean-sweep-general-election>
 last year, snatching the opposition’s sole seat. Ethiopia’seconomy is doing 
much better 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jul/23/ethiopia-powers-up-ambitions-for-green-industry-economy-climate-resilient>
 than Zambia and Malawi, which do have presidential term limits.

A big man who ends a brutal dictatorship and starvation – in this case 
Ethiopia’s lateMeles Zenawi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/aug/21/meles-zenawi-death-fears-turmoil>
 – will have a lot of political authority to push through reforms. Such power 
cannot easily be secured by a politician who made dodgy backroom deals to 
secure electoral victory.

However, what is clear is that while some long-term leaders have delivered 
decent development results, one danger is almost a given: the longer they stay 
beyond 25 years, the higher the risk that their countries will implode when 
they leave.

The best example can be found in Ivory Coast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ivory-coast> after Félix Houphouët-Boigny, 
who led his country for 33 years, died in 1993. He was urbane and Francophile, 
and there have been few African leaders with his progressive views on issues 
like citizenship.

During Houphouët-Boigny’s time in power, Abidjan was dubbed the “Paris of 
Africa”, and he built a prosperous cocoa-fuelled economy. But he wouldn’t have 
recognised the Ivory Coast thatplunged into a civil war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2002/sep/21/1> a few years after his death. 
If any African nation led by a long-term ruler was ever to survive convulsions,
Ivory Coast should have been the best candidate 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/22/international-criminal-court-help-to-end-conflict-or-exacerbate-it>
.

This would suggest that while long-term rulers can sometimes be effective in 
stabilising broken countries – and rebuilding fragmented societies is easier 
done without the vexations of competitive politics – it is an ill-advised form 
of stewardship for a country seeking political maturity.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gqyj%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gqyj%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc90667f808abc5daf9f153119ec1e2e57a70f80%2F0_235_4335_2602%2F4335.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Africa's%20Big%20Men%20can%20deliver%20but%20they%20must%20know%20when%20to%20go%20%7C%20Charles%20Onyango-Obbo&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gqyj%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Africa%27s+Big+Men+can+deliver+but+they+must+know+when+to+go+%7C+Charles+Onyango-Obbo&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gqyj%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc90667f808abc5daf9f153119ec1e2e57a70f80%2F0_235_4335_2602%2F4335.jpg>
 Raila Odinga, left, and Mwai Kibaki, right, photographed in 2011. The 
formation of a unity government led by them ended the post-election violence 
that shocked Kenya in 2008. Photograph: Ben Curtis/AP 
Troubles associated with elections and other democratic experiments in Africa 
are not always without benefit. A society learns to manage risk and pull itself 
back from the mouth of the grave. In 2008, Kenya was hit by theworst violence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/jan/28/kenya.international> since 
independence from British colonial rule in 1963, following a dispute over the 
election. It took former UN secretary general Kofi Annan just over a month to 
get the main player to agree to the formation of a national unity government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/feb/28/kenya> that divided the 
political spoils between then President Mwai Kibaki’s camp and his rival, Raila 
Odinga.

It was an unusually fast settlement, considering that in South Sudan a 
political deal to attempt toend the fighting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/12/hopes-rise-for-south-sudan-peace-deal>
 has taken nearly two years, while months of on-off talks have failedtroubled 
Burundi 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/15/burundi-all-alarm-signals-flashing-red-warns-un-as-reports-of-atrocities-mount>
.

South Sudan and Burundi lack Kenya’s long history of elections, some when it 
was a one-party state. Kenya’s heavy-handed and influential founding father, 
Jomo Kenyatta, died in 1978 after 14 years in office, and was succeeded by the 
gruff Daniel arap Moi. Moi left the country a shell of its former self by the 
time he stepped down in 2002. But while Moi left quietly, in some ways the 
post-election violence of 2008 had as much to do with his long rule as it did 
with alleged fraud.

Related: Can democracy spread at the push of a button? | Stephen Abbott Pugh 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/datablog/2016/feb/24/can-democracy-spread-data-monitor-governments-africa>

The epicentre of the violence was the Rift valley, where attacks targeted 
mostly Kikuyu “migrants” from centralKenya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/kenya> – the community from which Kibaki 
hailed. Moi is from the Rift valley and, during his 24 years in office, an 
elite from that region rose to power, captured the state, and shook it down. 
Moi’s departure from office left many of them at sea and, when the political 
coalition they were backing seemed to have been robbed in the polls, an 
explosion was almost inevitable.

I liken this to Iraq’s “Baathist problem” after the ousting of Saddam Hussein 
in 2003 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2003/dec/14/iraq.iraq1> and the 
dismantling of his Baathist political and security apparatus. After years of 
the party they supported being their meal ticket, a whole population can become 
highly alienated when everything is taken away.

There’s hardly a single African country that has both marvellously survived a 
long-term leader’s rule and gone on to prosper without missing a step. So, 
while there might sometimes be a case for dating an African Big Man, history 
tells us you should not marry him.

 * Charles Onyango-Obbo is editor of the Mail & Guardian Africa 
<http://mgafrica.com/>. You can follow him on Twitter @cobbo3 
<https://twitter.com/cobbo3>
