
Will 2015 be a watershed in the human effort to solve global problems, or just 
another chapter in the history of collective inaction?

 The answer will soon become apparent on construction sites around the world. 

 The two most ambitious international agreements of 2015 – the UN’s 
sustainable development goals (SDGs) 
<https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdgs> and the Paris climate accord 
<http://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/international/negotiations/paris/index_en.htm>
 – amount to a historic decision to build a world that reconciles improving 
human welfare with the reality of climate change.

Can elected officials justify using scarce public resource to build 
low-carbon, climate-resilient infrastructure?

 The SDGs chart a path for eliminating poverty and securing a better life for 
all by 2030. The Paris accord seeks to stabilise global carbon emissions by the 
second half of the century, through a rapid move away from high-carbon energy, 
transport, housing and land use towards efficient, low carbon, 
climate-resilient alternatives.

 But as nations set out to reflect these commitments in planning and budget 
processes, they face difficult choices: coal or renewables? Highways or public 
transport? Suburban sprawl or compact cities?

 And the window for making such choices is narrow. Existing and projected 
carbon emissions show the urgency of implementing the Paris commitments. But 
infrastructure projects are time-consuming and long-lasting. Power plants, for 
example, take from five to 15 years to plan and build and can then last for 
half a century. And 70% of the forecast increase in emissions from developing 
countries is expected to come from infrastructure that has yet to be built.

 This means that infrastructure decisions we make in the next few years could 
cement our ability to meet the Paris goals – or condemn us to a future in which 
global temperatures rise well above 2C. In the latter scenario, environmental 
conditions could be so hostile that development goes into reverse, leading to 
rising poverty and social conflict.

 Unfortunately, infrastructure planning is largely disconnected from climate 
change agendas for many governments and the current economic downturn threatens 
to widen this disconnect.

Related: Privatised, nationalised, electrified? A guide to the UK's railways 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/may/04/privatised-nationalised-electrified-guide-uk-railways-network-rail>

For example, in Latin America and the Caribbean, the end of the commodities 
supercycle 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-11-25/if-china-killed-commodities-super-cycle-fed-is-about-to-bury-it>
 has brought a painful economic contraction. Citizens are clamouring for jobs, 
wage increases and long-delayed improvements to services ranging from transport 
to healthcare. In this context, can elected officials justify using scarce 
public resource to build low-carbon, climate-resilient infrastructure?

 We believe the answer is a resounding yes. In the near-term, such spending 
can generate demand for labour and supplies, providing the stimulus that 
developing economies desperately need. In the longterm, it serves to 
simultaneously modernise and increase the efficiency of energy, manufacturing, 
mobility and logistics. This will in turn raise productivity and 
competitiveness, fostering domestic drivers of growth.

 The convergence of these two needs creates an extraordinary opportunity to 
get things right. Many of the requirements for a radical expansion of 
sustainable infrastructure are already in place. The managers of trillions of 
dollars of capital and pension fund assets are looking for predictable returns. 
Interest rates remain at historic lows. Critical technologies, from large-scale 
solar to clean transport, are mature and continue to drop in cost.

 What is missing, in many countries, are the policies, institutions and 
financial partners necessary to generate a pipeline of projects such as wind 
farms,bus-rapid-transit systems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/aug/27/buses-future-of-urban-transport-brt-bus-rapid-transit>
, or geothermal power plants.

 Private banks and investors have little experience with these sectors in 
emerging markets and are hesitant to take the lead. Multilateral development 
banks (MDBs), on the other hand offer decades of experience in planning and 
executing complex infrastructure projects. They also have the credibility to 
serve as trusted brokers between governments, investors and civil society.

Related: Ten ways to ensure UK transport projects are sustainable 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/oct/14/transport-projects-sustainable-uk-ensure-public-health-climate-change>

 In Paris the six leading development banks 
<http://www.worldbank.org/content/dam/Worldbank/document/Climate/Joint%20MDB%20Statement%20Climate_NOV%2028_final.pdf>
 (pdf) committed to expand their lending for climate-related projects. It’s a 
small fraction of what will be needed to meet the Paris commitments, but these 
funds could have a powerful exemplary effect, enticing other financial 
institutions to join in. The Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, the Brics 
New Development Bank (NDB) or the Latin American Development Bank (CAF), for 
example, are much more likely to co-finance complex infrastructure if they can 
work jointly with other MDBs.

 By establishing a robust institutional structure of MDB-led lending, private 
capital could be mobilised on a scale that could mean countries meet their 
Paris commitments, while responding to the development needs of their people.

 In the coming months this unprecedented opportunity will either be seized or 
squandered in the boardrooms of development banks. Borrowing governments must 
push smart infrastructure to the front of their project pipelines as their best 
route to sustainable development and poverty reduction. And donor nations, 
through their shareholdings, must do everything possible to facilitate 
financing for these projects.

 If they do not, 2015 may be remembered solely for its good intentions.

Luis Alberto Moreno 
<http://www.iadb.org/en/about-us/departments/biographies,1347.html?bioid=4> is 
president of the Inter-American Development Bank in Washington.Nicholas  
<http://www.lse.ac.uk/GranthamInstitute/profile/nicholas-stern/>Stern 
<http://www.lse.ac.uk/GranthamInstitute/profile/nicholas-stern/> is professor 
of economics and government at the London School of Economics.


Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
