
Law <http://www.theguardian.com/education/law> students and academics from 
across England and Wales met at Cardiff University recently to mark the 10-year 
anniversary of its innocence project and discuss their work on arguably the 
most complex and intractable cases in our legal system. At the height of the 
so-called innocence movement, some 30 universities were assisting alleged 
victims of miscarriages of justice to clear their names.

It is almost 12 years since the pioneering University of Bristol innocence 
project launched andonly one conviction has been overturned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/dec/09/dwaine-george-murder-conviction-overturned-cardiff-university-innocence-project>
 on the strength of a university application.

False hope?

At a breakout session at the Cardiff conference, students were considering the 
many and, all too often, insurmountable challenges of such work. A question 
posed for consideration by the students was: Do innocence projects create false 
hope?

“Prisoners place their hope in us. We are their last resort,” reflected one 
student. Another, from a different university, told a sad but familiar story of 
a prisoner’s partner at the end of their tether approaching a website claiming 
to specialise in criminal appeals. They were insisting on £60,000 upfront 
before they would even look at it. “They were about to re-mortgage their house. 
The prisoner might well have been innocent, but realistically the prospect of a 
successful appeal was slim,” she said.

The wrongly convicted have few places to turn for help. Only a handful of 
lawyers are prepared to take on such poorly paid cases (legal aid rates, frozen 
for years, were cut last year by 8.75% 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/jun/30/criminal-lawyers-promise-boycott-legal-aid-cases-lower-rate>
); and the miscarriage watchdog is as chronically underfunded as it is 
massively over-subscribed. The Criminal Cases Review Commission (CCRC) has 
borne a greater share of the austerity cuts than any other part of the criminal 
justice system.Over the last 10 years its budget has been cut by one third in 
real terms and its workload has increased by 70% 
<http://thejusticegap.com/2016/03/way-back-court-appeal/>.

Disarray

The innocence movement itself has been in a state of disarray following the 
2014 disbanding of the umbrella group Innocence Network UK. Its outspoken 
founder Dr Michael Naughton unilaterally pulled the plug on the scheme, 
accusing some universities ofjumping on the bandwagon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/dec/11/wrongful-convictions-murder-dwaine-george-innocence-movement>
, using projects as “a recruiting tool” to attract students to their courses 
and playing lip service to its main mission of overturning convictions.

But before that, some universities had abandoned the network over concerns 
about a lack of democratic accountability, and a genuinely radical and exciting 
project had become mired in infighting.

Related: The fight against wrongful convictions must go on – we owe it to the 
innocent | Jon Robins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/dec/11/wrongful-convictions-murder-dwaine-george-innocence-movement>

It was in this febrile atmosphere that I interviewed the CCRC chair Richard 
Foster last month. When asked about the value of university projects, he said: 
“If you think that you have a terminal illness, would you rather have your case 
considered by medical students in the bar on Friday night – or would you rather 
send it to a consultant oncologist?”

Foster’s comments were insensitive – as he has (sort of) conceded 
<http://thejusticegap.com/2016/04/genuinely-welcome-applications/> – but he 
also has a point. According to the CCRC, innocence projects have only made 
around 25 applications; they have come from just six universities; and one, 
Cardiff, has been responsible for more than half of the total. Cardiff was also
the first university UK to successfully have a case referred to the court of 
appeal 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2013/nov/20/appeal-court-innocence-projects-dwaine-george>
 (Dwaine George’s conviction was overturned in December 2014).

Battling the odds

What’s going on? “The CCRC is judging university projects on what applications 
have been made, but there are other ways of looking at this. The figures might 
not tell the whole story,” says Holly Greenwood, 28, a PhD student from Cardiff 
who has been working on their innocence project for seven years. Her 
ESRC-funded research is on the rise and fall of the innocence movement.

“The people who come to us are often those who have been rejected by lawyers 
and the CCRC. So we’re starting from a difficult point,” she says.

The odds are as massively stacked against success for the CCRC as much for 
anyone else. Last year the Birmingham-based CCRC received 1,599 applications 
but only referred 36 cases back to the court of appeal – that’s 2.2% of the 
total number. Prisoners in denial don’t get parole or better conditions – they 
can’t all be making it up.A point made by the Guardian’s Eric Allison recently 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/19/criminal-cases-review-commission-failing-innocent-prisoners>
: “It just doesn’t make sense that so many would make false claims.”

Related: University innocence projects: law students fight for justice 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/jun/11/university-innocence-projects-cardiff-law-students>

The CCRC (and universities) have to operate in a criminal justice system with 
a court of appeal that fails to get to grips with miscarriage cases. Such 
concerns were echoed by many of the witnesses who appeared before last year’s 
House of Commons’ justice committee on the CCRC. The commission had become “a 
filtering body” that provided “an extra barrier and reinforcement of the 
traditional intransigence of the court of appeal”,write Dr Dennis Eady and 
Professor Julie Price of Cardiff’s innocence project 
<http://thejusticegap.com/2015/01/problem-lies-court-appeal-always/>, in a 
submission co-signed by 18 academics, plus campaigners and lawyers.

The MPs seemingly accepted the point and called on the Law Commission to 
review the court of appeal’s grounds for allowing appeals. However,Michael 
Gove, the justice secretary and lord chancellor, rejected the recommendation 
<https://www.parliament.uk/documents/commons-committees/Justice/correspondence/15-09-30-Michael-Gove-to-Chair-on-FOI-Court-of-Appeal-Joint-Enterprise%20.pdf>
.

Regrouping

The recent conference at Cardiff saw a regrouping of the university casework 
movement. There might have been an upheaval but those universities that are 
sticking with the concept are committed to this important work and to exploring 
different, more effective ways of operating.

For example, six universities are piloting a collaboration with the new 
lawyer-led Centre for Criminal Appeals (CCA) and Essex University is working 
with Inside Justice, a unit set up by the prisoners’ newspaper Inside Time, to 
investigate miscarriages in 2010.

Emily Bolton, the CCA’s founder, set up the Innocence Project New Orleans, 
which has so far freed 25 innocent prisoners. “It’s all about time,” she says. 
“The quality of decisions made by the court of appeal is dictated by how much 
time has been spent investigating what went wrong in the case beforehand.

We have a system that goes some way to maintaining miscarriages of justice
Chris Musgrave, student 
“Students’ energy and enthusiasm undoubtedly needs to be harnessed by the 
innocence movement,” she says. “However, this needs to be supervised and guided 
by full-time investigators, researchers, lawyers or journalists.” It is no 
coincidence that Cardiff University – the one university with a full time 
case-worker, Dennis Eady – has made the highest number of applications to the 
CCRC.

Student views

And what do students get out of appeals work? “It inspired me to want to 
become a criminal defence lawyer. It was something that I could get passionate 
about,” says Chris Musgrave, 22, a law student at the University of Sheffield. 
He has been working on the case ofSusan May 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/susan-may>, who was convicted of murdering her 
aunt but who always protested her innocence and whose case has been highlighted 
by the Guardian over the years. “Her innocence just seems so glaringly obvious. 
It has been fascinating, at times harrowing,” he says.

Musgrave recently spent three months at the Center on Wrongful Convictions 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Northwestern_University_School_of_Law#Center_on_Wrongful_Convictions>
, run byNorthwestern University School of Law 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Northwestern_University_School_of_Law> in 
Chicago. In his final year as an undergraduate, he wrote a research paper 
looking at the different approaches to miscarriages of justice in the US and 
UK. His conclusion? “We have a system that goes some way to maintaining 
miscarriages of justice, almost actively, through these really high hurdles to 
get a conviction overturned,” he says.

Musgrave calls Richard Foster’s recent comments disheartening. “I have never 
reviewed a case at the bar. I don’t know any student at any university who has 
ever taken this work lightly.”

Bolton believes it has become increasingly clear that the CCRC is not able to 
put the necessary time into the cases it reviews. “Our guess is that they might 
average 50 hours work on a strong case, strung out over two years,” she says. 
“If I was a cancer patient, I wouldn’t want my consultant oncologist 
appointments spread so thinly.”

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
