
A Thai tuna processing factory has agreed to pay staff $1.3m compensation for 
labour abuses, an official said on Tuesday, in a rare victory for migrant 
workers in thecountry’s scandal-stricken seafood industry 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/25/slavery-trafficking-thai-fishing-industry-environmental-justice-foundation>
.

Hundreds of Myanmar <https://www.theguardian.com/world/myanmar> labourers at 
Golden Prize Tuna Canning, a processing plant in Samut Sakhon that sells fish 
to markets around the globe, have spent months seeking compensation for 
exploitative working conditions.

Thailand is the world’s third-largest seafood exporter, but the industry is 
plagued with rights abuses 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jul/20/thai-fishing-industry-implicated-enslavement-deaths-rohingya>
 and fuelled bytrafficked labour 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jul/20/sold-from-jungle-camp-thailand-fishing-industry-trafficking>
 from neighbouring Myanmar and Cambodia.

Related: Slavery and trafficking continue in Thai fishing industry, claim 
activists 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/25/slavery-trafficking-thai-fishing-industry-environmental-justice-foundation>

The sector has come under heightened scrutiny from foreign governments over 
the past year, with theEU weighing an all-out ban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/21/eu-investigators-to-decide-on-thai-fishing-industry-ban-over-slave-labour>
 on Thai fishing products.

The US passed a bill last week that will close loopholes in legislation 
outlawing goods produced by forced labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/26/obama-revives-anti-slavery-law-to-target-thailands-seafood-exports>
. This could see Thailand targeted with import bans.

Rights groups say Golden Prize workers had long been subject to unlawfully low 
salaries, supervisor abuse and a lack of compensation for machine accidents on 
the 25-acre processing sites.

Following a strike by more than 1,000 workers last week, company 
representatives joined negotiations with military officers, government 
officials and migrant worker leaders, reaching an agreement on Monday.

“The company began paying 1,100 workers last night involving money of 48 
million baht ($1.3m),” said Boonlue Sartpetch, the head of the province’s 
labour department. Seven hundred workers have already been paid, with the rest 
expected to receive compensation on Tuesday.

Golden Prize Tuna Canning, whose 2,000 workers are mostly from Myanmar, 
declined to comment.

The junta that seized power in Thailand in a 2014 coup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/25/thai-junta-dissolves-senate-coup-bangkok>
 has struggled to revive the flagging economy and is desperate to avoid any 
costly sanctions on the multi-billion dollar seafood sector.

In the US, federal officials are preparing to enforce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/26/obama-revives-anti-slavery-law-to-target-thailands-seafood-exports>
 an 86-year-old ban on importing goods made by children or slaves under new 
provisions of a law signed by the president last week.

The Tariff Act of 1930, which gave Customs and Border Protection the authority 
to seize shipments where forced labour was suspected and block further imports, 
was last used in 2000 and has been used only 39 times in all, largely because 
of two words: “consumptive demand” – if there was not sufficient supply to meet 
domestic demand, imports were allowed regardless of how they were produced.


The Trade Facilitation and Trade Enforcement Act signed by Barack Obama 
eliminated that language, allowing stiffer enforcement.

Thai officials say they have cleaned up the industry with new laws and 
crackdowns on traffickers 
<http://www.irrawaddy.com/asia/thai-authorities-say-fishing-industry-crackdown-intensified.html>
 and fish factories. This month Thai police said they arrested more than 100 
people on trafficking charges linked to the fishing industry.

Authorities have also registered nearly half of an estimated 200,000 
undocumented foreign workers in the seafood sector, officials said.

Andy Hall, a British labour activist who has been assisting the Myanmar 
workers at Golden Prize, said he suspects the spectre of costly trade bans was 
finally forcing the government to act.

“To get a dispute like this that involves so much money and actually have it 
settled is very unprecedented,” he said. But he accused both the company and 
local labour department of dodging the worker’s complaints for nearly a year.

In the past some Thai factories have responded to rights abuse allegations 
with defamation lawsuits;Hall faces a suit 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jan/22/human-rights-thailand-andy-hall-legal-battle-migrant-workers>
 for alleging exploitation at a Thai fruit company.
