
My mother told me that whenever she’d try to breastfeed me as a baby I’d push 
her away. Me and my brother had hyperactivity issues as kids and she blamed it 
on her divorce and E numbers in our food. When we were at the dinner table we’d 
act up. When I was 16 I wasn’t cycling so much. I’d started working at 
Barclays, got quite chubby and was called “the fat banker”. Lunchtime was half 
an hour and I’d buy a prawn butty and a bag of Walkers crisps. Later, when I 
was 20, six months after becoming world champion, I sat around in a place I 
shared in Cheadle [with track sprinter Craig MacLean] and I’d eat a big 
multi-bag of Walkers, then, when I’d finished them, go to the petrol station 
for another multi-bag and repeat. I was emotional, in a bit of a dark place. I 
have a fondness for junk food – it still calls me, sometimes. I think any 
professional athlete who says they stick to a strict diet and weigh their food 
out every time is either lying or they’re sick. I’m not going to put diesel in 
a petrol engine and obviously I do watch my diet, but to do just that and not 
live a life isn’t for me. I’m not going to make the sacrifices I do and then 
not enjoy myself sometimes. If it looks and tastes real good and is worth the 
calories, then I’m on it.

Related: Mark Cavendish on life in the saddle: 'I just love to win' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/may/02/mark-cavendish-life-saddle-i-love-to-win-tour-of-turkey-cycling>

I met my wife Peta [an ex-Page 3 model and now food columnist for the Sun] on 
Santa Monica pier in Los Angeles and our first date was at Ago restaurant on 
Melrose Avenue. Ago is owned by Robert De Niro and chef Agostino Sciandri, 
whose son Max won us a [cycling] bronze medal at the 1996 Atlanta Games. He 
taught me how to cook Tuscan food. I started getting into decent food after I 
got a house in Tuscany, near the British cycling academy’s training base. For a 
cyclist, the area is incredible, with the flats of the basin of Florence, the 
heights of the Apennines and the small climbs around Chianti. The locals like 
cyclists but best of all is their food – “peasant food” with simple 
ingredients, really well made, with heart but without extravagance. I love raw 
vegetables with just a little oil and vinegar.

Since we married, Peta’s taken over a lot of my cooking and she’s incredible. 
She’ll do different meals for me and the kids, depending on my regime. If I 
name 10 ingredients she’ll change the recipe every day. It’s only in the last 
year that I’ve learnt what proteins to eat and when to retain muscle while 
losing fat. Before I understood more about nutrition I used to prepare for big 
races by getting really skinny. I’d do 800-to-1,000-calorie days which really 
stripped me down. I used to starve myself. It wasn’t like a mental sickness – I 
knew what I was doing – but I’d always get ill after a race.

I’ve had tea with the Prince of Denmark, who’s a big cycle fan. Then I got 
invited for a sit-down lunch with the Queen, which was dead good. Me, the head 
of the Prudential Bank, the curator of the Imperial War Museum, Mary Berry and 
a few others. The Queen’s like a little grandma who won’t hold back and I love 
her. She was dead funny and proper on-it during the langoustine starters and 
the lamb.

Mark is the winner of 26 Tour de France stages, as well as gold medals at the 
World and Commonwealth championships. Athletes benefit from National Lottery 
funded nutritional advice;thefoodchampions.org <http://thefoodchampions.org/>

Cav’s mountain climb cherry and fig flapjack
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzyc%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzyc%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ed5b4bee573f95f80012c024a8a0d63aea8117c%2F0_335_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mark%20Cavendish%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99d%20eat%20one%20multi-bag%20of%20crisps.%20And%20then%20another%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzyc%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mark+Cavendish%3A+%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99d+eat+one+multi-bag+of+crisps.+And+then+another%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzyc%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ed5b4bee573f95f80012c024a8a0d63aea8117c%2F0_335_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Photograph: Heather Wilkinson for the Observer 
Benefits: post-exercise refuelling


Makes 8 bars
manuka honey 6 tbsp
rapeseed oil 2 tbsp
organic peanut butter 3 tbsp
porridge oats 280g 
flax seeds 3 tbsp
dried cherries 1 tbsp, chopped 
dried figs 4, chopped 

Preheat the oven to 180C/gas mark 4. In a large saucepan place the honey, 
rapeseed oil and peanut butter and place over medium heat – mix well until 
combined. Add the remaining ingredients and stir until all of them are combined.

Place the mixture into a lined baking tray and bake for 12-15 minutes. Once 
cooked, allow to cool before slicing and serving.

Recipes created by The Food Champions, a collaboration between the National 
Lottery and sports nutritionists from the English Institute of Sport
