
There is a calming quality to oxtail, as we might expect from something that 
spent its life at the other end of an animal peacefully munching grass. There 
is some in the oven now, a tumble of heavy bones, stewing with stock, sherry 
and thyme. There are the traditional aromatics in there too – onions, carrot 
and bay, soon to be joined by flat, mealy butter beans to soak up the beefy 
juices.

Where this cut wins me over is the high ratio of bone to beef, a guarantee of 
flavoursome stock to keep out the chill on a winter’s night. The tail is 
usually hacked into user-friendly lumps by the butcher – don’t try to do it 
yourself – and asks little more from us than patience. No bit of the carcass 
requires longer cooking to come to tenderness, though most of that is entirely 
untroublesome to the cook.

We ate delicious empanadas last week, the size of a purse, in an Argentinian 
bar off Oxford Street in London, stuffed with shredded oxtail, onion and 
carrot. It is rare to see the meat served off the bone and gave me the idea of 
making onion soup, with the meat teased from the bones and returned to the 
broth. As the night was wet and chilly, the glowing stock got a last-minute 
shaving of fresh horseradish root and salted ricotta. We were warmed, satisfied 
and, as one might hope, totally calmed.

Oxtail with butter beans and sherry

The liquid of an oxtail stew is too flavoursome to waste, enriched as it is 
with the goodness from the meat and bones. I like to soak it up with mashed 
potato or swede. This time, I used butter beans, warming them through in the 
gravy before serving, then mashing them into the thyme-flecked juices with our 
forks. Other beans would do the job, but what appeals about the butter bean is 
its particularly generous size and its especially starchy quality. The perfect 
thing for mopping up gravy from your plate.

Serves 4
olive oil 3 tbsp
oxtail 1.5kg, prepared
onions 4, medium
celery 2 ribs
bay leaves 3
dry sherry 300ml
beef stock 500ml
thyme sprigs 8
butter beans 800g, bottled or canned


To serve
chard, spinach or cabbage steamed


Warm the olive oil in a deep-sided casserole, place the oxtail pieces into the 
hot oil and let the meat brown, turning each piece with kitchen tongs.

Peel and thickly slice the onions. Remove the oxtail from the casserole, then 
add the sliced onions and let them soften and turn gold, stirring them from 
time to time. Cut the celery into thin pieces then stir through the onions and 
continue cooking. Add the bay leaves, then return the oxtail to the pan, 
followed by the sherry and then the beef stock.

Season with black pepper and a little salt, then tuck the thyme sprigs around 
the meat and bring to the boil. Cover with a lid, place in the oven and bake at 
160C/gas mark 2-3 for two hours. About half way through the cooking time, turn 
each piece of oxtail over.

Lift the lid and introduce the butter beans, drained of their liquor, 
distributing them among the meat. Replace the lid, and continue cooking for 30 
minutes. Check the seasoning and serve, spooning over the cooking juices and 
beans as you go.

Oxtail and onion soup
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fh6x%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fh6x%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e98af25faf3fb722d4f9b80c597a500d75bd079%2F0_1469_3752_2251%2F3752.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nigel%20Slater%E2%80%99s%20oxtail%20recipes&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fh6x%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nigel+Slater%E2%80%99s+oxtail+recipes&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fh6x%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e98af25faf3fb722d4f9b80c597a500d75bd079%2F0_1469_3752_2251%2F3752.jpg>
 ‘As the night was wet and chilly, the glowing stock got a shaving of 
horseradish’: Nigel Slater’s oxtail and onion soup recipe. Photograph: Jonathan 
Lovekin for the Observer 
As immensely satisfying as a bowl of thick brown oxtail soup can be, I prefer 
something lighter in texture. The recipe that follows is more of an oxtail 
broth, intense and beefy, that has all the depth of flavour of a traditional 
oxtail soup but is less heavy. To keep the shallots together, peel them and 
slice in half from tip to root, but only lightly trim the root end, which will 
help to keep the layers together.

Serves 4
onions 4, medium
olive oil 3 tbsp
carrots 150g, small
shallots 4, medium
oxtail 600g, prepared
beef stock 500ml
water 500ml
bay leaves 2


To serve
salted ricotta 50g
horseradish root 10g


Peel, halve and slice the onions and cook with the oil, in a deep pan over 
moderate heat, until soft and golden. This will take a good 20 minutes, or 
longer, with the occasional stir.

Scrub and halve the carrots (if they are medium sized, then chop them). Peel 
the shallots and cut them in half from stem to root. Lift the onions out of the 
pan and set aside, add the carrots and shallots to the pan (you may need more 
oil) and lightly brown.

Remove the carrots and shallots, keeping them separate from the onion, add a 
little more oil, then brown the oxtail pieces on all sides. Return the onion to 
the pan, add the stock, water and bay leaves and bring to the boil. Cover with 
a lid and simmer for 90 minutes.

Add the reserved carrots and shallots to the pan, a little salt and ground 
black pepper and simmer for an hour, checking the liquid level from time to 
time and adding more water or stock if necessary.

Lift the oxtail from the broth with a draining spoon and pull the meat away 
from the bones. Some will slide off easily, other pieces may be more resistant, 
but the meat should be sweet and tender. Discard the bones, return the meat to 
the soup. Check the seasoning, adjusting if necessary.

Grate the ricotta and horseradish and mix together. Ladle the soup into warm 
bowls and scatter over the horseradish and ricotta mix.


Email Nigel at nigel.slater@observer.co.uk <mailto:nigel.slater@observer.co.uk>
 or follow him on Twitter @NigelSlater 
<https://twitter.com/NigelSlater?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>

This page was updated on 14 January 2016 to add oven temperature.
