
Big balls of spinach always catch my eye on the rare occasions I go in one of 
the smarter of Testaccio’s food shops. This is ridiculous considering the 
cabinets of cheese and entire walls of cured meat that could be taking my 
attention. However, the bright green, cricket-ball sized globes of blanched 
spinach that sit on a white tray at the front of the ready-prepared food 
section are the things I find myself looking at time and again. My train of 
thought is always the same. They are 14 euros each! Who buys these balls? 
Making my own at home, I have found there must be a kilo of (hardy) spinach in 
each one. At the moment spinach is €2.50 a kilo at the market, so there is 
serious profit in these balls.

Related: Kale recipes | Our 10 Best... 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jan/03/kale-recipes-crisps-stew-salad-10-best>

“Good spinach should be lively, it should crunch and squeak as you stuff it 
into the bag” writesJane Grigson <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jane_Grigson>. 
I think she would have approved of my farming fruit and veg man Filippo on 
Testaccio market. His spinach needs to be wrestled into the bag, and then 
bounces against my leg all the way home. She would also, I think, have approved 
of the bouncing bagful I bought on the Uxbridge Road yesterday, which is now 
sitting in a colander in my sister’s kitchen in London. I enjoy this parity of 
ingredients in my two countries. I like hardy winter spinach varieties, with 
their crumpled leaves, ribbed stems with pink tips, looking robust, yet at the 
same time sweet and tender.

Introduced to Italy by the Arabs in the 11th century, the spinach grown near 
Rome is excellent. Generally, it is simply served, wilted, well-drained and 
dressed with olive oil and a spritz of lemon. Another good Roman way is
strascinata – “dragged” – in olive oil and garlic, sometimes with raisins and 
pine nuts. All that said, butter is what I crave with spinach a lot, thinking 
of a Jane Grigson recipe in which spinach is wilted, then reheated several 
times, adding more butter each time, until it is the richest stuff, a spoonful 
of which knocks the socks off creamed spinach. Butter is also key on bread 
under spinach and hollandaise, or melted on those pesky-to-poach, but excellent 
spinach and ricotta dumplings that Tuscans callgnudi.

Today’s recipe though, is for none of the above, nor is it the spinach curry I 
am looking forward to eating while I am in London. It is a spinach and rice 
cake, which first came about for me because of spinach and rice leftovers. Or 
as an Italian would say theavanzi di spinaci e riso – avanzi meaning “what 
remains”, but also something advantageous, which is the way Italians see 
leftovers. Of course Italy isn’t alone or special in having resourceful recipes 
for using leftovers: it’s a feature in traditional home cooking in all 
countries. But Italy is where I know, and where recipes for leftovers really do 
still rule, helping cooking feel like a continuum, one dish and meal rolling 
into the next rather than a series of isolated occasions.

Whether made with advantageous leftovers, or cooked from scratch, this is 
surprisingly tasty and good idea; savoury and pleasingly plump. It is all very 
straightforward – rice and spinach mixed with its allies: butter, nutmeg, 
parmesan and eggs, pressed into a tin then baked. The tin helps create a crusty 
bottom. It is good served hot, warm or at room temperature. Spinach and orange 
are good companions, so mySicilian orange and fennel salad 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/01/orange-lentil-salad-recipe-rachel-roddy-kitchen-sink-tales>
, which I roll out whenever possible, is my choice of accompaniment here. 
Otherwise there is the very sociable peperonata. Your suggestions are welcome. 
If you do prepare the spinach for this, maybe cook more than you need and shape 
your spinach “advantage” into a ball.

Spinach and rice cake – torta di spinaci e riso

I am not going to assume you all have leftover spinach and rice, so here is 
the recipe from scratch, which should also help you get a handle on quantities 
so when you do have leftovers you can do it by eye.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g58e%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g58e%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b0d451138f7bb0f39243977292bbe16a8dcce4b%2F0_0_2000_1334%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rachel%20Roddy%E2%80%99s%20Roman%20rice%20and%20spinach%20cake%20recipe%20%7C%20Kitchen%20Sink%20Tales&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g58e%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rachel+Roddy%E2%80%99s+Roman+rice+and+spinach+cake+recipe+%7C+Kitchen+Sink+Tales&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g58e%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b0d451138f7bb0f39243977292bbe16a8dcce4b%2F0_0_2000_1334%2F2000.jpg>
 Rachel Roddy’s spinach and rice cakes Photograph: Rachel Roddy for the Guardian
Serves 4–6
500g fresh spinach 
250g Italian short grain risotto rice (such as arborio or carnaroli)
Salt and black pepper
A small onion
20g butter, plus more for the dish
3 eggs, beaten
50g parmesan
Nutmeg
A handful of fine breadcrumbs

1 Pick over the spinach, discarding discoloured leaves and tough stalks, then 
wash in a couple of changes of cold water. Stuff the wet spinach into a large 
pan with no extra water and cook, covered over a low heat until it withers. Tip 
it into a colander and then leave to drain thoroughly.

2 Boil the rice in salted water for 10 minutes, then drain.

3 Peel and finely dice the onion. In a large frying or sauté pan, fry the 
onion in the butter with a small pinch of salt until soft and golden. Use 
scissors to roughly chop the spinach and then add to the frying pan along with 
the rice.

4 Pull the pan from the flame, allow to cool a little before adding the beaten 
eggs, parmesan, nutmeg, black pepper and a pinch of salt if necessary.

5 Butter and dust a cake tin or mould with fine breadcrumbs. Tip the mixture 
into the mould and then press flat with the back of a spoon. Bake at 
200C/400F/gas mark 6 for 25 minutes or until the cake is set firm, a little 
crisp and golden. Allow to sit for 5 minutes before turning out, or serving 
straight from the tin in wedges. Also very good at room temperature.
