
I have a fragrance habit. It all started with an article by Brian Eno in this 
newspaper, many years ago. He complained that there was no systematic way of 
labelling odours, that smell was “our most primitive, un-languaged sense”. The 
article contained a reference to methyl octine carbonate that, he wrote, 
“evokes the smell of violets and motorcycles. Dior’s Fahrenheit uses a lot of 
it.” That stopped me in my tracks. How could something smell like flowers and 
engine oil at the same time? My dad had a bottle of Fahrenheit and I ran 
upstairs to find it. Unscrewing the bottle, I inhaled and there it was: the 
essence of violets and motorcycles.

For a time I exercised moderation. I went through a long Fahrenheit phase, 
getting a bottle each Christmas, before branching out to other woody or fresh 
smells from Boots. I wore Hugo Boss, Égoiste, Terre d’Hermès. I had no idea 
about the history of scent, the great perfume houses, their niche counterparts. 
And then I stumbled onPerfumes: the A-Z Guide 
<http://www.perfumestheguide.com/Perfumes_The_A-Z_Guide_-_Luca_Turin_and_Tania_Sanchez/Home.html>
, by Luca Turin and Tania Sanchez. I’m not sure I’d go as far as India Knight, 
who called it “one of the best books I have ever read” but it’s pretty damn 
good.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cyvp%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cyvp%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e35a292cda06138b3e489c697565b720b1b0c9a%2F0_121_4368_2623%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Follow%20your%20nose%3A%20a%20lesson%20in%20perfume-making&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cyvp%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Follow+your+nose%3A+a+lesson+in+perfume-making&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cyvp%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e35a292cda06138b3e489c697565b720b1b0c9a%2F0_121_4368_2623%2F4368.jpg>
 Makes scents ... perfumer Sarah McCartney in her workshop. Photograph: Martin 
Godwin for the Guardian 
The book turned me on to a whole new world of scents – those that use oakmoss 
as a base and bring to mind dowager duchesses; others that work their magic via 
lavender and coumarin, a molecule with a hay-like odour extracted from tonka 
beans. At the same time, I was dying to smell the individual components of many 
of the fragrances I liked. Yes, a perfume is complete design in itself, like a 
classic car, but I wanted to peer under the bonnet. Was that an opopanax note? 
Or labdanum? Both are rich, complex resins from the Middle East. I wanted to be 
able to tell these – and all the other raw materials – apart.

What better way to hone my olfactory skills than on a perfume-making course? 
Tucked away in a studio in Acton, west London, perfumer Sarah McCartney 
concocts and bottles her4160 Tuesdays <http://www.4160tuesdays.com/> line, 
which includes treats such as The Dark Heart of Old Havana and Ealing Green (it 
smells of light, fresh cut grass, herbs, meadow flowers and wild roses). The 
name comes from the number of Tuesdays we can expect to see if we live to 80 – 
a reminder, Sarah says, not to waste any time.

I arrive and take my place on the sofa with four other perfume-making novices 
and Sarah’s assistant, Aisha. We slip into easy conversation, safe in the 
knowledge that we’re all nerds together, swapping favourite scents and asking 
if anyone’s come across the latest from some obscure brand or other. Then, we 
make our way upstairs to the workshop, which has the air of a laboratory 
crossed with an artist’s studio – exactly as you would hope. The room is lined 
with bottles of all shapes and sizes, some large canisters of synthetic musks 
and carriers, and tiny vials of precious essences like orris root, vetiver and 
petitgrain.

The morning is devoted to “appreciation”, which involves sampling a range of 
these intoxicating liquors on paper strips. Pure oakmoss, it turns out, smells 
like the inside of a stable. Musty, sweaty, a little animalic. Coumarin, to my 
nose at least, is pure marzipan – with only a touch of the reputed hay. Then 
come the strange and wonderful chemicals that can be vanishingly subtle on 
their own, but add a crucial sense of smoothness or grandeur to the final 
composition. There’s hedione, the “fresh air” smell; light and sweet ethylene 
brassylate; and calone, the seaside molecule used in marine fragrances like 
Cool Water.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cyvp%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cyvp%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F24%2F1443094616416%2F30827f26-26a9-4848-b20f-a12256619466-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Follow%20your%20nose%3A%20a%20lesson%20in%20perfume-making&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cyvp%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Follow+your+nose%3A+a+lesson+in+perfume-making&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cyvp%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F24%2F1443094616416%2F30827f26-26a9-4848-b20f-a12256619466-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Bottling it ... David Shariatmadari attempts to create a new hit fragrance. 
Photograph: Martin Godwin 
A couple of hours whizz by and it’s time to go to the local Thai for lunch, 
but I can’t bear to leave the laboratory and insist on sniffing my way around 
the jars. There is violet leaf, tobacco absolute, neroli, cedar from the Atlas 
and cedar from Virginia, citral, decanal, undecanal. I become slightly obsessed 
with a molecule called undecavertol, which smells somewhat vegetal, rather like 
a cucumber in the middle of a bouquet of flowers.

The afternoon is devoted to creating our own fragrances – we get to design and 
take home 30ml of each, in distinctive 4160-branded bottles. I go at it with 
the undecavertol, mixing it with loads of cedar wood, opoponax and tangerine, 
keeping careful track of amounts on my perfume formula sheet. I’m falling 
straight into the trap Sarah warned us about, of picking too many “feature 
notes” and leaving them all to fight it out for attention.

The result is ... strong. The cedar is a bit overpowering and the undecavertol 
washes its cucumberiness over everything. If you were being unkind you might 
say it smelled like exotic floor polish. At least there’s still another bottle 
to go: I aim for a lighter scent, this time with a hint of tobacco, some 
grapefruit up top and lots of ethylene brassylate in the heart. This is better. 
I haven’t tried to cram everything in there. But, again, if you were being less 
than charitable you’d say it smelled a bit, well, urinous. Just as I’m getting 
into the swing of it we look up at the clock and it’s 6pm. Way past the 
advertised finish time, but Sarah’s in no hurry and neither are we.

After all, there’s still the ritual glass of champagne and a tour through some 
of Sarah’s own treasures to come – one wall of the studio is devoted to her 
perfume collection, stuffed with rarities, discontinued fragrances and holy 
grails such as the original formula L’Heure Bleue by Guerlain.

The sniffing continues. It’s been a splendid day: a melding of art, science 
and fun with something concrete to show for it at the end. I only wish I could 
spend a week there and get my cedar-heavy floor polish to smell a bit more like 
wooded bliss.

For details of classes go to 4160tuesdays.com <http://www.4160tuesdays.com/>

Luca Turin: my life as a perfume critic

I used to talk about fragrances with my friends. One of them got so sick of it 
that he said: “Why don’t you write a book and get it off your chest and give us 
a break?” So I did. By training, I’m a biophysicist. Science and perfume have 
always been parallel themes in my life.

Perfumery has traditionally been considered a craft. The rise of artistic 
perfumery came in the 1880s, with the discovery of the first major synthetic 
materials. So in that respect, it’s a recent art, comparable to cinema, not to 
painting or music.

Perfume is not a smell. It’s what I call a message in a bottle. A smell has no 
intent. A perfume is like a chemical poem composed by a human being to impart 
an idea or sensation or emotion to another human being. The best ones are those 
where the intent is clear, otherwise it’s just something nondescript that 
smells vaguely good. So iIf the intent is intelligent, humorous, surprising, 
novel, profound, then the critic’s job is to read that intent and put it into 
words. In a sense, you’re simply translating.

Perfume criticism isn’t just about notes, it’s about the overall effect. It’s 
not the materials, it’s the tune. When you smell a really great fragrance, you 
don’t wonder, “Did they put violet nitrile in there?” It just smells fantastic.

It’s important not to put pen to paper too early. That’s true for all art 
criticism. Wait until you understand what it is that you’re feeling. It’s not 
just about personal associations: it connects with the contemporary perfume 
scene, perfume history, and currents in wider culture. You need knowledge of 
all of this to figure out what it means, what it suggests.

When I reckon I’ve done it justice, that’s a good feeling. It’s the pleasure 
of having nailed it.

I rarely wear perfume, or. I get tremendous enjoyment from smelling them, but 
wearing them? Sometimes. I really like lavender, I like to wear that after a 
shower. But a guy should just smell clean. It might sound strange, but who 
other than a perfume critic would want to smell of nothing?

In any case, every time I pass a perfume store I walk in to smell what’s there.

The Secret of Scent 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/index.php/secret-of-scent.html> by Luca Turin 
is published by Faber & Faber. His latest book isFolio Columns 
<http://www.amazon.com/Folio-Columns-2003-2014-Luca-Turin-ebook/dp/B016A53RMG/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1444481709&sr=8-1&keywords=folio+columns>
, a collection of perfume reviews

