
I know you shouldn't have children if you want five minutes' peace, but 
sometimes it slips my mind. Just sometimes I forget that it's unreasonable to 
want five measly minutes to read a book, have a cup of tea or even combine the 
two in the garden in the sunshine. No one's asking for a week, just a pause in 
normal service. It is no coincidence that a popular book for young children is 
calledFive Minutes' Peace 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Five-Minutes-Peace-Jill-Murphy/dp/1844285391/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1275041470&sr=1-1>
. The story of poor Mrs Elephant, desperate for a sliver of me-time, who can't 
even escape her pesky kids by getting into the bath, has to be more for adults 
than children. I am that Mrs Elephant.

As Flora is a baby I don't expect her to understand my needs. So I gently 
manipulate her day by pushing her around for hours in the pushchair so that I 
can sit in the garden while she finally snoozes in the shade.

Just as she goes off, the phone rings. It's my 21-year-old son, Sam, who wants 
to know if I've got his passport.

"You know I haven't got your passport," I whisper crossly, with half an eye on 
Flora's eyelids fluttering. "Don't you remember that you came back from that 
club, oh about five months ago, and said you'd lost it? You tried to ring the 
club and then when you couldn't get the number you even went round there and 
they didn't have it."

I'm hoping my detailed recall of events will convince him I haven't got it.

Usually I get things in twos for him. But you can't do that with passports and 
since I handed his over to him at the age of 18 he has lost it three times.

"Well now, I think I might have lost it in the house and not in the club."

"You mean you want to reinvent history. You wish you'd lost in the house."

"Well could you look for it and ring me back straight away?"

I make a mental note to do so, but as Flora is still asleep I take a sip of my 
now tepid tea.

I swear the phone rings almost immediately. It's Maddy, who's 18 and at 
university.

She'll usually phone just to say hi on her way to meet friends or to the 
library. I love the fact that she calls just to check in. What she may not 
realise is that I take it as an indication that I'm a good mother. So when I 
pick up the phone I decide to go for a bit of banter.

"Maddy, you've left home â€“ stop bothering me," I say.

There's a silence on the other end of the phone.

It turns out that it's exam time, when most students want some reassurance 
from their parents, not a comedian. Maddy doesn't tell me that, but I work it 
out. So after 10 minutes of back-tracking on my part, Maddy hangs up and Flora 
wakes up. It feels like divine justice.

By now it's time to pick up the children from school. I don't expect a quiet 
trip back, but Lydia has clearly been influenced by watching the TV sitcom 
Outnumbered in which children ask questions all the time.

"How big is your heart when you're born?"

"Small," I say, "to fit in your tiny ribcage."

"If two sperm hit an egg at exactly the same time, what would happen?"

"They can't," I say, although it's a fair question.

"Is Nanny right when she says the back of your neck is the part of your body 
most likely to get sunburned?"

"No," I say, "it's because people forget to put suncream on it.'

But by now I've got some questions of my own.

"Why do you always pretend to be stuck to the bath so you can't get out of it? 
Why can you only find one shoe in the morning? Why do you get over-excited just 
before bedtime?"

But, funnily enough, she's lost interest, and for the rest of the journey 
home, it's almost peaceful.
