
In the beginning was the selfie. Then came the belfie (bottom selfie), the 
relfie (relationship selfie), the helfie (hair selfie), the welfie (workout 
selfie) and the felfie (farmer selfie –no, really 
<http://modernfarmer.com/2014/01/express-felf-farmer-selfies-go-viral/>. The 
explosion of the selfie has triggered a deluge of products, from the selfie 
stick to thebelfie stick 
<http://uk.businessinsider.com/belfie-stick-2015-1?r=US&IR=T>; launched a 
thousandlazy headlines 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-3403292/The-morning-night-Sam-Frost-shares-make-free-selfie-binge-watches-Netflix-night-partying.html>
; and even cost some people the ultimate price; dozens of people wereinjured 
and killed in 2015 while taking selfies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/dec/28/selfies-danger-death-2015>
.

 People of all genders are seen to be keen selfie-takers (special mention must 
go to the creators of “nutscaping <http://www.nutscapes.com/>”; the artful 
combination of a single testicle hovering over a beautiful landscape), but the 
phenomenon is particularly associated with young women. A Pew Research Center 
report in 2014 found that68% of millennial women had posted a selfie 
<http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/files/2014/03/2014-03-07_generations-report-version-for-web.pdf>
, compared to 42% of millennial men, and only 24% of members of Generation X. 
And a One Poll survey for the websitefeelunique.com <http://www.feelunique.com/>
 last year claimed that the average 16-25-year-old woman spendsmore than five 
hours a week taking selfies 
<http://www.onepoll.com/project/feelunique-com-make-up-your-selfie/>. 

 If 2015 was the year of the dangerous selfie, 2016 is seeing the medium 
elevated to new cultural heights. Argentinian-born artist Amalia Ulman used 
Instagram selfies to create an extended performance project called Excellences 
& Perfections, excerpts of which are togo on display at Tate Modern 
<http://www.dazeddigital.com/artsandculture/article/29342/1/instagram-artist-to-feature-in-major-tate-exhibition>
 as part of itsPerforming for the Camera 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-modern/exhibition/performing-camera> 
exhibition. The project saw Ulman depict a fake life in three stages: the first 
introduced her as a Los Angeles “it girl”, the second portrayed a period of 
drug abuse and a stint in rehab, and the third charted her “recovery” through 
yoga sessions and healthy juice drinks. Ulman has said that these distinct 
phases were inspired by stereotypes of how young women present themselves online
 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/photography/what-to-see/is-this-the-first-instagram-masterpiece/>
, but it is the stereotypical responses she received that are perhaps the 
biggest eye-openers. Art project or not, to her followers, she was a real and 
vulnerable young woman – yet she was bombarded with whatSlate 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/double_x/doublex/2016/01/the_instagram_hoax_that_became_an_art_world_sensation.html>
 described as “a mess of envy, disdain and enthusiastic schadenfreude”. When 
she uploaded a post during her “self destructive” stage, one follower accused 
her of being “#kindawhiney!” and when she shared a picture of herself crying, 
another wrote: “Cry me a river.”

Finally, when Ulman appeared to be recovering, people accused her of being 
boring, calling her an idiot and a bitch. “People started hating me,” she says. 
“Some gallery I was showing with freaked out and was like, ‘You have to stop 
doing this, because people don’t take you seriously any more.’ Suddenly I was 
this dumb bitch because I was showing my ass in pictures.”

In many ways, her work highlights exactly the kind of superficial assumptions 
people make about women based on image alone. “It’s more than a satire,” she 
said. “I wanted to prove that femininity is a construction, and not something 
biological or inherent to any woman.Women 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> understood the performance much 
faster than men. They were like, ‘We get it – and it’s very funny.’ The joke 
was admitting how much work goes into being a woman and how being a woman is 
not a natural thing. It’s something you learn.”

 Elsewhere, many young women are harnessing the power of the selfie for 
particular causes or campaigns. Artist Molly Soda last yearleaked her own nude 
snaps 
<http://jezebel.com/artist-leaks-her-own-nudes-so-no-one-can-do-it-for-her-1744698343>
 in a statement about regaining power and control from nude picture hackers, 
while others continue to share selfie snaps in a plethora of inspiring and 
upliftingbody-positive blogs 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/juliapugachevsky/body-positive-style-bloggers-you-should-be-following#.lcW1e5prG>
 andhashtags 
<http://abc7ny.com/society/photos-women-not-ashamed-to-show-their-bodies-with-fatkini-hashtag/252490/>
.

 But is posting selfies an empowering and uplifting activity, or does it 
reinforce the notion that a woman’s value lies solely in her looks?

 The statistics don’t have a clear answer. A body image survey by Today and 
AOL found that65% of teenage girls 
<http://www.today.com/parents/selfie-esteem-teens-say-selfies-give-confidence-boost-2D12164198>
 said seeing their selfies on social media boosted their confidence. However, 
55% said social media made them more self-conscious about their appearance and 
58% agreed that “seeing pictures of other people living glamorous-looking lives 
on social media makes me feel bad about myself”.

“Selfie campaigns” arouse similarly mixed responses: the “no makeup selfie” – 
started to raise money for breast cancer charities – was bothpraised 
<http://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2014/dec/03/no-makeup-selfie-cancer-research-fundraising-benefit-quick-thinking>
 as brave and uplifting andcriticised 
<http://time.com/40506/nomakeupselfie-brings-out-the-worst-of-the-internet-for-a-good-cause/>
 for suggesting it was scary or daring for women to be pictured without makeup.

 The issue is complex, not least because the online reception of the images 
can have as much of an impact as the intent of the creator. When Welsh teenager 
Maisie Beech posted a “half makeup selfie” online she thought she was doing 
something fun and empowering. But afterthe pictures went viral 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-3416030/Teen-posted-selfie-make-half-face-called-ugly-disgusting-trolls.html>
, strangers commented to say she was sick or ugly and some even threatened 
physical violence, leaving her shocked at people’s cruelty.

 Many teenage girls find themselves subject to sexist pressures when it comes 
to selfies – both expected to present a beautiful, confident image, and 
navigating extreme criticism or even abuse if they are perceived as too sexy, 
“slutty” or posed.

There is a tendency to derisively dismiss selfies as narcissistic, but it’s no 
coincidence that so many of the young women who have hit the headlines for 
using them are doing so in response to sexist societal norms or abuse – from 
damaging, unattainable beauty ideals, to the hacking of women’s private 
photographs. While female celebrities are accused of being self-obsessed and 
oversharing, one could equally see their selfie habits as a clever means of 
taking back control of their own image from the male-dominated media and 
paparazzi. It’s also worth noting the palpable sneering and contempt for 
selfies (which most people would hesitate to regard as an art form) may well be 
influenced by the fact that society views them as a predominantly young, female 
creation.

But it is encouraging to see the considerable number who are pulling the rug 
out from under the traditional criticisms of selfies by harnessing the medium 
to send their own powerful, often feminist messages.






