
Challenger brands are often defined by their underdog mindset which allows for 
goals beyond their limited resources. The most successful ones have been those 
who realised when their market was changing and made it their mission to drive 
the change rather than fight it.

We, however, have come to the conclusion that the commercial success of these 
brands cannot solely be explained by an agile mindset that capitalises on 
changing market conditions with a disruptive brand positioning. Instead, it’s 
how they have activated this positioning in a way that is rooted in an 
understanding of human behaviour that has driven both trial and sales. At KHWS, 
we call this combination of brand and commercial thinking Brand Commerce.

Airbnb knew travellers wanted a different experience from staying at hotels 
and created a never-before-seen brand positioning, activated by getting people 
to experience their product (the website) as part of their campaigns, getting 
people to buy in to the brand without actually having to buy from it.

Innocent Drinks <http://www.innocentdrinks.co.uk/> understood parent’s desire 
to keep their kids healthy and adapted their messaging to them, reframing their 
product to play to the five-a-day guidelines and justify their price premium.

The most successful challenger brands display a deep understanding of their 
customers and their behaviours; a crucial reason behind their success.

With an increasing need to defend marketing spend, brands cannot afford to 
create campaigns that only build brand awareness without delivering sales. To 
achieve both, our Brand Commerce approach is underpinned by a model that helps 
understand the human behaviours that trigger sales.

Identify these and discover opportunities that will move you from underdog to 
favourite.

Michael Sandstrom is strategic planner at KHWS <https://www.khws.co.uk>

This advertisement feature is brought to you by the Marketing Agencies 
Association <http://www.marketingagencies.org.uk/maa>, sponsors of the Guardian 
Media & Tech Network’sAgencies hub 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media-network/series/agencies>.
