
Warning: this article omits information that the Guardian and other news 
organisations are currently prohibited from publishing.

The court of appeal has refused to lift reporting restrictions following the 
secret trial of a London law student who was cleared of plotting a terrorist 
attack on the streets of the capital.

However, the lord chief justice, Lord Thomas, said that only the director of 
public prosecutions (DPP) could ask a court to sit in secret, and warned that 
MI5 andMI6 <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/mi6> must not in future threaten to 
withhold evidence in a bid to secure courtroom secrecy.


Following an appeal brought by the Guardian 
<http://www.bailii.org/cgi-bin/markup.cgi?doc=/ew/cases/EWCA/Crim/2016/11.html&query=guardian+and+News+and+Media&method=boolean>
 and other UK media organisations, Thomas invited the parliamentary 
intelligence and security committee to investigate the role that MI5 and MI6 
played in decisions that were taken around the prosecution of Erol Incedal.

Related: Why is the crux of the Incedal case a secret? You're not allowed to 
know 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/mar/26/erol-incedal-case-secret-trial-terror>

“It is a significant, important and proper part of the duties of the security 
services of the United Kingdom that they act in accordance with the law,” 
Thomas said. “No part of the executive can refuse to provide the evidence 
required by the [DPP] on the basis that it perceives that it is not in the 
interests of national security to provide it.

“In a case involving national security ... it must be for the DPP, and the DPP 
alone ... to determine whether to prosecute and, if so, whether to apply to the 
court for part of the proceedings to be heardin camera [in secret].”

In a bid to deal with the accumulation of case law that remains secret, even 
to the courts, Thomas said also that he was establishing a working party that 
would examine ways in which closed judgments that were handed down in cases 
concerning national security could be available to courts dealing with similar 
cases in the future.

Incedal, 28, from south London, was arrested in October 2013 and found to be 
in possession of a bomb-making manual on a memory card hidden inside his mobile 
phone case.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Ferol-incedal-trial-security-services-cannot-deny-court-evidence-says-judge-video&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Ferol-incedal-trial-security-services-cannot-deny-court-evidence-says-judge-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F12%2F1444671174667%2FKP_538249_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Erol%20Incedal%20trial%3A%20security%20services%20cannot%20deny%20court%20evidence%2C%20says%20judge%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Ferol-incedal-trial-security-services-cannot-deny-court-evidence-says-judge-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Erol+Incedal+trial%3A+security+services+cannot+deny+court+evidence%2C+says+judge+%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Ferol-incedal-trial-security-services-cannot-deny-court-evidence-says-judge-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F12%2F1444671174667%2FKP_538249_crop_640x360.jpg>
Erol Incedal trial: security services cannot deny court evidence, says judge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2015/oct/12/erol-incedal-trial-security-services-cannot-deny-court-evidence-says-judge-video>
Following representations from the intelligence agencies – of a nature that 
Thomas has described as “absolutely impermissible” – theCrown Prosecution 
Service <http://www.theguardian.com/law/crown-prosecution-service> decided that 
it wished to prosecute him in secret.

The media were told that although they would be permitted to report on the 
charges against Incedal and the eventual verdict, they would not be permitted 
to hear the evidence, nor be informed of his identity. He would be referred to 
only as AB.

After the media objected, the court of appeal ordered that Incedal could be 
identified and that the trial should be heard in three parts: there would be 
open court sessions, secret sessions, and intermediate sessions which the press 
could attend, but not report, pending a review by the trial judge, Mr Justice 
Nicol.

Throughout each of those intermediate sessions, the small number of 
journalists allowed into court nine at the Old Bailey were expected to 
surrender their mobile phones, which were locked in soundproof boxes.

At the end of each session, the journalists were obliged to hand their 
notebooks to police officers, to be locked in a safe at the back of the court. 
The officers watched closely to ensure the journalists did not attempt to 
remove any notes from the court.

During his trial at the Old Bailey, Incedal argued that he had a reasonable 
excuse for having the manual in his possession. The jury rejected this claim, 
however, and he was jailed for 42 months.

His friend Mounir Rarmoul-Bouhadjar, also 28 and from south London, pleaded 
guilty to possession of the same manual and was jailed for three years. Both 
men have since been released from prison.

However, the jury failed to reach a verdict on the more serious charge that 
Incedal faced: that of planning a terrorist attack. After a retrial, a second 
jury acquitted him.

At the end of the retrial, Nicol decided against lifting the reporting 
restrictions, with the result that the reasons why the jury reached its not 
guilty verdict could not be reported. Nor could the basis for Incedal’s claim 
that he had a reasonable excuse for possession of the manual be explained to 
the public.

Thomas said that the media’s second appeal raised important issues concerning 
public confidence inMI5 <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/mi5> and MI6 and the 
accountability of the agencies. He said public accountability of the agencies 
could be achieved through an investigation by the ISC.

The lord chief justice added that nothwithstanding the importance of the open 
justice principle, Nicol had made the correct decision, in the interests of 
national security, and that the courts “should hesitate long and hard” before 
agreeing to a trial being heard in the same three-part manner.


