
“Am I a girl, or a mother?” Rachana Sunar opens her speech at the Oslo Freedom 
Forum <https://oslofreedomforum.com/> quoting one of the child brides she has 
been supporting in the past four years. It is poignant to think that a 
15-year-old girl could be confused about such things, but in Nepal,40.7% of 
girls are forced into early adulthood 
<http://www.unicef.org/infobycountry/nepal_nepal_statistics.html> by getting 
married by the age of 18.

The law says that the minimum age to get married is 20, therefore child 
marriage inNepal <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nepal> cannot be tackled 
from a legal perspective, but by changing cultural norms and traditions. 
According to Sunar: “Dialogue is a process to break the silence.”

Sunar was born in 1994 in a village in mid-western Nepal, where she grew up 
with her six sisters, mother and father. At 15, while still in school through a 
scholarship programme, Sunar was told by her parents she would marry a man she 
had never met before. She escaped child marriage by tricking her parents into 
thinking that if she dropped out of school they’d have to pay the past three 
years of her scholarship.

“The greatest inspirations were the challenges I experienced in my own life,” 
Sunar says. She witnessed years of abuse by her father to her mother for giving 
birth only to girls. Her experiences made her determined to show her father and 
the community “girls are just as valuable as boys”.

In Nepal, she explains, many girls lack ambition and determination because 
they have seen generations of women passing from dependence on their fathers to 
dependence on their husbands: “They have no will to be independent, to study or 
to get a job and they don’t know about their career, because the authority of 
their lives is in someone else’s hands.”

Sunar started by simply gathering some of the girls from her community and 
talking to them about education, gender equality and their rights. “At the 
beginning they laughed at me,” she says. “It was very difficult for me to gain 
the trust of the community and ask the girls for their time. It was hard.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k96h%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k96h%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b0753797a9177cc0dcbf906c52ef32116be65f8%2F0_0_5184_3456%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Child%20marriage%20in%20Nepal%3A%20'A%20girl%20is%20a%20girl%2C%20not%20a%20wife'&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k96h%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Child+marriage+in+Nepal%3A+%27A+girl+is+a+girl%2C+not+a+wife%27&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k96h%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b0753797a9177cc0dcbf906c52ef32116be65f8%2F0_0_5184_3456%2F5184.jpg>
 Rachana Sunar discussing child marriage with girls in her village. Photograph: 
Rachana Sunar 
The group became part of a one-year project called Sambad 
<http://www.myhealthrightsfuture.com/sambad-centre.html>, (“dialogue”), 
supported byStromme Foundation <https://strommestiftelsen.no/en> and other 
agencies. She talks proudly about the project’s achievements: “Six girls went 
to school, and if they dropped out and got married, Stromme supported 
microfinance activities for them, and they started their own small business.”

Although successful, the project ended because of lack of funding. “One year 
was not enough,” she says. Despite the lack of resources, she and her “sisters” 
(as they call each other) continued the project through dialogue and discussion 
and occasionally getting funding for microfinance training. Through her work as 
a teacher, Sunar pays for the activities at Sambad.

Raising our voice is not disgracing the man’s respect from the community, you 
already have respect.
Rachana Sunar 
Through conversation, Sunar wants to change the perceptions of the community 
towards girls. “I started to make girls empowered and to speak and say ‘No, I 
don’t want to get married’,” she says. A local teacher once accused her of 
making “women better than men”. Her response to him was firm: “Raising our 
voice is not disgracing the man’s respect from the community, you already have 
respect. If I hurt my left hand, I don’t cut my right hand to make it more 
similar. I treat my left hand and make both hands equal.” She plans to involve 
fathers in the discourse in future, though she says this will require more 
creativity.

Today Sambad is a centre where young people, boys and girls, work together to 
raise awareness about different issues affecting the country under the motto 
“young people are the backbone of the society”. They discuss the harmful impact 
of deforestation, child marriage and polygamy on their society, among other 
topics.

Related: We don't know enough about menstruation and girls are paying a price 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/28/we-dont-know-enough-about-menstruation-and-girls-are-paying-a-price>

When asked how she deals with the patriarchal society, she talks about when 
she tried to get funding from her local municipality. “To apply for funding 
they asked us to bring out identity cards and legal documents,” she says. 
“Since we had not registered our organisation because it is so small, they 
would not trust us.” After discussing with the rest of the girls, they returned 
the next day all together. She laughs when she imitates the face of the 
official when he saw 45 girls, with babies, surrounding him in his office. “He 
was kind of afraid,” she laughs again.

Sunar has lived in Norway for the last nine months, where she has learned 
perfect English, and a little Norwegian. She’s been part of a youth exchange 
programme calledAct Now 
<http://strommeea.org/what-we-do/professional-youth-exchange-programs/>, with 
70 other participants from 13 different countries. It’s included lectures on 
global issues and cross-cultural communication, and an internship in a 
kindergarten. Sunar says she’s learned a lot which she plans to apply to her 
community back home. “[Norway] is completely different from what I am used to,” 
she says. “Things are so advanced. I feel like we are 1,000 years behind.”

Sunar is only 22 but says “I am considered old in my home” and laughs when 
told that she is young for having achieved so much. With just two weeks left in 
her exchange programme, she is excited to go back home carrying more knowledge 
and passion for her work.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter. Join the conversation with the 
hashtag#SheMatters <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23SheMatters&src=typd>.
