
Further to my posting yesterday about the Irish media mogul Denis O’Brien, the 
Irish Times reported on Thursday 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/news/crime-and-law/courts/high-court/d%C3%A1il-opposes-o-brien-request-for-papers-1.2409316>
 that the Dáil, Ireland’s parliament, is now fighting off one of O’Brien’s 
legal actions.

I won’t go into the convoluted details of that particular issue here (which 
can alsobe found on the Irish Independent website 
<http://www.independent.ie/irish-news/courts/dil-opposes-request-for-documents-in-obrien-legal-action-34151226.html>
). But the fact of the action itself is a reminder of the propensity of 
Ireland’s largest newspaper proprietor to call so often on m’learned friends.

As I wrote in May this year, most of Ireland’s media were silenced 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2015/may/29/irelands-media-silenced-over-mps-speech-about-denis-obrien>
 after O’Brien obtaineda Dublin high court injunction against the country’s 
main broadcaster, RTÉ 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/news/crime-and-law/courts/high-court/denis-o-brien-granted-injunction-against-rt%C3%A9-1.2221156>
, in order to prevent it reporting a parliamentary speech. That injunction was 
eventually “clarified”, which allowed the speech to be reported.

The speech that upset O’Brien was made by Catherine Murphy TD, who raised 
questions over his banking arrangements. When she was cleared of having abused 
her parliamentary privilege by a Dáil committee,O’Brien then started legal 
action against the committee 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/news/politics/businessman-denis-o-brien-takes-legal-action-against-d%C3%A1il-committee-1.2305142>
.

His legal actions involving the Dáil and its members prompted the Irish Times 
to run an editorial calling him“a wealthy serial litigator.” 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/opinion/editorial/in-defence-of-privilege-1.2306771> 
Aside from politicians, his other main targets have been journalists and their 
outlets.

In August, he threatened to sue a satirical website, Waterford Whispers 
<http://waterfordwhispersnews.com/>, for running a spoof item about O’Brien. 
The post was duly taken down.

In February 2013, he won €150,000 damages  
<http://www.rte.ie/news/2013/0214/367770-defamation-denis-obrien/>in a 
successful defamation claim against the Irish Daily Mail over an article 
published in 2010 about O’Brien’s Haiti earthquake relief efforts. The Mail’s 
solicitor said after the verdict that it wasa sad day for freedom of expression 
in Ireland <http://www.rte.ie/news/2013/0214/367770-defamation-denis-obrien/>.


Noting that “the free exchange of information” was O’Brien’s business, Padraig 
Reidy of Index onCensorship <https://www.theguardian.com/world/censorship> 
remarked: “Perhaps he should show a little more respect to the principle and 
the practice.”

In November 2012, an organisation called Transparency International Ireland 
voiced concerns to the United Nations over the number of O’Brien’s legal actions
 
<http://transparency.ie/news_events/transparency-international-ireland-reports-concerns-united-nations-over-intimidation-i-0>
.


It cited figures compiled by the National Union of Journalists 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/nationalunionofjournalists> that listed 
actions, or threats of actions, against 17 journalists and media groups by 
O’Brien since 1998. Among the most high profile were those against some of 
Ireland’s best-known commentators, such as Vincent Browne, Sam Smyth and Elaine 
Byrne.


TI Ireland’s chief executive John Devitt said at the time 
<http://www.independent.ie/irish-news/obriens-legal-threats-to-media-raised-with-un-28905678.html>
: “The use of litigation and legal threats denies journalists and editors the 
human right to freely report and comment on matters of public importance.

“Journalists also have a duty to report or comment on issues in the public 
interest - even if they have a negative impact on Mr O’Brien’s reputation.”

O’Brien knows about human rights, of course, because he is chair of a human 
rights organisation,Front Line Defenders 
<https://www.frontlinedefenders.org/about/board-trustees>. And, as the largest 
shareholder ofIndependent News & Media <http://www.inmplc.com/> (INM), the 
biggest newspaper publisher in Ireland, he also knows the importance of freedom 
of the press.

Then again, as I reported in June 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2015/jun/15/former-editor-accuses-bosses-of-stifling-coverage-of-denis-obrien>
, the former editor of INM’s Sunday Independent, Anne Harris, claimed in a 
Sunday Times article, “Fear of O’Brien casts long shadow over press”, that she 
was subject to internal censorship.

She told of an incident that occurred in the wake of her paper’s publication 
of the Transparency International story. INM managers told her, she wrote, that 
O’Brien was “not to be written about in certain ways”.

It cannot be disputed that O’Brien has a right to defend his reputation. But I 
can’t help wondering if the gentleman makes too much fuss. Do his various legal 
threats not suggest that, for a freedom-loving human rights advocate, his skin 
might just be a little too thin?
