
Almost 400 jobs will be scrapped at London Metropolitan University 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/londonmetropolitanuniversity> as it moves 
all its students from three campuses on to one, it has been announced.

The shake-up at the university – which will reduce staff headcount by about 
395 posts, 13.5% of the workforce – will take place over the next two years. 
The reductions include cuts to the university’s management team, which has been 
shrunk by a third.

The university recently announced that it would be closing its centres in 
Whitechapel and Moorgate, where visual arts, architecture, business and law 
courses are taught. From 2017, students will begin moving to its Holloway Road 
campus in Islington, which is being redesigned through a £125m investment.


The University and College Union (UCU) described the cuts as a “further 
devastating blow” and said management were focused on investing in campus 
facilities at the expense of teaching and support staff.

But London <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> Metropolitan’s 
vice-chancellor John Raftery, who joined the university in August 2014, said 
the restructuring would help to secure the institution’s future.

“I think London Met has tremendous potential, but for too long it has not been 
fully realised,” he said.


He added that the university had faced “endless cost-saving exercises” because 
it had not been properly redesigned when it was formed through a merger in 2002.

“We’re creating a new higher education offering in London,” he said. “I’m 
bringing together departments from three different campuses and in different 
buildings all to one place in Islington. If you do that, you don’t need four 
libraries, you don’t need four finance officers and so on, many of those 
savings are liberated by convening together.”

The university’s finances have been under pressure since 2009, when the 
institution was found to have falsely claimed£36m worth of government funds  
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2009/dec/17/london-met-governors-forced-out>
for students who had not completed their end-of-year assessments.

It faced further problems in 2012, when the university’s right to recruit and 
teach foreign students 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2012/aug/30/london-metropolitan-university-visa-revoked>
 was withdrawn, after government reported “serious systemic failure” in its 
monitoring of its international student body. This right was later reinstated 
in 2013, but reputation and student recruitment has suffered.

The university now plans to reduce overall student numbers from 12,000 to 
10,000. It will also place a greater emphasis on blended learning – where 
students study online as well as on campus.

“What we’re doing is being on the front foot responding to [the policy 
context],” Raftery said. “We’ve got to be way more digital, have way more 
blended learning... that is built around complex lives, whether [students] are 
working or raising kids. This is the reality of our demographic, they’re 
working their way through university.”

He said that the university was having success in improving outcomes for 
students, such asemployment rates 
<http://www.londonmet.ac.uk/news/news-stories/university-news-2015/july-/london-met-secures-its-highest-ever-graduate-employment-score/>
.

UCU said that it would continue to make the case for an alternative approach 
during a forthcoming consultation at the university.

UCU regional official, Barry Jones, said: “This further devastating blow to 
the already ravaged London Met is based upon a strategic decision to focus on 
shrinkage and investment in campus facilities at the expense of teaching and 
support staff.


“We will be making the case for an alternative approach during the forthcoming 
consultation, based upon the maintenance of London Met’s mission and we will 
continue to fight in the interests of the university’s staff and students.”


Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
