
To preview her collaboration with AG Jeans  <http://www.agjeans.com>to the 
press on Monday night,Alexa Chung 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2013/sep/21/alexa-chung-interview> did away 
with the idea of parading models to show off the designs. Instead, she modelled 
the designs herself. Like the cool girl at school, she managed to showcase more 
than 10 outfits, changing in front of everyone without revealing her pants 
once. We were most impressed. The 21-piece collection, due in January with 
images embargoed until then, wasn’t half bad either.


The collection is inspired by real girls

But, when you’re Chung, they’re often famous, too. See the Pixie dress, a 
button-through shirt number named afterPixie Geldof 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/pixie-geldof>. Or the Tennessee, a pair of 
overalls named in honour of her BFF, Tennessee Thomas. Chung conceded that her 
friends might not wear their namesake pieces. “Pixie would definitely ask where 
the pink fluffy stuff was,” said Chung.



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F42zdg%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F42zdg%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F28%2F1414501745997%2Ffe0570fc-96ba-46fb-98a4-46bc9da30839-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alexa%20Chung's%20new%20look%20%E2%80%93%20'I'm%20bored%20of%20Peter%20Pan%20collars'&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F42zdg%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alexa+Chung%27s+new+look+%E2%80%93+%27I%27m+bored+of+Peter+Pan+collars%27&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F42zdg%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F28%2F1414501745997%2Ffe0570fc-96ba-46fb-98a4-46bc9da30839-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Three years of white denim … Johnny Borrell of Razorlight Photograph: Tim 
Mosenfelder/Getty Images 
Johnny Borrell’s influence is back

Chung wiggled into a pair of white jeans – “they’re a bit small because I’ve 
been in England eating roast dinners,” she said – and namechecked the 
Razorlight frontman as a bit of an inspiration. “Do you remember when he wore 
white jeans for three years straight?” she asked, in that deadpan way of hers. 
“I thought we should bring that back.” George Harrison’s jeans were also on the 
moodboard – and inspired a pair of high-waisted skinny numbers.



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F42zdg%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F42zdg%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F28%2F1414501912268%2Fd34d77bc-c432-47bf-ac50-668d2818af01-1176x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alexa%20Chung's%20new%20look%20%E2%80%93%20'I'm%20bored%20of%20Peter%20Pan%20collars'&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F42zdg%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alexa+Chung%27s+new+look+%E2%80%93+%27I%27m+bored+of+Peter+Pan+collars%27&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F42zdg%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F28%2F1414501912268%2Fd34d77bc-c432-47bf-ac50-668d2818af01-1176x2040.jpeg>
 High waisters … George Harrison, right, and Patti Boyd. Photograph: Manchester 
Daily Express/SSPL via Getty Images 



This is a denim brand, but it’s not just jeans

Our favourite piece was a ribbed T-shirt that came in grey marl and cream, 
that Chung said was “good to layer under stuff” (she wore hers under a sweet 
short pinafore dress). There were also an array of Chung-like ingenue dresses – 
one with a flouncy frill across the shoulders, and another with high-necked 
design. “I love a smock dress,” said Chung “even though I am over five. I 
thought I could do something that was more like a vicar thanPeter Pan 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2012/may/21/rebekah-brooks-peter-pan-collar>
 because I’m bored of wearing them.”

Chung can design stuff beyond what she’d like to wear

A pair of knee-length shorts were spurned during the try-on process because 
“they look weird for me, better on a blonde”, and even the cut-off hotpants – a 
staple of Chung’s festival wardrobe “combined with a Barbour and a wellington 
boot” – were borderline. “I think I might have to give up hotpants because I’m 
31 in a week,” she said, pulling on them on. We have to say if we looked like 
that in a pair of hotpants, we’d never stop wearing them.

She’s well aware a girl can do too many collaborations

Chung said she was hesitant to sign on with AG because “maybe I was whoring 
myself out in collaboration land” but she changed her mind after visiting the 
LA factory. A family business with, said Chung, “with loads of people working 
like elves on Christmas eve”, she described it as magical. The fact that she 
got to design her own buttons sealed the deal.
