
Q Dear Nigel, I know the advantages of letting roast meat "rest" for a while 
after cooking, but how do I prevent the meat from getting cold?
Geoff

A Hi Geoff, yes, it is tricky, isn't it. I get around the problem with beef 
and lamb by placing it on a really hot serving plate and then covering the 
joint with a dome of foil. It seems to work. The problem is with pork and 
chicken. I find that covering pork with any sort of cover makes the crackling 
go soft, and that chicken just won't stay hot enough. I try and get round this 
by only resting chicken for 10 minutes. The pork is trickier and I have taken 
to simply putting it on a very hot dish and laying the foil over the top very 
loosely. It is essential to find somewhere out of a draft, and sometimes I put 
it in the switched-off oven with the door open (not to be recommended if there 
are children around). I will say that having a hot plate makes a huge 
difference.

Q Hi Nigel, I bought some fresh greeny-yellow dates on a vine from a Turkish 
shop last week. I cut one open at home, and it looked and tasted unripe. I 
thought that I would wait for them to ripen. But they haven't ripened. They 
have just developed brown patches on their skins.
Naomi

A Dear Naomi, dates ripen in four stages, which are always referred to by the 
Arabic names: kimri, khalal, rutab and tamr. They are generally picked at the 
khalal stage, which is where yours are now. Unripened dates are often used in 
salads, where their sharpness is welcome. Yours are simply going through their 
ripening process. They tend to ripen in spots rather than evenly, so hold on, 
and keep an eye on them. They should be fully darkened in a week or two, 
depending on their variety and where you are keeping them.

â€¢ If you have a cooking question for Nigel, email ask.nigel@observer.co.uk  
<mailto:ask.nigel@observer.co.uk>
