
Earlier this month, Michael Gove addressed prison governors 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/making-prisons-work> and admitted that 
the most recent figures for deaths in custody and violence in prisons were 
terrible.

This chimed with the Justice Committee’s report into prison safety published 
four days later. In this report the committee examined the government’s 
response to the ongoing and rapid deterioration in prison safety in England and 
Wales that began in 2012.

Related: Looking for better ways to make prison work in the 21st century | 
Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/22/looking-for-better-ways-to-make-prison-work-in-the-21st-century>

Gove, in his speech, went on to say that there is no point trying to minimise, 
excuse or divert attention away from the increasing problems we face. 
Unfortunately, the grim statistics he presented only tell part of the story. He 
was correct when he said that there were 100 self-inflicted deaths in custody, 
up from 79 the year before and he was also correct when he said assaults on 
staff were up by 36% to 4,963 and that there has been an increase of 25% in 
incidents of self-harm.

But as bad as these figures are Gove still managed gloss over the reality of 
the situation. To understand the true state of the decline in decency and the 
increase in the awful conditions prison officers and governors are working in, 
Gove should have gone back three years, not 12 months.

In the 12 months leading up to March 2013 there were 52 self-inflicted deaths 
in custody 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/safety-in-custody-quarterly-update-to-december-2015>
, three years later there were 100 – an increase of 92%. In 2012 there were 
23,158 incidents of self-harm and three years later there were 32,313 – an 
increase of 39%. The number of serious assaults in the same period was 
approximately 1,200 and three years later it was 2,813 – an increase of 
approximately 130%. Almost every statistical graph the Ministry of Justice 
produces in this area shows a slight variation in serious incidents of harm or 
deaths in the nine years before 2012 then an alarming shift upwards.
Self-harm in prisons 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/may/2016-05-17T14:36:17/embed.html>
So what happened in 2012 that might explain the reason for this shift? Between 
2010-11 and 2014-15 theNational Offender Management Service 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/national-offender-management-service>
 (Noms) made cumulative savings of almost £1bn and the savings made in public 
sector prisons were £334m.

A large chunk of these savings was made by shedding staff while the prison 
population continued to grow. This was achieved with the implementation of a 
prison benchmark applied across the service, which changed prison regimes and 
dictated both the grades and numbers of prison staff. In order to get the staff 
out as quickly as possible, Noms offered them severance payments to leave. This 
resulted in the loss of experienced staff and, when staffing levels fell below 
what was required, Noms was unable to recruit replacements quickly enough – 
even offering those they had paid to leave the opportunity to return.

On top of that the new staff coming in did not have the experience of those 
they were replacing and many simply left under the pressure adding to the 
recruitment problems. The impact of these changes were seen in 2012, when the 
changes were being phased into prisons. The statistics provide good evidence of 
what happened – prisons were cheaper to run, but this came at a cost.
Assaults in male prisons 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/may/2016-05-17T14:46:06/embed.html>
The government wants to give governors more autonomy and this will be achieved 
with theprison reform programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/17/skype-ipads-in-cell-education-prison-legislation-queens-speech>
 referenced in the Queen’s speech. This is what prison governors have been 
crying out for; but not at any cost. The early adopter prisons are all very 
different and have their own unique challenges, ranging from local issues such 
as staffing turnover to the age of the prison buildings and cost of maintenance.

Related: Prison reform plan 'will not solve overcrowding and funding problems' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/18/prison-reform-not-solve-overcrowding-funding-problems-queens-speech>

When giving governors autonomy the government must re-invest what it has 
stripped out in the past five years. Prison reform will inevitably bring some 
immediate improvements with the long overdue abolition of the all-pervasive 
public managerialism that has infected the service. Governors are, however, 
starting from a much lower position than they were before austerity deprived 
them of resources. The changes made to prisons to cut running costs cannot 
simply be reversed at the stroke of a pen: they will take many months, maybe 
years, to turn around. Centralisation of contracts, procurement processes, 
budgetary controls, recruitment, and the management of education was introduced 
to initiate savings and cannot be instantly jettisoned. In order to understand 
the enormity of the challenge ahead it is necessary to appreciate where we 
really are now.

Gove acknowledges that a radical reform programme will take years to implement 
before it begins to yield the positive difference governors are capable of 
delivering. I hope that this is not simply rhetoric and that governors really 
will be given enough time, and resources, to rehabilitate prisoners and make 
society a safer place. Governors, without the imposition of centrally-driven 
diktats, are capable of so much more than they are currently allowed to 
demonstrate. Gove states that only when our prisons are places of calm 
stability and order can we make the difference we need to. That is probably 
true but in order to achieve that we must recognise that theprison population 
is overcrowded and the cuts went too far 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/18/prison-reform-not-solve-overcrowding-funding-problems-queens-speech>
. We are all now paying the price.

John Attard is national officer, Prison Governors’ Association

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
