
Senior politicians on both sides of the close-fought referendum battle will be 
criss-crossing Britain in a final, hectic day of campaigning, with the result 
of the historic vote still too close to call.

David Cameron <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron>, who will be 
travelling the country on a battle bus, is expected to appear with senior 
figures from other parties and from beyond politics, as the Britain Stronger In 
Europe campaign seeks to underline the breadth of its support from across the 
ideological spectrum.

Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>
 will appear alongside other senior party figures, including London mayor Sadiq 
Khan; the party’s leader in Scotland, Kezia Dugdale; and the Welsh first 
minister, Carwyn Jones, to make the case for Britain to remain in the EU at an 
event in London.

Liberal Democrat leader Tim Farron 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/tim-farron> will hit the road in his 
party’s yellow bus, which will visit Cambridge. Green party campaigners will 
also be out on the campaign trail.

Meanwhile, Vote Leave campaigner Boris Johnson 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris>, who has staked his future career 
on backing Brexit, will tour Britain by helicopter, meeting supporters at a 
series of stops throughout the country – though campaign sources suggested bad 
weather could yet put a stop to the plan. Michael Gove, the justice secretary, 
will also be making a series of public appearances.

Corbyn will say: “Throughout our history, the people of Britain have looked 
outwards, and for ways to work with others to improve the lives of our fellow 
citizens and the world around us. It is this commitment to delivering real 
change for all which forged the Labour party.

 “So I urge Labour supporters this Thursday: do what’s best for our people. 
Vote for jobs, rights at work and our NHS. Vote remain.”


Alan Johnson, the former Labour minister who has led the Labour In For Britain 
campaign, will insist Thursday’s referendum is “the biggest decision of a 
generation”.

Labour denied claims yesterday that it had pulled out of a cross-party press 
conference in Birmingham, at which the red Labour In battle bus had been due to 
appear alongside buses from the other main parties. A spokesman for Corbyn 
said: “The Labour In bus is part of the Labour In campaign, which is a separate 
campaign.”

Labour, which has spent £4m on its campaign, will also press home its message 
by sending planes trailing banners into the skies above the capital urging 
voters to turn out to back remain.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIqx1y4FkoNE&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIqx1y4FkoNE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIqx1y4FkoNE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIqx1y4FkoNE&media=>
Last night, the Stronger In campaign lit up a series of landmarks throughout 
the EU in union jack colours, including the Tate Modern, the Eiffel Tower and 
the Ponte Vecchio in Florence, with the message “Vote Remain”, in a bid to show 
that the result of Britain’s referendum will be closely watched throughout 
continentalEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.

Former England footballer David Beckham became the latest celebrity to endorse 
the remain campaign on Tuesday and Vote Leave were embarrassed afterMichael Gove
 <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove> suggested another 
footballer, John Barnes, backed the leave camp, but Barnes himself denied that.

The Electoral Commission last night said data collected from the 382 local 
voting areas showed that a total of 46,499,537 electors would be eligible to 
vote in Thursday’s poll. That was up from 44,441,081 in December, after a vocal 
public campaign to persuade electors, and in particular young people, to 
register.
