
Some patients at The Docs <http://www.thedocsmanchester.co.uk/> city-centre 
surgery in Manchester emerge from the consulting room, minus a prescription, 
but clutching a voucher for a free yoga class courtesy of staff at the practice 
who are convinced that yoga deserves a more prominent part in NHS care.

The tickets entitling the bearers to a 45-minute class at the nearby Studio 25 
<http://www.studio25manchester.com/> were initiated by one of the partners, Dr 
Matthew Joslin. He developed them following powerful Facebook support for an 
open letter he wrote to the NHS in January appealing for greater incorporation 
of the Indian exercise and mindfulness techniques into day-to-day healthcare. 
The letter received 17,000 Facebook shares.


Astonished at the reaction, 46-year-old Joslin has added to his 16 years as a 
yoga practitioner by training to teach the physically-demandingAshtanga 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ashtanga_vinyasa_yoga> form of the practice. He 
plans to start giving one class a week from June onwards at Studio 25, and 
later in the the basement at The Docs when work has been carried out to convert 
it into a yoga studio, with a physiotherapist also on hand to tackle a range of 
musculoskeletal problems.


“It is time yoga became the default option to get people moving, improve 
strength, flexibility and posture and – while you’re at it – to bring a helping 
of mindfulness to promote mental health,” says Joslin.


Related: Exercise classes for over 65s help cut falls risk 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/apr/19/over-65-exercise-classes-cut-falls-risk>

This is not just about bad backs and dodgy knees. Joslin has become aware that 
many of the men and women coming into the consultation room of his inner-city 
practice bring problems that he feels yoga could help. Cardiovascular disease, 
diabetes, pregnancy, back pain, obesity, mental health issues, social isolation 
and a number of the difficulties faced by people in old age fall into this 
bracket.


Yoga is cheap, sociable and available in a number of forms to suit all ages, 
tastes and abilities – from the more static and strengtheningIyengar 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iyengar_Yoga>, the therapeutic and meditative 
Svastha, to the cardio workout offered by Ashtanga. Could it be a way of 
hitting a number of health problems at once?

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4th8n%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4th8n%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2239e967c192459a32cd8a66473fdf0dd468265f%2F0_104_3456_4320%2F3456.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Should%20yoga%20be%20part%20of%20NHS%20care%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4th8n%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Should+yoga+be+part+of+NHS+care%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4th8n%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2239e967c192459a32cd8a66473fdf0dd468265f%2F0_104_3456_4320%2F3456.jpg>
 ‘It is time yoga became the default option to get people moving, improve 
strength, flexibility and posture,’ says Dr Matthew Joslin (pictured). 
Photograph: Rose Joslin 
Figures from Sport England from 2013-14 suggest that 388,200 people over 16 
participated in yoga for 30 minutes every week – up from 296,800 in 2008-09 – 
and the NHS England chief executive, Simon Stevens, announced last autumn that
yoga was to be offered to health professionals alongside Zumba and health checks
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/02/nhs-workers-to-be-offered-health-checks-and-yoga-classes>
, in a package aiming to cut the £2.4bn annual cost of sick leave in the health 
service.


However, recently-issued draft guidelines on lower back pain from the National 
Institute for Health and Care Excellence <https://www.nice.org.uk/> (Nice) do 
not mention yoga specifically in recommendations that people take exercise to 
improve their condition. Although Nice says its recommendations do not exclude 
yoga, there is not enough scientific proof that it works.

Joslin started yoga to cure a bad back but became hooked by the practice when 
he was introduced to Ashtanga during a period of anxiety and depression that 
nearly made him quit medicine. He now goes to three classes a week, including a 
Friday lunchtime class accompanied by The Docs’ GP trainee, Shahnawaz Khan, and 
practice nurse, Wendy Cooke.


The 45-minute Yoga <http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/yoga> Express 
programme, to which he sends his patients, was devised by renowned yoga teacher 
Matt Ryan, who used to be a DJ at Manchester’s Hacienda nightclub, and used the 
practice as his way out of drug and mental health problems.


The GP reels off anecdotal examples of patients who have had similar positive 
experiences – an adult with neurological damage following meningitis, who now 
has better balance and coordination; a woman with serious depression, who 
communicated after her first session of yoga.


A major problem is that the evidence base for yoga is not there. A Cochrane 
review of yoga and back pain pointed this out, even though there is a strong 
support for the benefits of exercise on cardiovascular disease. Another 
difficulty about yoga is that it is used to describe a number of practices from 
the meditative to the highly athletic.


Dr James Newham, from Newcastle University’s Institute of Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> and Society, and researchers from 
Manchester University have carried out the first study of antenatal yoga in the 
UK – published in the journal Anxiety and Depression – showing that a single 
session of yoga reduced self-reported anxiety by a third and stress hormone 
levels by 14%.

Related: Innovative community health services help ease the pressure on GPs 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/apr/13/innovative-community-health-services-ease-pressure-gps>

Dr Kishan Rees, a clinical teaching fellow in medical education at Lincoln 
UMED, believes that economic constraints on theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> call for a broader view of public 
health. “There may be a lack of evidence to support some complementary 
therapies such as Yoga,” he says. “However, as long as it causes no harm, these 
approaches should be implemented as part of a toolkit people can access as they 
see fit.”

In the US, the work of the meditative aspects of the yoga by psychologist Dr 
Richard Miller have been officially recognised. He used the state of lucid 
sleep (yoga nidra) to treat post-traumatic stress in soldiers returning from 
Iraq and Afghanistan.


The government’s Mindful Nation project backed the concept of mindfulness and 
recommended that mindfulness-based cognitive therapy should be commissioned on 
the NHS for recurrent depression. In the UK, the Phoenix Prison Trust takes 
yoga and meditation to prisoners, to improve their physical and mental 
wellbeing.


Justin Varney, interim deputy director of health and wellbeing at Public 
Health England, says: “There are a variety of types of activity that people can 
undertake to contribute towards achieving a healthy amount of physical 
activity, with most people preferring to undertake a mix. Yoga is an excellent 
way to achieve the two sessions of muscle strengthening per week in alignment 
with our guidance.”

Yoga is always going to be a turn-off to some who associate it with mysticism 
and drugs, but Joslin believes that austerity and the Facebook reaction suggest 
yoga is worthy of more careful official consideration. “I want to see whether 
there is a way to marry the amazing healing sustaining practice that is yoga, 
with the services offered by the NHS,” he says. “The NHS already sends people 
to the gym and to swimming pools. Find me a physiotherapist who doesn’t think 
yoga is a good idea.”
