
Gemma O’Doherty, a journalist who sued the Irish Independent for defamation 
afterbeing fired by the paper and labelled “a rogue reporter” 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2014/dec/22/irelands-gemma-odoherty-wins-apology-and-damages-from-independent-newspapers>
, has won a grovelling apology and damages from the publishers and the paper’s 
editor-in-chief.

Although the final terms of the settlement were not revealed at Dublin’s high 
court today, the apology to her by Independent News & Media (INM) and its 
editor-in-chief, Stephen Rae, was read out in court:

“Independent Newspapers wish to acknowledge the exceptional work of 
multi-award winning investigative journalist Gemma O’Doherty for theIrish 
Independent <http://www.theguardian.com/media/irish-independent> during the 
course of a lengthy career.

Independent Newspapers accept that Gemma O’Doherty has acted at all times in a 
professional and diligent manner and in the best interests of Independent
Newspapers <http://www.theguardian.com/media/newspapers>.

Independent Newspapers unreservedly apologises to Ms O’Doherty for the stress 
and hardship caused to her and her husband as a result of its actions.

Independent Newspapers have agreed to pay to Ms O’Doherty undisclosed damages 
and to indemnify her in relation to her legal costs”.

The apology is similar to the one INM gave last month in settlement of 
O’Doherty’s unfair dismissal action at Ireland’s employment appeals tribunal. 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2014/dec/22/irelands-gemma-odoherty-wins-apology-and-damages-from-independent-newspapers>

She was fired in August 2013 following her investigation into the widespread 
wiping of driving licence penalty points by the Irish police force.

As part of her inquiries in April 2013, she called at the home of the former 
Irish police commissioner, Martin Callinan, who also had penalty points deleted 
from his record.


Rae later referred to her as “a rogue reporter” and weeks later she was 
informed that she was to be made compulsorily redundant, making her the only 
member of the Independent staff to suffer that indignity.

Following the resolution of her defamation action, O’Doherty issued a 
statement saying the apology was “another comprehensive vindication of my 
reputation as an investigative reporter”. She continued:

“On a separate and general note, journalists have an obligation to hold power 
to account, be it in An Garda Síochána, Dail Eireann, the health service or 
other institutions of the state.

We must be allowed to do our work without fear or favour, defending the public 
interest and the rights of citizens, especially victims of injustice and the 
marginalised”.

Her lawyer, Paul Tweed, also saw INM’s apology as “vindication of her 
professional reputation”. He added:

“Quite apart from this case and newspaper, it is perhaps a sign of the times 
that Gemma is the fourth journalist in as many weeks for whom I have had to 
take action against various other organisations, albeit in differing 
circumstances, in order to safeguard their professional integrity”.

Sources: RTE <http://www.rte.ie/news/2015/0113/672253-o-doherty/>/Private 
information
