
Why do newspapers hate Kate Moss <http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/kate-moss>
 so much?

Charlotte, by email

There is a strange editorial divide when it comes to the essential and 
never-ending news cycle that is the life ofKate Moss 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/kate-moss>. The broadsheets seem to love 
her, using any old excuse to print photos of her. The tabloids, by contrast, 
absolutely loathe her, gleefully seizing any opportunity to kick her, mock her, 
berate her and generally insist that she’s really Not All That. Which is odd, 
when you think about it, because surely it should be the other way round, with 
the tabloids loving this gorgeous female celebrity who is a guaranteed source 
of sales, and the broadsheets holding up their noses at this – ew! – celebrity 
who seemingly does very little with her life other than jet about and make a 
truck-ton of cash.

We could talk for days about why the tabloids hate Moss so much, insisting 
that she’s miserable/ugly/lonely/fat etc, despite all the evidence to the 
contrary. To skip the “too long; didn’t read” version, it seems fair to say 
that sexism plays a fair part here, seeing as Moss refuses to adhere to the 
famous female narratives preferred by the tabloids, namely get married, have 
babies and behave with maternal decorum (see Kate Middleton, Jools Oliver etc); 
swerve from that script and apologise tearfully (female reality TV stars, 
female soap actors etc); or die tragically (Diana, the patron goddess of all 
tabloids). Moss, on the other hand, has always lived her life without the 
slightest apparent concern for what anyone thinks, and certainly not the media.

But, in the case of some tabloids, it seems just as likely that their vendetta 
has nothing to do with gender. When asked why she thought the Daily Mail was so 
obsessed with her ageing, Moss made the unimprovable reply, “I don’t know. 
’Cause it’s the Daily Mail? They just get on everyone’s tits, don’t they?” 
(Yes, I’ve used that quote a thousand times before, and I plan to use it a 
thousand times more.)

The brilliant thing about Moss is that she can never be shamed: a newspaper 
could run a story about how she was caught having an orgy with several members 
of the Tory front bench, Sister Wendy and a labradoodle while simultaneously 
smoking propane, and, while the tabloids would spontaneously combust with their 
tangy combination of voyeurism and phony morality, the rest us would just nod 
and say, “Yup, that’s what I reckoned a quiet Sunday afternoon would be like 
for Kate Moss.” She showed fashion advertisers to be the hypocrites that they 
are when all those who had hired her precisely for her rock’n’roll image then
dropped her in 2005 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2005/sep/21/clothes.advertising> after she 
was photographed apparently taking cocaine, only to come back barely five 
minutes later withher yearly earnings double 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-461505/Moss-doubles-money-Cocaine-Kate-scandal.html>
d.

Of course, it’s not just the media that likes to get moralistic about Moss. 
Plenty of people do, too, even though she always comes across as pretty 
harmless,as long as you’re not an employee of easyJet 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/jun/08/kate-moss-called-pilot-basic-bitch-witness>
. No, I wouldn’t want to go on holiday with her (I’d be more likely to sprout 
wings and fly than keep up with Moss on a night out), but, heck, she’s hardly
Saddam Hussein <https://www.theguardian.com/world/saddam-hussein>. I’ve heard 
and read plenty of tut-tutting about Moss’s alleged former drug use, with much 
headshaking about the global damage done by drug users and so on, and that’s 
just grand: well done on your“virtue signalling” 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/helen-lewis/2015/07/echo-chamber-social-media-luring-left-cosy-delusion-and-dangerous-insularity>
, to borrow a useful term coined by the New Statesman’s Helen Lewis. Strangely, 
though, I very rarely hear such qualms expressed about, oh, let’s say,Noel 
Gallagher <https://www.theguardian.com/music/noel-gallagher>, who has talked 
frequently about his former cocaine abuse and yet now seems on the fast track 
to national treasure status, despite writing songs so boring I honestly believe 
they should not be played on the radio out of concern for drivers falling 
asleep at the wheel.

Anyway, it has been reported in the past week that Moss and her husband Jamie 
Hince are to separate 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-3175299/Jamie-Hince-continues-wear-wedding-ring-following-Kate-Moss-split.html>
. Is this true? Who knows. Certainly, the reason cited by the tabloids –that 
Hince has been spending too much time with some aristo friends 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-3173112/Two-failed-engagements-string-rock-star-lovers-wild-social-life-s-claimed-Kate-Moss-Jamie-Hince-s-marriage-just-t-supermodel-true-love.html>
, whose names I can’t even be bothered to Google – does make one cock a 
somewhat sceptical eyebrow. “He hangs out too much with posh people” does not 
seem like a problem that would ruffle too many of Moss’s feathers. Anyway, the 
sole evidence for this cited reason is that Hince went to Glastonbury with 
aforementioned poshos and Moss stayed behind, which I wouldn’t really describe 
as smoking-gun level of proof. Whereas the reaction of the tabloids has been 
much gleeful speculation about Moss’s impending loneliness, the broadsheets 
have been either silent or adoring, with one paper running a collection of Moss 
and Hince’s “most fashionable moments 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/fashion/people/kate-moss-jamie-hince-relationship-in-pictures/wedding-2011/>
”. This might seem an odd way to mark the possible end of a marriage, but it is 
surely preferable to dubious speculation based purely on scrolling through an 
aristocrat’s Instagram, which is currently how journalism is being made in some 
papers.

But there’s no point in getting overly exasperated about this, because, if 
there’s one positive and guaranteed truth to be drawn about this whole farrago, 
it’s this: Moss could not care less what any newspaper writes about her. And, 
for that alone, this column will always salute her.

Post your questions to Hadley Freeman, Ask Hadley, The Guardian, Kings Place, 
90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Emailask.hadley@theguardian.com <mailto:Post your 
questions to Hadley Freeman, Ask%C2%A0Hadley, The Guardian, Kings 
Place,%C2%A090%C2%A0York%C2%A0Way, London N1 9GU. 
Email%C2%A0ask.hadley@theguardian.com.>.
