
My Grandma Roddy used to suck her breath in sharply, then breathe out “oooooh 
dear...” when something concerned her. As she got oldereverything concerned her 
– even thick-skinned fruit and vegetables; you would surely have a finger off 
when you tried to peel them with a sharp knife. On the way back from one of our 
shopping trips she oh-deared all the way home at the thought of the butternut 
squash I had bought.

Years later, in another country, I am reminded of my Yorkshire grandma when a 
woman at Testaccio market expresses concern as I pick up a pumpkin.Pericoloso – 
dangerous – she says. She’s right: the dark-green mantovana pumpkin with its 
fiendishly thick, bumpy skin has been the cause of many a knife mishap, I’m 
sure. The wonderfully phallic ones from Naples too, the striped delicata and 
the ochre butternut squash – all of these require a fair amount of force to get 
at the dense sweet-savoury flesh.

Related: A peperonata recipe straight from Rome | Kitchen sink tales 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/29/peperonata-recipe-jane-grigson-rachel-roddy-kitchen-sink-tales>

My regular though is the workhorse of local pumpkins, a squat variety, with 
deeply fluted, smooth orangy-green skin. Generally too big a burden to be 
carried home whole, these pumpkins, known simply aszucca, are sold by the 
slice, the flutes providing neat portions. The flesh looks impressive – blazing 
orange – but it can seem a bit flabby compared with the svelte mantovanas, 
delicatas and butternuts. Like the flesh of halloween pumpkins, it can easily 
seem soggy and lacklustre; it needs a careful hand to bring out the best in it. 
“Slices don’t keep – cook it today”, said the woman, which again made me think 
of Grandma, who would have loved the natter and endless advice that’s doled out 
– wanted or not – at Testaccio market.

Roasting is a good way to bring out the best in a timid pumpkin; it deals well 
with the wateriness. You rub the slices with olive oil then cook them until 
tender and golden at the edges. Further advice comes from Flavio de Maio, the 
owner of my local trattoria, who treats zucca in winter as he does courgettes 
in summer,alla scapace, which means marinating fried or roasted pumpkin in a 
mixture of olive oil, red wine vinegar, finely chopped garlic, chilli and lots 
of Roman mint. The pumpkin provides the sweet, the vinegar the sharp, and the 
chilli, garlic and mint a warm, musty flavour for a delicious antipasti or side 
dish.

Another favoured way with roasted pumpkin is risotto, a luscious dish of rice 
in its own creamy sauce. I was taught to make this by a Milanese lawyer who 
wished he was a chef, had lived in Mantua – the home of excellent pumpkins – 
before settling in Rome. Frustrated by pumpkins that needed more than a simmer 
in the stock, he took to roasting them, mashing them and then adding them in 
the last minutes of the rice cooking time to make a richly flavoured risotto 
that takes on the very colour of autumn.

The lawyer also taught me that risotto need not be an intimidating dish, and 
is perfectly achievable if you are prepared to practice – and to stir for about 
18 minutes: the time the rice takes to steadily absorb the stock. I find the 
radio and a glass of wine helps. I also find Italian terms for the stages of 
cooking helpful:tostatura – the roasting of the rice in the buttery onion 
before you add any liquid;sfumare, when you add the alcohol to the hot pan and 
it seethes; and the final step, themantecatura – the vigorous beating of butter 
and cheese into the final dish that develops that final sleek creaminess. Most 
helpful of all is having someone else there to peel the pumpkin.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4exzk%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4exzk%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F6%2F1446815594021%2F11906b9b-c3ca-4c88-90aa-97f19b12e691-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyond%20the%20peel%3A%20Roman%20roasted%20pumpkin%20risotto%20%7C%20Kitchen%20Sink%20Tales&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4exzk%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyond+the+peel%3A+Roman+roasted+pumpkin+risotto+%7C+Kitchen+Sink+Tales&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4exzk%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F6%2F1446815594021%2F11906b9b-c3ca-4c88-90aa-97f19b12e691-2060x1373.jpeg>
 ‘Roasting is a good way to bring out the best in a timid pumpkin; it deals 
well with the wateriness.’ Photograph: Rachel Roddy for the Guardian 
Roasted pumpkin risotto

Serves 4
450g pumpkin/squash flesh cut into 15mm wedges
Olive oil
Salt
1 small onion
100g butter
1.5 litres light chicken or vegetable stock (you may not need all of this)
380g risotto rice (Arborio, Carnaroli or Vialone Nano)
125ml white wine or 50ml dry vermouth
60g freshly grated parmesan

1 Put the pumpkin on a baking tray, sprinkle with salt and olive oil. Bake at 
200C/400F/gas mark 6 for 30–40 minutes or until it is tender and tinged golden 
brown. Once cooked, scrape the flesh from the skin and mash it roughly. Keep it 
warm. Put the stock in a pan, put it on a back burner, bring to a slow boil and 
then turn it off.

2 Peel and dice the onion finely. Melt 50g of the butter in a heavy bottomed 
pan with relatively high sides over a low heat, add the onion and a pinch of 
salt and cook slowly until soft and translucent. Turn up the heat, add the rice 
and stir quickly so each grain is glistening with butter. Add the alcohol, 
which will seethe and be absorbed by the rice. Glance at the clock – this is 
going to take about 18 minutes – and add the first ladleful of warm stock, and 
stir until this, too, is absorbed.

3 Continue adding the stock, only adding the next ladleful when the previous 
one has been absorbed. Make sure the pan never dries out. Each addition will 
take longer to absorb as the rice finds its job more arduous. After about 12 
minutes start tasting the rice for readyness. Once the rice is tender, but 
still with inner firmness, add the last ladleful of stock.

4 Once this is absorbed add the warm mashed pumpkin, stir well, and cook for 
another minute. The consistency should be loose so you might need a little more 
stock. Turn off the heat, add the rest of the butter and the parmesan, then 
beat vigorously with a wooden spoon until the whole mass is creamy and glossy. 
Leave to sit for a minute, stir again and serve from the pan, passing around 
extra parmesan.
