
When Yuko Shimizu <http://yukoart.com/category/work/> moved to New York in 
1999 she had no interest in – or money for – interiors. “I rented an apartment 
in an unhip area of Brooklyn and bought all the used Ikea furniture from the 
guy moving out,” she says.

But when she came to buy her own place eight years ago, viewing more than 100 
apartments changed her thinking. “I realised that decorating your home is part 
of your personality.”

From her interior choices, you might guess she is comfortable with risk. Early 
20th-century wooden wall panels are painted solid black and topped with graphic 
wallpaper. A narrow hallway is covered in bold monochrome stripes that extend 
from the walls across the ceiling. A modernist Barcelona chair sits next to a 
Versailles-style dome seat. These things could easily not have worked.

Shimizu herself took a leap of faith in her mid-30s when she ditched a 
corporate PR job in Japan for art school in New York. The risk paid off and 
she’s now, at an undisclosed age, a respected illustrator. She’s also keen to 
point out that she’s not to be confused withthe other Yuko Shimizu  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/06/hello-kitty-movie>who created 
Hello Kitty.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tp72%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tp72%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62cf069fd33b0b689a4e89a9f45bec68008222fe%2F0_0_6846_9182%2F6846.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manhattan%20makeover&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tp72%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Manhattan+makeover&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tp72%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62cf069fd33b0b689a4e89a9f45bec68008222fe%2F0_0_6846_9182%2F6846.jpg>
 Lines of enquiry: the neat and compact kitchen. Photograph: Mark Seelen. 
Styling: Marc Heldens 
When Shimizu found her third-floor, one-bedroom apartment on the Upper West 
Side of Manhattan, she approached decorating as she does her work. “Looking at 
the apartment I realised, ‘Oh, it’s like a three-dimensional space you fill 
in,’” she says. “My drawings are not simple. They’re highly decorative, but 
they have rhythm – parts where it’s tight and parts where you let go.”

And so she set to work. For the main areas of her home she chose a palette of 
black and white with an accent colour of red. “The tone is important,” she 
says. “In Asia there’s a Chinese red that is cooler with a lot more black, and 
a Japanese red that shifts more towards orange. I like both but, for interiors, 
the Japanese red brightens a room.”

Indeed, red continually beams out against the black and white throughout her 
home: from the artwork to her bedroom door, and the lettering on a cushion that 
says “BE NICE OR LEAVE.” (“I sometimes give these as presents because people 
love them,” she says.) Most notably, it’s the base colour of the wallpaper in 
her lounge – a depiction of galloping zebras and flying arrows. Originally 
designed for a New York restaurant, this is a cult print spotted in Wes 
Anderson’sThe Royal Tenenbaums 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/91078/royal.tenenbaums>, covering the 
walls of Gwyneth Paltrow’s character’s room. The flow of the animals creates 
the feel of a fairground carousel circling overhead.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tp72%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tp72%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54f56ee3c34deddfa8a721de93ec93a7cfe2196d%2F0_723_3744_4835%2F3744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manhattan%20makeover&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tp72%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Manhattan+makeover&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tp72%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54f56ee3c34deddfa8a721de93ec93a7cfe2196d%2F0_723_3744_4835%2F3744.jpg>
 Colour co-ordinated: Yuko Shimizu outside her apartment with her chihuahua 
‘Bruiser’. Photograph: Mark Seelen. Styling: Marc Heldens 
When it comes to furniture, Shimizu decided to challenge herself to a “No Ikea 
rule.” “It’s pretty hard because they have some great stuff,” she says, “but 
the problem is, whichever country you go to, everyone has the same furniture 
and it feels wrong.” So she tries to buy original items, either on Etsy and 
eBay, or when she travels.

She is a collector of both “junk and expensive things” – from figurines of 
Chinese dictators toFornasetti <http://www.fornasetti.com/> pieces. “I like to 
support artists,” she says, “and often that means I can’t immediately buy the 
thing I want [because it’s too expensive], but that’s OK. One day I might be 
able to.”

While others might admire Shimizu’s choices, committing them to a living space 
requires courage. Does she enjoy the risk of things potentially not working? “I 
guess that’s what artists are, right? If your vision and viewpoint is the same 
as everyone else’s, you’re probably not doing art,” she says. “Your home is 
your space and is where you can take risks. It’s a bit like my work,” she adds. 
“I don’t need everyone to love it.”

Living With Yuko Shimizu 
<http://roads.co/books/visual/living-with-yuko-shimizu> is published by Roads, 
£11.99. To order a copy for £9.59, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/402011/>
