
Imagine how much you already know. Just contemplate everything you have 
learned and experienced during all the years that you have been alive. 
Everything. Seems pretty vast, doesn’t it?


Your brain is full of knowledge gathered throughout your lifetime. Storing all 
this knowledge is beneficial because it can be used to predict future 
occurrences. For example, you have seen so many chairs that you instantly 
recognise a new one for what it is, even when it has a slightly different 
appearance.

This predictive power allows your brain to process everyday occurrences 
quickly and efficiently – you need to store only the things that are new. In 
the chair example, your brain records the way this particular chair deviates 
from previously encountered ones.

Something different happens when we encounter things completely outside of our 
usual experience. If your brain is surprised, it finds that memorable – and 
this is known as the“novelty effect” 
<http://www.scientificamerican.com/article/learning-by-surprise/>. The element 
of newness helps your brain form a strong memory.

Related: Want to learn faster? Stop multitasking and start daydreaming 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/oct/24/want-to-learn-faster-stop-multitasking-and-start-daydreaming>

We do not always consciously make use of what we already know when we try to 
learn new information. Butevidence is piling up 
<http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fnbeh.2013.00139/abstract> that 
suggests this is a smart thing to do.

So how can you make the most of your prior knowledge to prepare for acquiring 
– and retaining – new knowledge?

1. Remind yourself about what you already know


Always recall related knowledge actively when you’re learning new information. 
For example, if your task it to learn about the current situation in a certain 
country, recall what you already know about its history.

Don’t be tempted to look everything up immediately – even though Google has 
made that so easy. Take some time to retrieve what your own brain has stored 
about the topic first, even if it doesn’t relate directly to what you’re 
studying.

This act of retrieving knowledge 
<http://www.digitalpromise.org/blog/entry/ask-the-cognitive-scientist-retrieval-practice>
 has been shown to be very beneficial to learning, strengthening both the 
stored and the newly learned knowledge. If you’re unsure you’ve got the facts 
right, or find there are gaps in your knowledge, you can always check online 
afterwards. This is a good way to help identify and correct misconceptions as 
well.

2. Make use of the novelty effect


Imagine you’re trying to learn that “cheese” in French is “fromage”. Nothing 
in your prior knowledge would help you make that link. But you can still use 
both prior knowledge and the novelty effect to help you remember the word.

First, link the information artificially to your prior knowledge (you could 
say to yourself: “fromage” = “from age”) and then try to make this association 
as novel as possible.

You can do this by mentally placing the cheese in a weird spatial situation, 
optimally involving as many senses as possible (imagine a truly aged cheese in 
your bathroom, a cheese that smells strongly and is sweaty).


Related: Let a grandmaster of memory teach you something you will never forget 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/nov/07/grandmaster-memory-teach-something-never-forget>

The trick being used is called the method of loci 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Method_of_loci>: arbitrary information is 
connected together by linking it to locations within a familiar environment. It 
helps if you make the memory as bizarre and vivid as possible.

The ancient Greeks 
<http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/mental-imagery/ancient-imagery-mnemonics.html>
 cottoned on to this method and they used it to remember their famous lengthy 
speeches. Nowadays, it’s oftenused by memory champions 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/nov/07/grandmaster-memory-teach-something-never-forget>
 to recall frighteningly long lists of facts or numbers.

3. Get an overview of the study material


Before starting to study, make sure you get an overview 
<http://www.howtostudy.com/read-text-slowly-before-and-after-class/> of the 
study material by browsing through a study book, looking through the table of 
contents, and trying to answer questions, even if you have no clue what they 
are about.

Preparing <http://www.scientificamerican.com/article/getting-it-wrong/> for 
what you’re going to learn can help you to take in the knowledge as it comes 
your way. Skim through the chapters in your set texts so you can see the 
direction you’ll be taking. Keep repeating this procedure throughout the 
learning process; it is useful to have an overview in your mind at all times.

4. Take your time and be patient


Time itself will help you learn. Building structured knowledge takes a while – 
it requires effort and a lot of repetition over several days, weeks, even 
months.

Most of the knowledge that has stuck in your brain is a result of active 
recall, repetition, and – not unimportantly –unconscious lingering 
<http://www.pnas.org/content/107/16/7550.short> brain processes that order and 
generalise <http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364661311001094> 
your knowledge.


Related: How anxiety scrambles your brain and makes it hard to learn 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/nov/21/how-anxiety-scrambles-your-brain-and-makes-it-hard-to-learn>

These lingering processes occur after learning, while you’re resting, or even 
sleeping, and will influence future memory performance. A short nap or resting 
period after studying can help youremember better 
<http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fnsys.2014.00046/full>. 

On the other hand, last-minute cramming is unfortunately only helpful in the 
short term. It will not give you strong long-term retention, and that in turn 
hampers the integration of future knowledge.

These tips will help you to be more consciously aware of your prior knowledge 
and how it relates to learning new information when studying. When you’re at 
school, curriculums are carefully designed to build on previously acquired 
knowledge. But once you’re an adult, at university or at work, you come across 
new information all the time in a random order.

Recapping your older knowledge – by actively making yourself recall what you 
already now – will not only help you add on new bits of information, but will 
reinforce and refine the knowledge you already have.

Marlieke van Kesteren is a postdoctoral researcher in educational neuroscience 
at the VU University Amsterdam.

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
