
David Cameron leads a government with a “worryingly authoritarian streak” that 
is seeking to undermine theLabour <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> 
party’s funding arrangements through the trade union bill, a former head of the 
civil service has said.

Writing in a Guardian article 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/jan/11/trade-union-bill-silence-civil-service-bob-kerslake>
, Bob Kerslake made one of the strongest attacks on a government by a retired 
senior civil servant, saying the bill marked a “partisan and disproportionate” 
attempt to improve the position of theConservatives 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> at the expense of Labour.

A confidential Labour party document released to the Guardian revealed that 
the partyfaced an expected £6m drop 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/10/labour-expecting-6m-loss-in-funding-through-trade-union-bill>
 in its annual income as a result of the changes to the political levy being 
introduced in the trade union bill, making it impossible for it to maintain its 
current structure, staffing or offices.

Kerslake, who was head of the civil service between 2011 and 2014, said the 
bill and government reforms to the Freedom of Information Act were worrying 
developments.

“While there are quite reasonable steps [in the trade union bill] to increase 
transparency, the main thrust of the measures seems to be both partisan and 
disproportionate to the supposed problems that they are seeking to address,” 
wrote Kerslake, who was made a life peer in March.

“Taken with the other measures being put forward by the government – 
curtailing the powers of the Lords, watering down theFreedom of Information Act 
<https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/guide-to-freedom-of-information/what-is-the-foi-act/>
, cutting theso-called ‘short money’ 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/25/osborne-accused-of-despicable-attempt-to-cut-opposition-party-funding>
 to support the opposition parties – they demonstrate a worryingly 
authoritarian streak in this government that is not comfortable with scrutiny 
and challenge.”

Speaking in the House of Lords <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/lords> 
during the second reading of the trade union bill on Monday, Labour’s Lord 
Mendelsohn, who is a shadow business minister, said the proposed legislation 
was a “clear attempt to defenestrate the Labour party’s finances”, describing 
it as “extraordinarily partisan, vindictive and selective”.

He said Labour <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> peers would do all 
they could to limit the bill’s effects. “We will not recoil from vigorously 
opposing that which is wicked and unjust, and we won’t shy away from suggesting 
improvements and suggestions. I have never thought that putting lipstick on a 
pig was a very good idea. But this bill has made me revise my opinion.”

In his maiden speech in the Lords, Labour’s former election strategy chief 
Spencer Livermore said it was a “curious anomaly” that the bill would leave 
trade unions as the “only organisation in Britain prohibited from harnessing 
technology to modernise their own democratic procedures”.
