
One in two people who don’t give to local charities say the main reason is 
that they are unaware of them,research suggests 
<http://www.tsb.co.uk/tsb-local-charities-matter.pdf>.

Small local charities themselves say that having a greater profile in their 
communities would be the single biggest help to them, other than increased 
funding.

The evidence that boosting awareness of local charities could be key to them 
flourishing emerges in surveys commissioned by the TSB bank to coincide with
Small Charity Week <http://smallcharityweek.com> this week.

TSB, which supports almost 500 local charities across Britain through its 
branches, is working with theSmall Charities Coalition 
<http://www.smallcharities.org.uk> to encourage people to find out about local 
charities and get behind them.

Related: It's hard to lead a charity, especially when you've got to unblock 
the toilets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/jan/27/lead-a-charity-chief-executive-unblock-the-toilets>

Bola Gibson, head of community engagement at TSB, says: “Unlike large 
organisations, which naturally have more resources at their disposal, small 
local charities really struggle to get their voice heard. The lack of awareness 
is greatly hampering their funding and operations.”

The research included an Opinion Matters <http://www.opinionmatters.com/> 
survey of more than 1,000 adults. Over a third (38%) of them could not name a 
local charity in their area and 50% of those who said they did not donate to 
any local charities gave the reason as not knowing enough about them.

A second survey, by ComRes <http://www.comres.co.uk/>, comprised interviews 
with 301 registered local charities with annual income of less than £200,000. 
More than half (157) said that greater awareness of their charities would be 
the biggest help, apart from increased funding.

Graham Robinson, a volunteer with North Nottinghamshire Community First 
Responders <https://twitter.com/north_notts_cfr>, which assists the ambulance 
service, says: “Large companies tend to donate to well-known household charity 
names, so we find it hard to get them to support us. It comes down to 
awareness.”

Gibson says: “What our local charity partnerships have proved is that 
partnerships between well-known businesses and local causes can have a positive 
effect, not just by increasing funding but also increasing awareness.”

Small Charity Week is an annual campaign to celebrate and raise the profile of 
smaller charities. It was initiated in 2010 by theFoundation for Social 
Improvement (FSI) <http://www.thefsi.org/>, which works with charities with 
annual income of up to £1.5m.

For more news, opinions and ideas about the voluntary sector, join our 
community <https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/>.
