
Volcanic in origin, Mauritius has scenery so jagged and wild it makes you 
gasp. In my case, literally.

 It’s an hour after dawn and I’m climbing a mountain at a cracking pace. My 
young guide, Nicolas Quéland of outdoor activity companyYanature 
<http://www.trekkingmauritius.com/>, is a born athlete who goes trail running 
on ancient volcanoes for kicks. My other companions, holidaymakers from 
Germany, are both dentists. “We don’t get out into nature as much as we’d 
like,” they say. They’re like greyhounds released from the traps.

Related: Ten Mauritian beaches loved by locals 
<http://www.theguardian.com/ba-guide-to-mauritius-2016/2016/apr/29/ten-mauritian-beaches-loved-by-locals>

 Le Morne Brabant is an island-within-an-island – a monumental basalt monolith 
at Mauritius’s westernmost point. A world heritage site since 2008, its 
fortress-like summit and cave-peppered cliffs were once a hideout for runaway 
slaves. To reach its famous lookout, you have to cross private land, and 
Yanature’s guides are among the few with the necessary permission. Their 
four-hour hike is so popular, they run it six mornings a week.

 It’s not to be taken lightly. At around 490 metres, the elevation may be 
modest, but parts of the path are steep. At times, our hike turns into a 
scramble, my confidence pushed to the limit as I haul myself up sheer chunks of 
rock.

 “It might seem tough, but you’ll make it,” says Quéland, “and, believe me, 
it’s worth it. There are plants up here that are endemic to Mauritius – even to 
the mountain itself.”

 Sure enough, beside one particularly tricky climb, there’s a delicate, 
bell-shaped speck of red. It’s atrochetia boutoniana or Boucle d’Oreille 
(meaning “earring”), the island’s national flower. “This is the only place they 
grow naturally,” says Quéland. “The microclimate on these slopes is unique. 
It’s bizarre to see one flowering so early, though – they’re not normally out 
until June.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4taqj%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4taqj%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf53b065337fbefed48cd0174aea01d53fdb1baa%2F0_230_3456_2074%2F3456.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hiking%20in%20Mauritius%3A%20more%20than%20a%20walk%20in%20the%20(national)%20park&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4taqj%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hiking+in+Mauritius%3A+more+than+a+walk+in+the+%28national%29+park&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4taqj%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf53b065337fbefed48cd0174aea01d53fdb1baa%2F0_230_3456_2074%2F3456.jpg>
 Nicolas Queland of Yanature. Photograph: Emma Gregg 
Quéland was born on the island and knows its landscapes inside out. After 
studying for a master’s in international business management in Paris, 
Mauritius drew him back, and in 2015 he became co-director of Yanature, a 
small, independent outfit that’s helped push the island’s green agenda. Its 
founder, Yan de Maroussem, left an office job in Port Louis to spend two years 
in a French monastery before finding his true vocation as a mountain guide and 
environmental activist, campaigning for public appreciation of the island’s 
beautiful trails, rivers and beaches.

Quéland is clearly happy with his new niche, too. Sensing that I’m both keen 
and apprehensive, he cajoles me gently, offering tips and reassurance as we 
climb.

 At last, we reach the lookout, marked by a cross. Above us, Mascarene 
swiftlets zip around the summit, while below, kitesurfers scud across an 
exquisite blue lagoon. The views are so lovely that I forget, briefly, my 
worries about how on earth I’m going to get down.

 “Just remember, try to keep five points of contact at all times,” says 
Quéland, demonstrating the descent technique. After hands and feet, the fifth 
point, in case you’re wondering, is your backside.

Quéland and his colleagues also lead four-hour hikes in Black River Gorges 
national park, a gorgeous swathe of forest laced with tracks – where two points 
of contact usually work just fine. Thanks to a landmark conservation programme 
run by the Mauritian Wildlife Foundation and the Durrell Wildlife Conservation 
Trust, its once-tiny population of echo parakeets – the last remaining parrot 
species in the Mascarene archipelago – is bouncing back.

 “I love it here, so returning home after my studies seemed like exactly the 
right thing to do,” Quéland says. “Ecotourism in Mauritius has huge potential, 
and I want to be part of that. We’re still a young country. Little by little, 
we’re finding our way.”

British Airways flies direct three times a week from Gatwick to Mauritius. For 
more information and to book, visitbritishairways.com/mauritius 
<https://ad.doubleclick.net/ddm/clk/302966546;130080452;z>
