
A not-for-profit organisation is targeting nearly 30 marginal Coalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> seats in a national 
campaign to “protect the independence of the ABC” in the leadup to the election.

ABC Friends is encouraging voters to support candidates who are on the record 
as supporting the national broadcaster following cuts under Tony Abbott and 
Malcolm Turnbull’s governments.

ABC Friends’ first national campaign will target 27 marginal electorates 
<https://www.abcfriends.org.au/index.php/2016/06/01/target-marginal-seats-list-released/>
, most held by the Coalition, across Australia: eight in New South Wales, three 
in Victoria, three in Tasmania, four in Queensland, and one each in Western 
Australia, South Australia and the Northern Territory.

Fairfax <http://www.aec.gov.au/profiles/qld/fairfax.htm>, being vacated by 
Clive Palmer;Indi <http://www.aec.gov.au/profiles/vic/indi.htm>, held by 
independent Cathy McGowan; and five ALP marginal seats are also in the 
campaign’s sights.

Volunteers will ask voters to sign cards to pledge their support for the ABC 
as well as to select candidates who will restore funding to the broadcaster.

Related: Veteran broadcasters condemn ABC radio restructuring plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/08/veteran-broadcasters-condemn-abc-radio-restructuring-plan>

It will be supplemented by targeted campaigns on social media and local media. 
Itsfirst social video in a series of about 10  
<https://www.facebook.com/FriendsOfTheAbc/videos/470733026449592/> paints a 
picture of “the possible future of the ABC”, in which Leigh Sales and Kerry 
O’Brien are reality television stars and Four Corners “hasn’t been on for 
years”.

Ranald Macdonald, former editor-in-chief and managing director of the Age and 
spokesman for ABC Friends, said cuts to the ABC under the Coalition had cost 
jobs and compromised quality.

The coming election was “crucial” for the national broadcaster, he said.

More than $300m in funding was thought to have been cut under Abbott and 
Turnbull, but Macdonald said that was a conservative estimate, not taking into 
account inflation.

“The fact is, it’s more than that.”


In last month’s budget, the federal government trimmed funding to the ABC from 
$60m over three years to approximately $41.4m.

ABC News director, Gaven Morris, said a total of 30 positions 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-05-18/abc-fact-check-unit-to-close-14-jobs-to-go/7425638>
 across the organisation would likely be impacted as a result of the cuts, and 
the Fact Check unit would close after the election.

Macdonald said the government’s attempts to minimise the impact of the funding 
cuts was “total spin”.


“Why have they lost 500 people? Why can’t they do any drama at all? ... Why 
has it become Sydney-centric?”

Related: Guardian Live election special event with Lenore Taylor and Katharine 
Murphy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-live-australia/2016/may/10/guardian-live-election-special>

Macdonald said the campaign was serious and committed, funded by an increase 
in membership and donations.

“We’re wanting to fire a shot across the bows of the government and say ‘don’t 
take us for granted’.”

Labor last week announced it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/30/back-to-the-cave-bill-shorten-calls-out-senator-leyonhjelm-on-gender-equality>
 would deliver an extra 500 hours of women’s sport via the ABC if elected, and 
says it has more policy announcements pertaining to the broadcaster to come.

Macdonald said ABC Friends was not aligned with any political party and would 
be determining individual candidates’ commitment to restoring funding to the 
ABC at public forums.

“Everyone stands up there and says they love the ABC – then of course the 
question is what are they going to do about the funding.

“We already see it’s becoming a battleground.”
