
Ken Livingstone has robustly defended his claim that Adolf Hitler supported 
Zionism 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/28/ken-livingstone-suspended-from-labour-after-hitler-remarks>
, saying he had been deliberately misrepresented by people who wanted to 
discredit Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn.

“If I had said Hitler was a Zionist, I would apologise for that because it’s 
rubbish,” said the former mayor of London when faced with hostile questioning 
by MPs.

“If I’d said it, I would agree it was abhorrent. But I didn’t say it. I was 
stating a simple historical fact.”


But Labour MP Chuka Umunna <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/chuka-umunna> 
said Livingstone’s comments had made him a “shame and embarrassment” to the 
party.

In evidence to the home affairs select committee, Livingstone said that in a 
radio interview with Vanessa Feltz he had said that Hitler had supported 
Zionism in the early 1930s as a way of ridding Germany of thousands of Jews. 
That was not the same as saying Hitler was a Zionist, he added.


He told MPs who are investigating antisemitism 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/29/jeremy-corbyn-sets-up-inquiry-into-labour-antisemitism-claims>
: “If I could go back in time and avoid referring to Hitler and Zionism in 
Vanessa Feltz’s interview, I would. I would go back and remove it because it 
allowed all the anti-Jeremy people in the Labour party to start whipping this 
up as an even bigger issue.


“I regret using it because it became this hysterical issue in the midst of our 
campaign to do well in the local elections and the next day virtually every 
front page was about me and antisemitism.”


Livingstone’s comments about Hitler and Zionism came amid a spate of 
suspensions ofLabour <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party 
officials and activists for making allegedly antisemitic comments on social 
media. The former mayor was suspended from the party.


Since then, Livingstone told MPs, that “I can’t get down the street without 
people stopping me and saying we know what you said is true, don’t give in”. 
Those supporting him were “disproportionately” Jewish, he added.


He conceded that Jewish people had been offended by his remarks “because they 
have been told a lie”.

He added: “A handful of Labour MPs used this issue, deliberately lied about 
what I said, and smeared me because they wished to undermine the leader of the 
Labour party. It’s that simple. And they should be the ones who are suspended.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y4j4%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y4j4%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa81c0a254127b73091693572aacd3a1965eb3f90%2F0_378_3798_2279%2F3798.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ken%20Livingstone%3A%20'I%20didn't%20say%20Hitler%20was%20a%20Zionist'&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y4j4%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ken+Livingstone%3A+%27I+didn%27t+say+Hitler+was+a+Zionist%27&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y4j4%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa81c0a254127b73091693572aacd3a1965eb3f90%2F0_378_3798_2279%2F3798.jpg>
 Labour MP Chuka Umunna said Livingstone’s comments had made him a ‘shame and 
embarrassment’ to the party. Photograph: Jack Taylor/Getty Images 
Livingstone repeated earlier claims that in his 47 years in the Labour party, 
he had not encountered antisemitism or racism. “Let’s be honest, if you’re a 
bigot, the Labour party is not the natural place for you to sign up,” he said.


He had been accused of antisemitism because of his long record of criticism of 
Israeli government policy towards the Palestinians, he said. “Criticising 
Israel does not mean you’re a Jew-hater.”


Several times he came close to an apology of sorts. “If anyone’s been hurt by 
what I said, of course I’m sorry. But I came into politics to tell the truth, 
and I’ve never knowingly lied.”

In a fractious exchange, Umunna, the Labour MP for Streatham told Livingstone: 
“By needlessly and repeatedly offending Jewish people in this way, you’ve not 
only betrayed our Labour values, you betray your legacy as mayor, because all 
you are now going to be remembered for is becoming a pin-up for the kind of 
prejudice that our party was built to fight against. That’s a huge shame and 
it’s an embarrassment.”

Earlier, Jonathan Arkush, president of the Board of Deputies of British Jews, 
said that he had heard Livingstone’s comments about Hitler and Zionism with 
“complete disbelief” and regarded them as “hateful”.


Accusing Livingstone of bigotry and of being “plainly antisemitic”, he said: 
“His views are utterly repellant to our community. If Livingstone had made his 
remarks about any other group, he would be labelled as a political pariah, and 
that’s what I think he is.”


Traditionally antisemitism had come from the political far right, Arkush told 
MPs, but there was also prejudice from the far left. “With the advent of a more 
leftward tilt of the Labour party, some people feel that space has opened up or 
people have felt emboldened to say things they couldn’t previously say in 
polite society.”


He said that Corbyn’s “very, very hostile position on Israel”, his 
associations with the Palestine Solidarity Campaign and the Stop the War 
Campaign, and meetings with Hamas and Hezbollah had “clearly sent the wrong 
message to some people”.


Every step taken by Corbyn to tackle antisemitism “has had to be wrung out of 
him by public pressure,” he added.


The Jewish community’s ties with the Labour party were strong, said Arkush. 
“That’s why the Jewish community feels such anguish now.”


Criticism of the policies of the state of Israel was legitimate, but denying 
the right of the Jewish people to self-determination was antisemitism, he said.


Livingstone told MPs that he was “acutely disappointed” that Shami 
Chakrabarti, the chair of the independent inquiry into antisemitism in the 
Labour party, had said she would not call him to give evidence.

• This final sentence of this article was amended on 15 June 2016 to say that 
Livingstone was disappointed he would not be called to give evidence. The “not” 
was missing in an earlier version.
