
I recently finished my third book, Perijee & Me 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/376343/>. It’s about 
a lonely young girl called Caitlin who finds an alien and raises him as a 
brother. I was excited about writing it for lots of reasons - one of them being 
that Caitlin was my first female protagonist.

In all my other books, the main characters have been boys. It wasn’t something 
I did for a reason - they were choices that I made automatically, and so I 
didn’t think much of them. But after a while, I started wondering why I was 
making a lot of the decisions I was making.

Related: Why I want more disabled characters in books 
<http://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/dec/08/i-want-characters-like-me-in-books-disability-diversity>

When I write, there’s an image I keep coming back to. It’s a field of long 
grass with a path running across it - not a proper path, just a line where 
someone’s already trampled the grass down. You want to get across the field, 
the most obvious course is to stick to the path. In fact you could walk across 
the field any way you want, but following the path feels safe: the decisions 
have already been made for you. You never stop to wonder who made the path, or 
why they made the choices they did - you just assume they knew more than you 
did.

But what if they didn’t? What if someone just turned up and went, “Er, I don’t 
know, this way” - and then everyone else used the path that they made? The more 
people use it, the more it seems like it’s the only choice: soon the path’s so 
well trampled it might as well be tarmac, and NOT walking along it seems like 
madness.

The reason this image comes to me is because it’s the same with making a 
story. You have to make HUNDREDS of decisions when writing a book. And often, 
it’s very tempting to go with the most established choices - the ones which 
cause the least disruption.

Related: Diverse voices: the 50 best culturally diverse books 
<http://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/oct/13/50-best-culturally-diverse-childrens-books>

Take writing characters, for example. You might create an amazing, unusual 
character, but when it comes to certain decisions you just go with the flow. 
You’d rather not interrupt the narrative with “difficult choices”, so without 
thinking you automatically make charismatic, selfish, and dangerous characters 
men. You COULD make them women - there is literally no reason why you couldn’t 
- but you worry it stands out too much. For me, the default starting position 
is to make my characters white and able-bodied - like me, basically. It’s 
something I do without thinking.

When I wrote my second book, The Tornado Chasers 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/tornado-chasers.html>, I felt it was 
important for me to challenge this tendency. I wanted to write a rollicking 
gang adventure, but I wanted the gang to be as diverse as possible. I didn’t 
want to have a single token girl in a gang of boys, for example. I wanted 
characters to have disabilities, but I didn’t want them to be bravely 
overcoming them - I wanted them to be characters in their own right. It was 
going to be a gang filled with different genders, ethnicities and abilities, 
where no one was defined by them.

There was just one problem: I was terrible at it.
When I first realised this, I was utterly mortified. I had run headfirst into 
my limitations as a writer. In my first draft, I didn’t just have one 
lazily-written token female character: I had two. When I first wrote the 
characters with disabilities, I handled the issue mawkishly at best and 
offensively at worst. It was all well and good to say that I was going to write 
diverse characters, but what if I actually couldn’t - what if I wasn’t good 
enough?


This is the unspoken problem with the call for greater diversity in books. We 
all agree that authors need to write better disabled characters, and include a 
wider variety of ethnicities, and have more human and flawed female characters. 
But no one has pointed out how HARD this is to do well. What if, like I did, 
you try to do the right thing and fail?

It turned out the answer was to ask for lots of help. My publisher, editor and 
agent all realised the importance of what I was trying to do: they pointed out 
where I was making mistakes, gave advice, made suggestions, and were above all 
very patient with me. There was no finger pointing or embarrassed grimacing 
when I made a real clunker (there were many).

Related: Does YA fiction need to check its privilege? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/nov/25/does-ya-fiction-need-to-check-its-privilege>

Gradually, painstakingly, with a lot of editing, it got better. The gang 
slowly came together. Readers still point out bits where I could have done 
better, but on the whole it seems well-received. And more importantly, most 
people don’t talk about the diversity of the gang. They treated them as they 
should be treated: like characters in their own right.

When it came to Perijee & Me, I felt much more comfortable challenging myself 
because I knew I had a team behind me. It was a challenge writing my first 
female protagonist, one who is heavily dyslexic - and once again, it only 
really worked once I had made a lot of mistakes and received a lot of advice.

Related: I didn't see working class identity in books when I was growing up, 
and I don't see enough now 
<http://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/apr/12/working-class-identity-childrens-books-natasha-carthew>

The point is, I’m still terrible at this. It doesn’t come naturally - it only 
works because I work really hard at it. But as far as I’m concerned,if we’re 
going to improve at this then we need to accept that writing diverse characters 
is challenging because it has to be done well. What’s the point of having 
another shoddily-realised feisty girl or two-dimensional token wheelchair 
sidekick to add to the massive pile of rubbish attempts at diversity? It wastes 
everyone’s time, and quite frankly it’s not good enough.

We all have to strive to create well-rounded diverse characters and find new 
ways of writing. The fact that it’s hard isn’t a good enough excuse: we have to 
step away from the established paths and take more risks.
Who knows - we might even find a better one.


Ross Montgomer’s Perijee & Me 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/376343/> is available 
from the Guardian bookshop.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4geh3%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4geh3%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69636e70e3c5500b4e77ffff08ecd267f921fd78%2F0_0_830_1280%2F830.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20writing%20diverse%20children's%20books%20is%20tough&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4geh3%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why+writing+diverse+children%27s+books+is+tough&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4geh3%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69636e70e3c5500b4e77ffff08ecd267f921fd78%2F0_0_830_1280%2F830.jpg>