
When the UN high commissioner for refugees finally implemented a comprehensive 
policy directive on urban refugees in 2014 <http://www.unhcr.org/5422b8f09.html>
 (pdf), it marked the end of a long battle. For decades, aid and development 
experts argued about the pros and cons of camps. Refugees often don’t want to 
live in camps, and the UNHCR recognised that camps can turn into de facto 
prisons.

“Camps should be the exception, phased out at the earliest possible stage,” it 
wrote in a 2014policy paper <http://www.unhcr.org/5422b8f09.pdf> (pdf). 

Related: Syrian refugees: 'A whole generation is growing up displaced and 
uneducated' | Patricia Mouamar 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/15/syrian-refugees-a-whole-generation-is-growing-up-displaced-and-uneducated>

Two years on, the situation facing Syrian refugees in Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/23/merkel-accused-turning-blind-eye-syrian-refugees-turkey>
 calls that policy into question. More than2.7 million refugees 
<http://data.unhcr.org/syrianrefugees/country.php?id=224> need assistance, but 
aid organisations cannot reach most of them. Sending refugees into the streets 
to fend for themselves may be the best solution in the long run. But if 
humanitarian organisations can’t track these refugees, how will we ever know? 
It is a core problem that no one has solved.

In fact, most of the world’s refugees are not in camps. More than half of all 
refugees live in urban or rural areas 
<http://www.unhcr.org/pages/4b0e4cba6.html>. In some countries, doing so is 
against the law.

For example, in Kenya, the government’s policy is that refugees should live 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/30/kenya-softens-stance-closure-dadaab-refugee-camp-somalis>
 in the vast, remote campsof Dadaab 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/27/life-dadaab-three-generations-of-refugees-isolated-from-kenyan-society>
 orKakuma 
<http://data.unhcr.org/horn-of-africa/settlement.php?id=17&country=110&region=12>
. This means the camps may never be disbanded. Dadaab, which has existed for 25 
years, currently hasnearly 330,000 residents 
<http://data.unhcr.org/horn-of-africa/region.php?id=3&country=110>, mostly from 
Somalia.

The alternative, when governments allow it, is for refugees to find their own 
place to live. But when they do, many have trouble making a living. In Turkey, 
the government ostensibly allows Syrian refugees to work. In practice, however, 
they arelimited 
<https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2703842-Turkish-Law-on-Foreign-Workers-2016-8375.html>
 by strict quotas and to certain industries. The Turkish government has only 
issuedabout 7,000 
<http://www.hurriyetdailynews.com/turkish-govt-says-citizens-employment-will-not-be-hampered-by-work-permits-for-syrians.aspx?pageID=238&nid=93737>
 work permits for Syrian refugees, yet an estimated 1 million adults need jobs 
to feed their families.

The World Food Programme <http://www.wfp.org/> (WFP) believes that 2.5 million 
people – includingall the urban refugees in Turkey – need food aid. Last year, 
theyreached 
<https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2703993-Turkey-2016-Regional-Refugee-Resilience-Plan.html#document/p31/a275392>
 only 150,000 Syrian refugees outside camps. With no way to earn money legally, 
Syrian families in Turkey are sending children to work and marrying off their 
younger girls.

Urban refugees are more inclined to send their children to work in Turkey 
because they can’t go to school. A report from Human Rights Watch,When I 
Picture My Future I See Nothing 
<https://www.hrw.org/report/2015/11/08/when-i-picture-my-future-i-see-nothing/barriers-education-syrian-refugee-children>
, found that, from 2014 to 2015, only 25% of non-camp refugee children were 
enrolled in a school or temporary education centres run by aid groups.

Meanwhile, food assistance reached 100% of refugees in camps. They were also 
able to send their children to school, instead of sending them out to work: 90% 
of children in camps were able to continue their education.

The WFP, Unicef and other UN agencies cite budget shortfalls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/06/refugee-crisis-un-agencies-broke-failing>
 as the primary problem in meeting the needs of urban refugees from the Syrian 
crisis. But the problem is more complex. It is difficult to raise money for 
non-camp refugees because no one has any idea what their conditions are. The 
Turkish governmenthas not conducted 
<https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2703993-Turkey-2016-Regional-Refugee-Resilience-Plan.html#document/p32/a275395>
 a national needs assessment and aid agenciescannot receive permission 
<https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2703993-Turkey-2016-Regional-Refugee-Resilience-Plan.html#document/p12/a275388>
 to do so themselves.

The UNHCR doesn’t even know where non-camp refugees live. After Turkey adopted 
a comprehensivemigration law 
<https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2703514-Temporary-Protection-Regulation-Turkey.html>
 in 2014, the UNHCR wasno longer allowed 
<https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2702969-Faq-Syrians-in-Turkey-English.html#document/p8/a275120>
 to register refugees. The Turkish government is not sharing its data. In the3RP
 
<http://www.3rpsyriacrisis.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/Turkey-2016-Regional-Refugee-Resilience-Plan.pdf>
 (pdf), an annual regional response plan for Turkey, the UN writes: “Detailed 
information on registration and vulnerability is not available to the UN and 
aid agencies”. The UN describes identifying the needs of refugees outside camps 
as the “biggest challenge”.

Without explicit government cooperation, there is no way for the UNHCR to 
honour its commitment to ensure that refugees are protected and assisted. Job 
programmes and other development initiatives cannot be implemented without 
permission.

Related: Syrian refugees living in darkness in a derelict factory in Lebanon – 
in pictures 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2015/oct/21/syrian-refugees-live-in-near-darkness-in-a-derelict-soft-drinks-factory-in-lebanon-in-pictures>

In this, Turkey is not an exception. A 2010 report 
<https://www.odi.org/sites/odi.org.uk/files/odi-assets/publications-opinion-files/5858.pdf>
 by the Overseas Development Institute found the same problems in Kenya, where 
refugees are politically unpopular. The government plays down refugee needs 
because they don’t want to draw attention to them. Once refugees enter Nairobi, 
they essentially disappear.

“The ‘invisibility factor’ of refugees was often cited as a major impediment 
to outreach,” the ODI report said. “Ultimately, all refugee groups interviewed 
felt that UNHCR had let them down.”

Sentencing refugees to life in a camp is a terrible burden; it isolates people 
from the real world. Camps are also very expensive. But the alternative may be 
worse. Non-camp refugees are invisible, untraceable and desperately in need of 
help.

As the war in Syria continues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/03/maternity-hospital-aleppo-deadly-blast-syria>
, the future for urban refugees in Turkey looks bleak. Thenumber of refugees 
around the world is higher 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/18/59m-people-displaced-war-violence-persecution-says-un>
 than it has been for decades, and climbing every year. If settling refugees 
outside of camps is really what’s best for them, why aren’t they doing better?

• Emily Troutman is an independent writer and photographer. In 2009, she was 
named citizen ambassador to the UN. She publishes her work atwww.aid.works 
<http://aid.works/>
