
Denni Karlsson and I are standing by a glacial river as it hammers through a 
rocky gorge. Beside us is a wooden crate, the size of an old tea chest. It sits 
on two slender cables that stretch across the torrent 10 metres below.

“This cableway was the traditional route across the river, part of life in the 
highlands,” says Denni, who runs horse riding tours of East Iceland from the 
farmhouse where he now lives with wife Arna Bjarnadóttur. “The last man who 
farmed here once fell out of it in the middle. He was hauled out unconscious 
somewhere downstream, but was back at work three days later.”

We are in Fljótsdalur, an upland valley made famous in the 1930s by novelist 
Gunnar Gunnarsson, who lived up here. His tales of stoical people battling the 
elements of ice, water and fire (of the volcanic sort) still ring true today.
Iceland map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/05/travel_iceland_web/giv-12515CS4M3XGC6bX0/>
Denni tells me that one of his own horses was lost on the high plateau that 
borders the great ice cap of Vatnajokull for a whole year, and has just been 
found.

I get in the crate and haul myself over the river – without mishap – to an 
abandoned house. I peer in at the old bedstead and table: life was abominably 
hard here, and people were often forced to leave when their luck turned. An 
hour later, back at Denni’s home, Arna shows me the Bible they found when they 
took over the dwelling, which had also been abandoned. “It’s dated 1728, and we 
think it was left behind when the volcano, Askja, erupted in 1875. The family 
emigrated to America.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tzd6%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tzd6%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde11ca7e9c1b2f6a53be4cd6493ffc4fcb414cd5%2F0_73_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20tale%20of%20ice%20and%20fire%3A%20touring%20East%20Iceland&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tzd6%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A+tale+of+ice+and+fire%3A+touring+East+Iceland&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tzd6%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde11ca7e9c1b2f6a53be4cd6493ffc4fcb414cd5%2F0_73_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Denni and Arna in the traditional longhouse at Fljótsdalur 
Despite all the departures, however, East Iceland is now experiencing a small 
but significant return, with people coming back, often to family roots, and 
finding new ways to make a living, often through tourism. Film-maker Denni was 
born in East Iceland, but has lived in Rejkjavik and the US. He and Arna are 
now based here and have built a traditionalbađstofa or longhouse for guests. 
Their fascinating collection of artefacts and antiques from Fljótsdalur history 
are dotted around. Like many others they believe in slow food and slow tourism: 
“We encourage guests to go walking, chat in the kitchen, or just play with the 
dog.”

It’s a philosophy I find all over the area. Many farms use volunteering 
websites such ashelpx.net <http://www.helpx.net/> or workaway.info 
<http://www.workaway.info/> to bring in visitors who want to stay longer and 
earn their keep. At one farm they sang the praises of a British student who had 
just spent a fortnight painting the barn, between making excellent pancakes and 
doing hill walks.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tzd6%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tzd6%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F92e0d1ad04914ae1ff442fabbfd38c6f3a7bd4d1%2F0_79_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20tale%20of%20ice%20and%20fire%3A%20touring%20East%20Iceland&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tzd6%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A+tale+of+ice+and+fire%3A+touring+East+Iceland&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tzd6%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F92e0d1ad04914ae1ff442fabbfd38c6f3a7bd4d1%2F0_79_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Fáskrúðsfjörður waterfall on the road to Egilsstaðir 
The main town in East Iceland is Egilsstaðir, which made headlines in 2012 
when the local council voted to accept thevideo evidence for a giant 
Nessie-style monster 
<http://www.seeker.com/lake-monster-exists-concludes-icelandic-commission-1769066020.html>
 in their lake. In theSalt Bistro <http://www.saltbistro.is/>, I chat to Stefán 
Bogi Sveinsson who was president of the council at that time. “I was called on 
to adjudicate on whether a medieval monster existed,” he says, with a twinkle 
in his eye. “People here are really not far from the old mythology. I voted in 
favour.”

I ask if the renaissance is real, too.

“Yes, I think it is,” he says. “I moved back here from Reykjavik myself and 
there are plenty of others. We’ve got this new flight coming in from Gatwick 
and people are investing in small businesses – like this bistro.”

A spectacular drive over mountains takes me to some of these new, 
tourism-driven businesses. At Karlsstaðir, on the shores of Berufjörđur, I find 
Svavar Eysteinsson and Berglind Häsler, who manage to be farmers, vegan 
sausage-makers, guesthouse-owners and Icelandic pop stars. In 2014 their band, 
Prins Póló, scored a massive hit on the island with the theme tune for the film 
Paris of the North. Now Svavar is out rounding up sheep for his uncle and 
Berglind is setting up the ovens for their latest venture: a crowd-funded 
cottage industry making turnip crisps.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tzd6%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tzd6%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2fe5677bbf97b9d81ffe39d5fafde75986115b8%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20tale%20of%20ice%20and%20fire%3A%20touring%20East%20Iceland&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tzd6%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A+tale+of+ice+and+fire%3A+touring+East+Iceland&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tzd6%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2fe5677bbf97b9d81ffe39d5fafde75986115b8%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Seyðisfjörður, a beautiful small town of clapboard houses in Norwegian style 
“I was worried we would be bored,” says Berglind, “but in fact we get loads of 
people dropping in. I don’t think I could ever go back to Reykjavik.”

The drive around these fjords is breathtaking. Waterfalls plunge over cliffs 
into the ocean and crags tickle the clouds. Amid it all there is a winding road 
and a smattering of red-roofed farms. East of Egilsstaðir I eventually reach 
Seyðisfjörður, a thriving port that is home to just 650 people and yet manages 
to support an art school, a cinema, a theatre, restaurants, and bars. It also 
has several beautifully restored wooden houses, some of which have been 
converted into the Hotel Aldan. I stay at what was the bank, and eat in a 
bistro, watching a strange assortment of art students, fishermen and farmers 
come and go. You could spend a few days here very easily, maybe taking a trip 
down to Skálanes at the fjord’s mouth, where a field centre-cum-guesthouse lies 
next to an eider duck colony.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tzd6%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tzd6%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86dad58e2d9c84935da2d6e624160bd62c6369fd%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20tale%20of%20ice%20and%20fire%3A%20touring%20East%20Iceland&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tzd6%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A+tale+of+ice+and+fire%3A+touring+East+Iceland&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tzd6%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86dad58e2d9c84935da2d6e624160bd62c6369fd%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Skúli Júlíusson on Snæfell 
Time is limited, however, and next morning I have to meet Skúli Júlíusson who 
is going to take me up Snæfell –one of several Icelandic mountains that go by 
this name. It’s the highest peak in the area, and permanently covered in ice. 
We drive to its base and then set off across a rising slope of volcanic gravel 
and rock which gets steeper and becomes ice. We attach crampons. The views are 
increasingly spectacular: delicate veins of shining silver water, marble lava 
fields patched with golden lichen and emerald green moss. Everything is stark 
and treeless. At the summit we get a panorama that includes active Bárðarbunga 
volcano.

We return by the same route to the car. The walk has not been long, but I am a 
bit cold and agree to Skúli’s suggestion of a hot shower. So why are we heading 
into the wilderness? Skúli chuckles. “You’ll see.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tzd6%2Fsfb%23img-6&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tzd6%2Fsfb%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94cd858ec8b1ee12740fcb40e7e767ee888a09af%2F0_0_4739_2843%2F4739.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20tale%20of%20ice%20and%20fire%3A%20touring%20East%20Iceland&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tzd6%2Fstw%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A+tale+of+ice+and+fire%3A+touring+East+Iceland&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tzd6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94cd858ec8b1ee12740fcb40e7e767ee888a09af%2F0_0_4739_2843%2F4739.jpg>
 A welcome shower in a hot waterfall after the climb. 
At the end of a gravel track we get out and walk. There is grass here and I 
can see a line of steam rising from the ground. After a few minutes the mystery 
is revealed: a waterfall in the wilderness that spouts continuously at 38C. 
It’s miraculous. The nearest thing to it would be to turn on your shower at 
home, very hot, then leave it running, forever. We soak for an hour in the pool 
under the falls, until sunset reminds us to leave. I experience a strange 
sensation: I’m in cornucopia-denial. I need more time in East Iceland.
• The trip was provided by Discover the World (01737 214250, 
discover-the-world.co.uk) 
<https://www.discover-the-world.co.uk/destinations/iceland-holidays/exploring-east-fjords>
 whose seven-night Exploring East Fjords holiday costs from £1,271pp, including 
return flights from Gatwick toEgilsstaðir, car hire and B&B accommodation 
(Snaefell climb £216pp)
