
USA Today recently said “Every war gets its own comedy” 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/life/movies/2015/11/26/tina-fey-whiskey-tango-foxtrot-exclusive-sneak-peek/76330484/>
 and so it seems the recently released filmWhiskey Tango Foxtrot 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt3553442/> may be the first about the war in 
Afghanistan. An adaptation of journalist Kim Barker’s memoirThe Taliban Shuffle 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Taliban-Shuffle-Strange-Afghanistan-Pakistan/dp/030747738X>
, it’s the first attempt I have seen trying to portray the parallel world of 
aid workers within the Afghanistan war zone as a comedy.


Related: Secret aid worker: We are just cleaning up the mess politicians make 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/dec/08/secret-aid-worker-we-are-just-cleaning-up-the-mess-politicians-make>

I was one of the hundreds of aid workers surged in and out at a breakneck pace 
during the intensified nation building effort of the US government’s AfPak 
strategy in 2009-10 when the numbers of foreign workers more thantripled 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2009/POLITICS/12/01/clinton.afghanistan/index.html?iref=24hours>
 from the initial years of the international response. Rapidly recruited, 
briefed and deployed, we landed on the ground in provinces where logistics and 
administration had yet to keep pace with the number of arrivals.


As a veteran aid worker managing a bilateral humanitarian, reconstruction and 
governance programme team, my role became partly manager, cheerleader and 
boarding school supervisor of a young fresh aid worker crowd. Finding enough 
desks and searching through army containers for blankets and beds became 
routine.

Based in Kandahar, then probably the most dangerous place in the country, we 
led a far more subdued life than Tina Fey’s character portrays. With only 
non-alcoholic beer allowed and very little on offer in entertainment, we had to 
get creative when we did get free time – from repurposing the fire reservoir 
into a swimming pool to shooting comical videos of our life.

There were few chances to go off base, and when we did the places we visited 
were equally surreal. The Nato base atKandahar airfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/mar/25/us-commander-afghanistan-bans-burger-pizza>
 was particularly memorable. You could go for tango and belly dancing lessons 
or to a massage and nail studio run by Kyrgyz migrants. There was all-night 
American Idol-style karaoke, a Pizza Hut and Burger King. All this was designed 
to provide a sort of relief from more dangerous places just beyond the 
fortified walls, but instead it was both a drastic contrast to life at home and 
detached from the rest of Afghanistan.

Related: Secret aid worker: your stories of mental health, PTSD and burnout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/sep/23/secret-aid-worker-mental-health-ptsd-and-burnout>

I don’t think anything quite prepares a civilian for arriving in such a heavy 
militarised war zone like Kandahar for the first time. All the briefings we 
got, while helpful, just didn’t match up to the sense of intensity, insecurity 
and claustrophobia on arrival. The optimism of early military briefings changed 
as time went on.

Going to Kabul for meetings was like going to New York – suddenly there was a 
nightlife for foreigners, an abundance of alcohol, a variety of good 
restaurants and even some short shopping expeditions. Our Afghan colleagues 
witnessed this as a temporary western parallel world to their own and it was 
hard to shake the sense we weren’t living most people’s reality – we were 
heavily guarded even in the popular evening party spots that were considered 
safe and there was no link between the expat and Afghan lifestyles outside of 
work or business.

 Looking back at the exorbitant number of hours that were spent on working to 
counter violent extremism, through a hearts and minds campaign and 
reconstruction programmes, can also be painful. What did we really achieve? The 
inability to move freely left us with a skewed sense of the needs of vulnerable 
Afghans and meant that many schools and health units never materialised because 
checking up on reconstruction work was easier said than done. Ensuring 
accountability just wasn’t possible.

I often wondered what ordinary Afghans made of all these Americans and 
Europeans coming in. By the end of 2013 whenNato 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nato> troops were stepping down, all sides 
were probably equally cynical, including those Afghans who had hoped for a 
greater degree of freedom from tyranny, corruption and poverty after 2002.


Some things were accomplished. The civilian reconstruction effort enabled the 
implementation of an international framework for funding Afghanistan’s 
development and an eventual military and civilian drawdown while building a 
stronger role for the Afghan administration. The central government functions.


Related: Secret aid worker: sometimes I go to supermarkets to escape the 
loneliness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/sep/01/secret-aid-worker-humanitarian-loneliness>

However, increasing numbers of Afghans are now desperately trying to reach 
European shores as migrants, along with Syrians and Iraqis. Anyone who can 
manage to leave is trying, disparaging the earlier optimism about the future of 
the country.


The humanitarian and development effort has helped the country to be 
marginally better off 
<https://www.americanprogress.org/issues/security/report/2015/12/14/127188/rethinking-the-civilian-surge/>
 and has staved off a potentially worse humanitarian crisis, but at what cost 
and effort?


Do you have a secret aid worker story you’d like to tell? You can contact us 
confidentially atglobaldevpros@theguardian.com 
<mailto:globaldevpros@theguardian.com> – please put “Secret aid worker” in the 
subject line. If you’d like to encrypt your email to us, here’sinstructions 
<https://www.mailvelope.com/help> on how to set up a PGP mail client and our 
public PGP key <https://pgp.theguardian.com/PublicKeys/Global%20Devpros.pub.txt>
.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
