
The capital of the Austrian state of Tirol neatly combines an impressive 
mountain setting with a storied and historic past. Stroll through the city's 
old town and you'll feel like you've gatecrashed the set of a medieval movie; 
look up, and you're surrounded by the peaks of the Nordkette mountains. This is 
a city that beats to an outdoor rhythm, albeit one with a young, vibrant alter 
ego thanks to a student population of 30,000. What's more, since "starchitect"
Zaha Hadid <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/zaha-hadid> added a touch 
of science fiction to the city's skyline, in the form of theHungerburg Funicular
 
<http://www.nordkette.com/en/cable-railways/history/the-hungerburg-funicular.html>
 and theBergisel Ski Jump <http://www.bergisel.info/en/>, Innsbruck has 
confirmed that it has one foot in the future, too.

Innsbruckers have been buying their food at the vast covered market, Markthalle
 <http://www.markthalle-innsbruck.at/> 1, on the banks of the Inn since 1406. 
You'll find farmers selling direct alongside a new generation of foodie stalls. 
Try Tirol-style sausages or red venison bacon. Pause at one of the many bakers 
to buyFaschingskrapfen (doughnuts) or strudel. The fillings aren't limited to 
apple: nut-filledNussstrudel or savoury beef Lugenstrudel make a change. Treats 
& Co at the back of the hall serves a farmer's breakfast every day.

Nordpark <http://www.nordkette.com/en/the-mountain-in-the-winter.html> is a 
small but challenging ski hill with impressive views of the city centre. You 
reach it by cable car from the Hungerberg plateau, which you can get to on the 
funicular that starts just outside the city wall at the Zaha Hadid-designed
Hungerburgbahn 2 – an amorphous, illuminated station that aims to imitate the 
shape of the Alps in winter. Make the 20-minute trip, even if you don't ski, to 
enjoy the panorama.

The Innsbruck outpost of Vienna's glorious Café Sacher 
<http://www.sacher.com/sacher-cafes/sacher-cafe-innsbruck/> 3, feels a bit like 
a library but there's no better place to sample authentic Austrian cafe life. 
Indulge in AustrianGulaschsuppe and Viennese classics such as Wienerschnitzel 
followed by silky, chocolate-toppedSachertorte (€4.95 a slice). Non-smokers may 
object to the overspill from the smoking area.

Exploring the city's old town gives a glimpse of its lavish imperial past. The 
gothicHofburg Imperial Palace 
<http://www.hofburg-innsbruck.at/623/php/index.php> 4, former seat of the 
Habsburg dynasty, was built in 1406 and is filled with Renaissance art, opulent 
furniture and family souvenirs. The central ballroom, the Giant Hall, is hung 
with impressive life-size portraits of the royal family. At the nearbyHofKirche 
5, King Arthur and 27 other giant bronze statues guard the empty tomb of 
Maximilian I.
 The Zaha Hadid-designed Hungerburgbahn 
At Café Munding <http://www.munding.at/> 6, even Mary Berry would be impressed 
by the super-crisp pastries on offer. The cafe, which is over 200 years old, 
claims to be the oldestKonditorei-Café in Innsbruck. It's a stone's throw from 
the Golden Roof (see below), the coffee (€2.70) is roasted on the premises and 
the owners make jam from fruit harvested at local farms.

Innsbruck has five Christmas markets <http://christkindlmarkt.cc/?n=1> around 
the city centre, each with its own USP. Every evening at 5.30pm, trumpeters 
step on to the balcony of theGolden Roof (Herzog-Friedrich-Strasse) 7 – an 
old-town landmark decorated with 2,657 fire-gilded copper tiles – and entertain 
the crowds with Christmas songs. AtMarktplatz, 8, on the banks of the Inn, the 
centrepiece is a 13m Christmas tree studded with 170,500 Swarovski crystals and 
a petting zoo.

Time for a pre-dinner drink. Real schnapps is surprisingly smooth and light – 
atS'Culinarium <http://culinarium-signor.at/> 9, there are hundreds to try. 
People don't talk much about Austrian wine but they should – it's good. Sample 
some of the best atInvinum <http://invinum.com/> 10, a wine bar and wine shop.

Go outside the city walls to Landestheaterplatz, where the menu at Pavillon 
<http://www.der-pavillon.at/news/> restaurant 11, reads like a selection from a 
Masterchef final. The restaurant, which used to be the entrance to an 
underground car park, is a two-storey glass cube that sits between the 
19th-century Tirolean State Theatre and the 15th-century Imperial Palace. 
Highlights are wild venison with a chervil confit, and nougat ice-cream with 
popping candy. It's not cheap but it's worth a splurge (€67 for five courses).
 A view from the Nordpark 
Innsbruck's restaurant and bar scene is surprisingly banging for a place that 
is the size of Doncaster: the drinking and eating needs of the students are 
served by some fashionable watering holes and a cerebral cafe culture. At
Cafe Bar Moustache <http://cafe-moustache.at/> (cafe-moustache.at) 12, you'll 
find swarthy young guys with windburn and unruly facial hair discussing the 
quality of powder atNordpark <http://nordpark.com/>, the city's local ski hill. 
But they could also quite easily be chatting about the "performance literature" 
that took place here earlier in the week.

• The trip was provided by Tirol <http://www.tyrol.com/> tourism office. 
Easyjet <http://www.easyjet.com> flies to Innsbruck from Gatwick, Bristol and 
Liverpool from £32 one-way, excluding fees and taxes. Bus route F runs from the 
airport to Innsbruck's main station in about 20 minutes. TheInnsbruck Card 
<http://www.innsbruck.info/en/experience/innsbruck-card.html> gives unlimited 
travel on public transport, one ascent and one descent on any cable car, 
funicular or lift, plus discounts at shops, restaurants and museums (€31 for 24 
hours)
