
Burundi’s year-long crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/10/burundi-ethnic-violence-refugees>
 has not gone away. It started with President Pierre Nkurunziza’s determination 
to claim a third term, trampling over the constitutional arrangements that 
ended a decade-long civil war.

Press freedom is a major casualty of the new strife; but the turmoil has also 
transformed the way in which Burundians get information. For better or worse, 
social media has filled the vacuum left by theshutting down of the most popular 
radio stations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/17/radio-silence-burundis-media-targeted-in-ongoing-political-crisis>
 and forcing out of many of the country’s professional journalists.

With 90% of the population relying on radio as their main source of 
information, traditional media has been in the eye of Burundi’s gathering storm 
since at least 2010. During the abortive coup of 13-14 May last year,insurgents 
and opponents 
<http://www.irinnews.org/analysis/2016/06/07/briefing-%E2%80%93-who%E2%80%99s-who-burundi%E2%80%99s-armed-opposition>
 of the president’s bid for a third termtried and failed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/14/burundi-violence-coup-protests-bujumbura-president-pierre-nkurunziza>
 to take over the national radio television (RTNB), but they managed to destroy 
the government-linked Rema FM.

Related: The world looks away as blood flows in Burundi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/10/burundi-ethnic-violence-refugees>

The next day, loyalist forces regained control of the city and destroyed radio 
stations including Bonesha, RPA, Isanganiro and Radio Renaissance. In August, a 
committee of inquiry established “complicity” between some private media bosses 
and the putschists, leading a prosecutor to issue arrestwarrants against 
journalists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/16/burundi-media-suffers-backlash-after-failed-coup-attempt>
.

Since then, the climate of violence, harassment and threats has driven about a 
hundred journalists into exile – that’s a third of all Burundi’s reporters. 
Foreign media are no longer welcome and dangers await those who do find their 
way in.

At home, the media landscape has been reduced to a minimum: religious and 
commercial radio are the last independent antennas standing. Reporters Without 
Borders ranks Burundi 156th out of 180 countries in itspress freedom index 
<https://rsf.org/en/burundi>.


Meanwhile, mobile phones have replaced radios as the main source of 
information.WhatsApp <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/whatsapp>, 
Facebook, Twitter and texts have filled the gap. Mobile networks continue to 
function even during moments of severe crisis. The government can’t function 
without them, and amid severe budget constraints, it needs communication taxes.

Social networks have become an essential tool for daily life and 
self-protection for Burundians. People seek real-time information on any danger 
or risk in volatile neighbourhoods, from finding out about police raids to 
learning the target of the latest grenade explosions. They also search for news 
about those who have been arrested or abducted.

Related: Same tech, different result as states use internet to empower and 
control 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/24/technology-states-internet-empower-control-world-bank-digital-divide>

Social media also enables the population to attract the attention of the 
international community. During the government crackdown on public protests 
against Nkurunziza’s candidacy for a third term, Burundians circulated pictures 
on social media of police beating protesters and firing at unarmed civilians.


Mobile phones <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/mobilephones> and social 
media maintain a link between many of Burundi’s constituent parts that appear 
steadily more remote and disconnected: the diaspora and the refugee camps; the 
capital city and rural areas; Burundi and the rest of the world.

But the rapid spread of news through social media brings its own problems. 
Such networks are efficient vehicles for propaganda and countering wild rumours 
such as “Burundi is about to launch attacks against Rwanda”, “Rwanda is about 
to launch attacks against Burundi”, “The Nkurunziza family has fled the 
country”, or “Last night, Tutsis were massacred in such-and-such a town.”


Social media users relay everything they hear, making it difficult to 
distinguish between valuable information, rumours and propaganda of the worst 
kind. Reports are not verified before being published, and are mostly emotional 
reactions to events published in real-time without the benefit of critical 
distance.


Related: Can democracy spread at the push of a button? | Stephen Abbott Pugh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/datablog/2016/feb/24/can-democracy-spread-data-monitor-governments-africa>

Although Burundi’s violent history makes these new forms of communication 
particularly sensitive, the rise of social media through mobile phones is far 
from unique. AcrossAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, Twitter, 
Facebook and WhatsApp are used increasingly by political activists to bypass 
government censorship.

In some countries, this has led to a game of cat and mouse between authorities 
and the public. Shutting down mobile data around elections or periods of 
political tension is becoming common. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, 
the governmentshut down mobile data 
<https://cpj.org/2015/01/drc-halts-internet-access-and-cellphone-services-a.php>
 during protests in January 2015 – but at significant cost to businesses that 
rely heavily on mobile payments. In Uganda, the governmentclosed down mobile 
data 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/18/ugandans-cast-votes-presidential-elections-delays>
 for several days during the elections in February.

In Burundi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/burundi>, as more responsible 
radio stations are replaced by unfiltered voices spread by new technologies, 
journalists are trying to re-establish professional reporting in their country.

In March, a meeting was held in Brussels between Karenga Ramadhani, the new 
president of the Burundian National Council for Communication, and the banned 
media. This was a first step towards an improved political climate.

Since then, some arrest warrants against journalists have been lifted and both 
sides have made commitments to improve relations. Nevertheless, opening a space 
for public debate will only be possible if those promises are kept, and the 
situation returns to normal.

 * Thierry Vircoulon is senior central Africa consultant at International 
Crisis Group <http://www.crisisgroup.org/>
