
A global action plan to empower women economically by 2030 will focus on six 
areas, including addressing legislation that blocks women’s progress, the head 
of UNWomen <http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> says.

But the plan has critics, with the head of Oxfam International claiming it 
risks producing only cosmetic improvements to women’s opportunities.

In a preview of the plan that a high-level panel 
<http://www.unwomen.org/en/news/stories/2016/1/wee-high-level-panel-launch> 
will outline in September, UN Women’s executive director, Phumzile 
Mlambo-Ngcuka, said core areas to be addressed are digital and financial 
inclusion; childcare and unpaid care duties; pay equality; structuring the 
informal sector; entrepreneurship; legislation and international conventions.

It is almost as though as soon as a sector gets populated by women, it gets 
degraded
Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka 
“We are already engaging with governments around legislation that touches on 
women’s empowerment,” she said in an interview during theEuropean Development 
Days <https://www.eudevdays.eu/> conference last week. “One example is the 
convention on domestic work 
<http://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=1000:12100:0::NO::P12100_ILO_CODE:C189>, 
which has only been ratified by 22 countries. If you are a domestic worker who 
needs leave to have a baby, someone else will walk in the door as soon as you 
go out, and you have no recourse.

“This is a worldwide concern, including in Europe where domestic work is often 
an entry point for migrant women who use their earnings to support their 
families and also send out remittances.”

The panel 
<http://www2.unwomen.org/~/media/headquarters/attachments/sections/news/stories/2016/hlpwomenseconomicempowermentbiographiescochairspanelists.pdf?v=1&d=20160315T220634>
 consists of 15 women and three men, and is co-chaired by Costa Rica’s 
president, Luis Guillermo Solís, and the CEO of Ikea Switzerland, Simona 
Scarpaleggia. Mlambo-Ngcuka said it will report in September and again in 
March, to “highlight interventions that countries, the private sector and 
different institutions can use to remove barriers to women’s economic 
empowerment”.

She said the panel wants more structure in the informal sector, which employs 
75% of women in developing regions who work outside the home 
<http://www.unwomen.org/en/news/stories/2015/6/ed-wee-speech-sweden>, adding: 
“It is almost as though as soon as a sector gets populated by women, it gets 
degraded. We are looking for interventions that can put women into protected 
jobs in significant numbers.”

Mlambo-Ngcuka, a former deputy president of South Africa, said addressing 
women’s economic empowerment would have a positive impact on othersustainable 
development goals 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive>
 (SDGs), adopted by the UN general assembly in September. Goal five commits 
governments to achieve gender equality and empower women and girls.

Related: Empowering women will mean little without decent jobs, UN panel warned
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/17/empowering-women-will-mean-little-without-decent-jobs-un-panel-warned-commission-on-the-status-of-women>

“When women can afford a better quality of life, they are able to afford 
healthcare and support the education of their children. Dealing with women’s 
economic empowerment is a good foundation for the other SDGs,” she said.

UN Women, which was created in 2010 and has offices in 87 countries, recently 
appointed a team to engage with religious leaders on issues such as prejudices 
that are viewed as traditional.

Since it first met in March, the panel appears to have addressed some of the 
concerns of civil society 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/17/empowering-women-will-mean-little-without-decent-jobs-un-panel-warned-commission-on-the-status-of-women>
 about tackling structural barriers to empowerment.

But panel member Winnie Byanyima, a Ugandan politician and aeronautical 
engineer who is executive director of Oxfam International, says the plan still 
depends too much on the perception that rights will trickle down. She said 
achievements will be “cosmetic” unless governments are forced to challenge 
cultural norms that trap women in myriad ways that have economic implications, 
such as violence and bans on land ownership.

“A lot of discrimination is supported by tradition, religion and culture. 
Women are powerless to challenge these norms, even when they are protected by 
national laws. Governments should be expected to put resources towards 
mobilising to change attitudes and norms. Instead they leave this to civil 
society, which does not have the resources to play that role.”

She wants the panel to challenge what she calls the “rigged economy”, under 
which the 80% of African farmers who are women own only 10% of the land they 
till.

“Taxation is part of the rigged economy. Rich people and rich companies pay 
minimal taxes and stash away their money, while ordinary people must pay their 
taxes at a higher rate. If this kind ofinequality 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/inequality> – rigged in men’s 
favour – is not addressed, women will stay at the bottom of the heap and the 
panel’s objectives will achieve only cosmetic changes.”

 * Alex Duval Smith received EU funding to cover the European Development Days 
in Brusselslast week 