
When universities were first created in medieval times, they were mainly 
communities of ecclesiastical scholars. Now, they are multimillion-pound 
businesses with complex leadership teams, human resources departments, mission 
statements, international strategies, communications executives and directors 
of enterprise.

Related: Facing the future: how can university boards stay ahead of the game? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/may/05/facing-the-future-how-can-university-boards-stay-ahead-of-the-game>

They also face increasingly complex challenges – changes to funding and 
regulatory systems (like the draft Teaching Excellence Framework) weigh heavily 
on growing challenges from global competition, a diverse student body and new 
technology.

“There’s greater unpredictability, greater demands in terms of accountability 
and greater expectations with regard to who you manage,” says Professor Peter 
McCaffery, deputy vice-chancellor of London Metropolitan University and a 
higher education leadership analyst. “It is more genuinely competitive than 
ever before.”

Leaders in higher education now have to be comfortable with continuous change, 
he says – resilient, flexible and able to focus on their institution’s mission 
despite numerous other distractions.

Risk and reward

Fiona Ross, director of research at the Leadership Foundation for Higher 
Education, says that governing bodies are taking on more responsibilities. As 
well as setting the strategy of the institution and keeping an eye on its 
financial health, it has to take more interest in academic risk, assuring the 
quality of the degrees and experience the institution offers. This has become 
particularly important as universities start delivering education overseas.

Pressures have also grown on vice-chancellors, the chief executives. As 
universities’ principal source of funding has changed from government grants to 
tuition fees, funding has become less dependable. Many university leaders now 
need to spend a large chunk of their time on fundraising and looking for other 
ways of raising cash.

As a result, many now have a business background. But Julie Lydon, 
vice-chancellor of the University of South Wales, who started her career in 
industry and lectured in business, says the culture of universities remains 
distinct.

“Leaders of a £200m business expect people to get on with it,” she says. “In 
higher education that’s the starting point for a debate.”

She says effective communication is an essential skill for vice-chancellors, 
not only in getting their own staff on board with strategic decisions but in 
influencing government, or negotiating partnerships with outside organisations.

Related: Employers and universities already work together - we shouldn't put 
that at risk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/apr/21/employers-and-universities-already-work-together-we-shouldnt-put-that-at-risk>



Workable workloads

Sue Chambers, vice-chair of Universities Human Resources – a support group for 
HR professionals in higher education – says university leaders have a crucial 
role to play in creating a thriving environment. At the University of 
Aberystwyth, where she works, the leadership team supports work-life balance.

“We aren’t alone in trying to find a fair and transparent way of managing 
workload in which output is valued over time spent at work.”

For McCaffery, being an external ambassador and managing risk internally are 
key attributes of a successful university leader, as well as strategic 
planning, vision and academic credibility.

“There is a view that you don’t need to be an academic to run a university and 
we are getting more of that,” he says. “But you must have academic credibility. 
Otherwise you won’t last.”

Ross says the whole point of a university leadership structure is to enable 
staff to deliver the fundamental purposes of a university: sharing learning, 
producing knowledge and contributing to the community.

“People get obsessed about structure, but unless it is stopping you from 
delivering these things, you don’t have to worry,” she says.

She also defends the recent tendency in higher education towards tighter 
management control. “Some criticise the ‘creeping managerialism’ because they 
see it as a challenge to autonomy and academic freedom,” she says. “In my view, 
with increasingly complex institutions, dealing with so many different things 
compared with 20 or 30 years ago, there has to be some semblance of management.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j6xf%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j6xf%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff4e4fe784d3401841c0aad00f53552b82016c136%2F0_309_3744_2956%2F3744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20business%20of%20running%20a%20university&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j6xf%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+business+of+running+a+university&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j6xf%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff4e4fe784d3401841c0aad00f53552b82016c136%2F0_309_3744_2956%2F3744.jpg>
 ‘The most challenging aspects of the role as leader are people-facing, 
human-resources issues,’ says Nick Petford, vice-chancellor at the University 
of Northampton 
The right direction

For Nick Petford, vice-chancellor at the University of Northampton for the 
past five years, leading a university is all about being true to its mission. 
“You have to find out what the university is about, where it comes from,” he 
says. “Otherwise you might try to turn it in a direction it doesn’t want to go.”

But it is also about the bottom line, and maintaining an effective and 
efficient business model. This is a particular issue for Northampton because it 
is building a new campus, due to open in 2018, funded through a bond. With 
radical changes afoot – academics will no longer have their own offices – 
getting staff on board has been crucial. “The most challenging aspects of the 
role as leader are people-facing, human resources issues,” he says.

Petford now operates mainly through his mobile phone, sitting wherever he 
finds a spare desk, and rejecting a more traditional hierarchical arrangement. 
“It wasn’t presenting the right image for a university moving forward in the 
21st century.”

He stresses the importance of higher education leaders keeping up to date with 
how technology is transforming life outside the university, as they are 
training the next generation for a changing jobs market.

Northampton’s focus on social innovation has led to a number of projects with 
local authorities and boosted its finances. “Cash-generating initiatives buy 
you a level of autonomy, which means you don’t have to follow like sheep some 
of the more ridiculous pronouncements that come from politicians,” says Petford.

Universities need this independence to stand out from the crowd, he says. “If 
you get that right you can find space for yourself.”

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com




