
Secondary schools in England continued to struggle to adjust to changes in the 
timing and structure ofGCSEs <http://www.theguardian.com/education/gcses>, with 
the government’s official league tables showing schools made little headway in 
improving their results last year.

The revised figures released on Thursday by the Department for Education 
showed a slight improvement in the headline GCSE pass rate, with 57.1% of 
pupils at state schools achieving five passes of grade C or higher, including 
English and maths, compared with 56.6% in 2014.

Overall the number of schools falling below the government’s floor targets for 
GCSE passes fell by just one, to 329 schools nationally – 11% of all mainstream 
state secondary schools – well above the level of 154 that failed to reach the 
mark in 2013.

Related: Three alternative GCSE and A level results tables 
<http://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2016/jan/21/three-alternative-gcse-a-level-results-tables>

The DfE noted that the data identified “a continuing challenge in raising the 
attainment ofwhite working class boys 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/nov/11/white-boys-from-poor-areas-least-likely-to-take-as-or-a-levels-says-study>
, who continue to represent one of the lowest performing group of pupils”.

The figures showed a widening gap in attainment by disadvantaged pupils and 
their peers. In 2015 there was a 28 percentage point gap in the pass rate 
between the two groups, compared with 27.4 in 2014.

Overall, 36.5% of pupils classified as disadvantaged received five good passes 
including English and maths, compared with 64% of all other pupils.

A DfE spokesperson said: “The gap between disadvantaged pupils and their peers 
has narrowed since 2011 and more disadvantaged pupils than ever before are 
reaching the expected standard by the end of key stage four.

 “But we refuse to accept second best for any young person, which is why we 
must now focus on extending opportunity for all. We are continuing the Pupil 
Premium at current rates for the duration of this parliament, providing 
billions of pounds to support disadvantaged pupils. ”

Labour countered by pointing out that the attainment gap was now wider than 
when David Cameron took office in 2010.

“It is deeply concerning that a quarter of a million pupils are in failing 
secondary schools, and alarmingly the attainment gap between disadvantaged 
pupils and their peers has grown for the third year in a row,” said Lucy 
Powell, Labour shadow education secretary.

“Without a doubt we need to support excellent teaching and leadership in all 
our schools to drive up standards. Yet with chronic shortages of teachers, 
mounting pressure on school places forcing more and more children into larger 
class sizes, and a growing inequality in our education system, it is 
increasingly clear that the Tories are failing on education.”

But the performance tables included welcome news for Bethnal Green Academy in 
east London, with a rare achievement – 92% of its disadvantaged pupils passed 
the GCSE headline measure, a higher proportion than the 90% of the school as a 
whole.
GCSE pass rates for state schools with at least 30% of disadvantaged pupils 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/01/schools_disadvantaged/giv-27167amnOS1Cr8U4X/>
 GCSE pass rates for state schools in England with at least 30% disadvantaged 
pupils. Source: DfE 
Some 78% of the academy’s pupils are classed as disadvantaged by the DfE, 
meaning they had been eligible for free school meals or been in care. The 
school made headlines last year whenthree of its pupils travelled to Turkey and 
Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/25/education-secretary-nicky-morgan-syria-bethnal-green-academy>
 with the apparent intention of joining Islamic State.

Meanwhile, King Solomon Academy <http://kingsolomonacademy.org/>, a school run 
by the Ark academy chain, had another remarkable performance: 95% of its 
students passed the GCSE headline measure, including 93% of its disadvantaged 
pupils, for the second year running.

The school, in north-west London, had 75% of its students sitting GCSEs 
classed as disadvantaged.

Bolton Muslim girls’ school also achieved remarkable results, with 84% of its 
disadvantaged pupils passing the government’s benchmark, at a higher rate than 
the 83% pass rate for the school as a whole.

The schools minister, Nick Gibb, said the latest results meant the 
government’s programme of transforming struggling maintained schools into 
academies was bearing fruit.

“Today’s results show how far we have come in raising standards, but they also 
highlight where some pupils are still at risk of falling behind,” he said.

“We refuse to accept second best for any young person and we must now focus on 
extending opportunity for all. This government is giving all young people, 
irrespective of their background, a fair shot in life and we must not let up 
the pace of reform now.

Related: GCSE results 2015: pass rate rises but A* grades dip 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/aug/20/gcses-results-2015-english-pass-rate-rises-jump-a-c-grades>

“Through our focus on delivering educational excellence everywhere and the 
dedication of our schools, we will tackle those pockets of persistent 
underperformance so every child fulfils their potential.”

However, the latest data suggested that academy status is no panacea. 
Sponsored academies continued to lag behind local authority secondary schools 
with a 10.2 percentage point gap in GCSE pass rates, unchanged from the 
previous year. The 261 sponsored academies that have been open for five years 
or more actually saw a lower pass rate compared with 2014.

Converter academies – usually good or outstanding schools that changed status 
– continued to improve at a faster rate overall, and boasted a 64.3% pass rate. 
Maintained schools saw 56% of their pupils pass, while sponsored academies had 
just 45.8%.

The small number of free schools entering for GCSEs – 20 schools with just 
1,100 pupils – had a pass rate of 51.6%, while university technical colleges 
passed just 37.7% of their 1,200 pupils.


The national figures showed that the best performing local authority in the 
country was the tiny Isles of Scilly, which has one school, followed by the 
more heavily populated regions of Kingston upon Thames in south-west London and 
Trafford in Greater Manchester as the best performing in terms of GCSE pass 
rates.

The London borough of Kensington and Chelsea, which topped last year’s 
national table with a pass rate of nearly 74%, this year plummeted to 11th 
place with a 67% success rate.

The worst performing local authority was – again - Knowsley in Merseyside, 
despite improved results: 37.5% of pupils received five passes, compared with 
35.4% last year.

It was followed by the City of Nottingham, which dropped two percentage points 
to 42%, and Blackpool.

The figures also suggest a lack of enthusiasm for the government’s English 
baccalaureate, or EBacc, with the number of pupils taking the mix of GCSE 
subjects qualifying for the EBacc having gone backwards compared with 2014.

The education secretary, Nicky Morgan, has said she expected all students 
starting GCSEs from 2018 to be entered for EBacc subjects. Last year she
announced punitive measures 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jun/14/schools-gcse-ebacc-ofsted-nicky-morgan>
 – including extra scrutiny by Ofsted inspectors and league table downgrades – 
as consequences for schools failing to enrol 90% of pupils in the EBacc.

Next year’s changes to the league tables will see the current headline measure 
replaced with more sophisticated measures of progress and attainment across 
eight subjects, with five of the eight to be the EBacc core of English, maths, 
sciences, languages, and history or geography.

Related: Schools face pressure under plans to target academic GCSEs 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jun/14/schools-gcse-ebacc-ofsted-nicky-morgan>

The new league table may spur more schools to adopt EBacc subjects, although 
many report that a shortage of teachers makes it difficult to add foreign 
languages.

However, the figures also showed what the DfE called a milestone for A-levels 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/alevels>, with more than half of all 
subjects entered being in the “facilitating subjects” preferred by universities.

The A-level league tables were topped by a familiar mix of selective grammar 
schools and independent schools.

St Paul’s Girls’ school in London, Queen Elizabeth’s school in Barnet, north 
London, and Magdalen College school in Oxford all saw more than 80% of their 
pupils achieve grades of AAB at A-level, including at least two facilitating 
subjects.

Colyton grammar school in east Devon again topped the national tables based on 
average A-level point scores per pupil.
