
Housing associations’ social mission has been debated at length in the past 
few years. For some, including Halton Housing Trust, changes in theHousing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing> and Planning Act, passed in May, 
to the way associations are governed could make our work even more difficult.

The act replaces the existing regulatory regime with a system that will give 
housing associations greater freedom and control over their businesses, 
particularly when they are considering group restructuring and mergers. The act 
also removes the need for associations to get permission from the Homes and
Communities <https://www.theguardian.com/society/communities> Agency (HCA) 
before disposing of stock. This could give housing associations greater 
flexibility when managing assets and could cut red tape, enabling housing 
associations that have bought properties from local authorities to potentially 
raise more finance by revaluing their assets.

Related: Our last chance to restrain the housing bill is with the Lords | Bob 
Kerslake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/jan/26/housing-planning-bill-house-of-lords>

But there is also a catch for  housing associations like ourselves that are 
registered charities– about a third of all associations 
<http://www.thirdsector.co.uk/housing-associations-consider-deregistering-charity-commission/governance/article/1396876>
. For those associations, the provisions of the Charities Act 2011 will apply 
unless some alternative arrangement is made with the Charity Commission. This 
means that the HCA will no longer need to approve sales, but the Charity 
Commission will have to approve them. We are concerned that this could hinder 
effective asset management and put us at a disadvantage.

Some charitable housing associations have reconstituted themselves as 
community benefit societies. This means they are still charities but are no 
longer subject to regulation by the Charity Commission.

Quite rightly the government does not believe there should be less restraint 
on the disposal of charities’ assets. The Law Commission is looking at charity 
law and regulation, specifically regarding the asset disposal regime. Its 
initial recommendations may resolve the issues housing associations might face 
under the Charity Commission disposals regime.

However, we all know how draft proposals can change, so we will be keeping a 
watchful eye as this develops up until the publication of the commission’s 
final recommendations and a draft bill at the end of 2016.

We need to keep our options open. At Halton Housing Trust we are working 
closely with our legal advisors, our board, the National Housing Federation and 
other stakeholders to ensure we are able to respond appropriately.

 For us, a charity stops being a charity when the restrictions placed upon it 
prevent it being able to act in the best interests to pursue its original 
charitable objectives.

Join the Guardian Housing Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/housing/register/> to read more pieces like 
this. Follow us on Twitter (@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/GuardianHousingNetwork/?ref=hl> to keep up with the 
latest social housing news and views.
