
Pro-European MPs and some government sources believe it may be possible to use 
the Commons to mount a guerrilla campaign to minimise the impact of a 
referendum vote to quit theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>
 – or even to reverse the decision if the negotiations with the EU on the UK’s 
exit terms produce a disastrous deal.

The government is not willing to discuss its reaction in the event of a vote 
to leave since its sole goal at this stage in the campaign is to emphasise the 
risk of such a vote by saying that the decision would be irreversible and would 
likely be met with a brutal response from Britain’s European partners, 
primarily the French.
Brexit explained: current polling 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/05/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=current_polling#>
But privately ministers have pointed out there is a large cross-party Commons 
majority for the UK’s continued membership of the EU, and it could be deployed 
once the hugely complex, detailed and contentious legislation necessary to 
leave the EU started to pass through parliament.

 The first target is likely to be whether the UK could remain in the single 
market, while leaving the EU – so joining the European Economic Area, of which 
the non-EU countries Norway, Lichtenstein and Iceland are currently members. 
The single market guarantees thefree movement of people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2016/jun/02/national-borders-exist-to-pen-poor-people-into-reservations-of-poverty>
, goods and services inside the EU.

But parliament would face myriad votes on how to disentangle itself from the 
EU.

One minister described the possible guerrilla campaign as “a reverse 
Maastricht” – a reference to the way in which Tory Eurosceptic MPs, often in an 
alliance with a Labour opposition, tried to stall the Conservative government’s 
efforts to enshrinethe Maastricht treaty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/1991/dec/12/emu.theeuro> in UK law in the 
1990s.


Related: David Cameron: leave vote would be economic 'bomb' for UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/06/david-cameron-brexit-would-detonate-bomb-under-uk-economy>

One possibility for pro-Europeans would be to insert a clause demanding a 
second referendum on the terms of the renegotiation, or to run a guerrilla 
campaign to minimise the number of EU laws from which the UK would withdraw. 
One pro-European MP said: “We would have to respect the mandate of the 
referendum, but there is still plenty of scope on how and when we quit the EU.”

Although there has been discussion about the way in which EU laws set out the 
process for a member state to leave, there has been little public debate on how 
the Commons would seek to unravel UK law from that of the union, or how this 
could be done without blocking up the parliamentary legislative timetable for 
years.







Sam Bowman, the executive director of the rightwing thinktank the Adam Smith 
Institute, which has advocated the UK leaving the EU in stages, welcomed the 
possible intervention in the Commons.. He said: “This is a referendum on EU 
membership, not the single market, and MPs would be right to keep us in the 
single marketif we vote to leave the EU 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/31/what-happens-next-if-britain-votes-to-leave-the-eu>
. Keeping Britain in the single market would take the main economic risks out 
of leaving the EU, avoiding the doomsday scenarios outlined by the Treasury and 
others.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kg3v%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kg3v%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2a79d2817e417cc6c89ce2956f98e30e0707213%2F0_21_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pro-EU%20MPs%20could%20stage%20guerrilla%20campaign%20to%20reverse%20Brexit%20decision&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kg3v%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pro-EU+MPs+could+stage+guerrilla+campaign+to+reverse+Brexit+decision&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kg3v%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2a79d2817e417cc6c89ce2956f98e30e0707213%2F0_21_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Michael Gove – left, with Boris Johnson on Monday – claims that in the event 
of Brexit ‘we can set the pace’. Photograph: Phil Noble/Reuters 
 “The EEA option outlined in a recent Adam Smith Institute report 
<http://www.adamsmith.org/the-liberal-case-for-leave/> would give the UK 
economic security while allowing it to leave the EU. In many respects it gives 
us the best of both worlds – indeed the remain side has emphasised little else 
of value about the EU during the campaign apart from the single market.

 “The EU is not a prison, but the remain camp risks portraying it as such. It 
is possible to leave without risking serious economic harm, and staying in the 
single market as a step towards a long-term settlement would give the UK that 
safe route out.”

 By one estimate there are fewer than 200 MPs that currently support the UK 
leaving the EU, and although it is legally correct to say that the referendum 
is only advisory on parliament, there is an acceptance that politicians would 
be required to try to act on the decision of the British people.

Related: What happens next if Britain votes to leave the EU? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/31/what-happens-next-if-britain-votes-to-leave-the-eu>

David Cameron has said in the event of a vote to leave, he would immediately 
and formally notify the EU of its intention to quit under article 50 ofthe 
Lisbon treaty <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/jun/13/eu1>, kickstarting 
a two-year negotiation that could only be extended beyond the two years by a 
unanimous vote of the EU member states.

But lawyers advising the expert UK parliamentary committees dealing with Europe
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> say there is no legal 
obligation to notify the EU immediately.

Michael Gove, the justice secretary and prominent leave campaigner 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/03/eu-referendum-michael-gove-agrees-to-audit-of-vote-leave-350m-claim>
, said: “Logically, in the days after a vote to leave, the prime minister would 
discuss the way ahead with the cabinet and consult parliament before taking any 
significant step.”

He added: “It would not be in any nation’s interest artificially to accelerate 
the process and no responsible government would hit the start button on a 
two-year legal process without preparing appropriately. Nor would it be in 
anyone’s interest to hurry parliamentary processes. We can set the pace.”
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Feu-referendum-brexit-for-non-brits-video-explainer&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Feu-referendum-brexit-for-non-brits-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20Brexit%20for%20non-Brits%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Feu-referendum-brexit-for-non-brits-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EU+referendum%3A+Brexit+for+non-Brits+%E2%80%93+video+explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Feu-referendum-brexit-for-non-brits-video-explainer&media=>
EU referendum: Brexit for non-Brits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/may/31/eu-referendum-brexit-for-non-brits-video-explainer>
However, the EU will be torn between ejecting Britain as quickly as possible 
to minimise the risk of a Brexit contagion leading to the collapse of the 
union, and the hope that the UK can be persuaded to rethink.

Many countries have held second referendums on renegotiated terms including 
Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/oct/03/lisbon-treaty-ireland-what-next> 
and France, but the dominant mood among European leaders appears to be to push 
the UK towards the exit door quickly in the event of a vote to leave unless 
there was a serious chance the decision would be rescinded.

The next formal scheduled major discussion on the issue is not due to be held 
until the summit of European leaders on 28 and 29 June.
