
What?

The Lékué macaron kit (£39, selfridges.com) 
<http://www.selfridges.com/GB/en/cat/lekue-macaroon-kit_308-89001028-3000001SURM017/>
 is a silicone mat embossed with concentric circles, and a nozzled, flexible 
drum. Almond meringue batter piped in mounds may be baked on sheet.

Why?

These meringue fancies have had their day, like 90s dance-pop. Yet I can’t let 
either go. Heeeeyy, macaron-a!

Related: Kitchen gadgets review: Tea Maker from Sage – ‘like a unicorn 
rebranded as a sharp horse’ 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/27/kitchen-gadgets-review-tea-maker-sage-kettle-heston-blumenthal>

Well?

Sad times – my fashionista friends tell me macarons are over. As over as the 
cupcakes before them. Who knows which sweet treat will grab the zeitgeist next 
– cakepops, cronuts, canneles? (I find food fads fascinating, and also 
alliteration.) The revolution will probably be televised: the cupcake vogue was 
sparked by a single episode of Sex and the City; macarons trace their 
resurgence to Sofia Coppola’s Marie Antoinette. Then again, everyone remembers 
Keith eating a scotch egg in The Office, but Pharrell didn’t release a 
signature line of porky balls after that.


I’m happy to stick with macarons. I love their crisp, chewy creaminess, and 
their ability to hold mad flavours. However, baking these buggers – unlike 
predicting food fads – is an exact science. It involves triple-sifting, 
whisking, macaronage, some praying. Making Italian meringue requires the Hadron 
Collider. Enter Lékué, with a kit that helps. A bit. I had a go at making some, 
which went as wrong as it’s possible to go. It can’t help you mix almond batter 
to the perfect consistency, which is the hard bit. My first undersifted, 
overcooked batch resembled whelk shells or, more realistically, dog turds. 
Instead of a smooth top, the next batch sported 50 cracked nipples. (I gifted 
them to a pregnant friend.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tzj2%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tzj2%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f443a2d6c5980331f30f2793ff284474c7645c2%2F0_146_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kitchen%20gadgets%20review%3A%20L%C3%A9ku%C3%A9%20macaron%20kit%20%E2%80%93%20%E2%80%98magic%20is%20unlocked%2C%20Willy%20Wonka-style%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tzj2%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kitchen+gadgets+review%3A+L%C3%A9ku%C3%A9+macaron+kit+%E2%80%93+%E2%80%98magic+is+unlocked%2C+Willy+Wonka-style%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tzj2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f443a2d6c5980331f30f2793ff284474c7645c2%2F0_146_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 Rhik pipes his blue goo in perfect portions. Photograph: Martin Godwin for the 
Guardian 
Eventually, I ladle a more promising mix into the piping gadget, a sort of 
icing bellows. It has no advantage over a piping bag, but does resemble a 
Japanese kettle. The mat, however, earns its keep. Lipped circles ringfence the 
batter, leading to evenly risen domes. Placed on a baking tray, it also 
insulates the meringue’s “feet” – necessary for chewy innards. Magic is 
unlocked. Now, like Willy Wonka, I can’t stop whipping up pastel dreams in my 
ethically questionable factory. Who cares if macarons have fallen out of 
fashion? Like multicoloured yoyos, they’ll be back. Anyway, in my experience, 
best-before dates are best ignored.

Any downside?

I keep calling them macaroons, which a) are small coconut cakes, and b) sound 
like a seaside euphemism for ladies’ jubblies.

Counter, drawer, back of the cupboard?

Window-dressing the patisserie you’ll soon be opening. Or resting on the 
massive belly you’ll soon be having.3/5

