
When Mark Howells’ grandad’s health was declining, Howells became frustrated 
with the lack of communication surrounding the care being received. His 
grandfather had a number of chronic conditions including dementia and relied on 
a network of professional care workers and family support, but the carers 
didn’t have a holistic view of his day-to-day care. “We lacked even basic 
real-time information about his wellbeing,” says Howells. “The effect of poor 
communication was that small problems could quickly escalate into avoidable 
crises.”

 As a response to this, he co-founded Konnektis <http://www.konnektis.com/>, a 
startup that’s embracing mobile technology to disrupt the sector and enable 
care workers to make the shift to paperless communication.

According to a recent study by the South East Health Technologies Alliance 
<http://www.sehta.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/The-SEHTA-TICH-Review.pdf> 
(Sehta), one of the UK’s largest healthcare networking organisations, 
technology has the potential to free up staff time to provide more 
human-centric care and improve resident wellbeing. But it’s not a lack of 
innovation that’s holding the care sector back, it’s a lack of uptake.

A separate survey of 50 top care home groups, as reported by Nursing Times 
<http://www.nursingtimes.net/roles/nurse-managers/exclusive-uk-care-home-sector-lagging-on-use-of-technology/7000119.fullarticle>
, found that although 80% believed technology could improve their care 
planning, only 32% used electronic records. Of those who didn’t, 45% cited cost 
concerns as the key factor holding them back, while inadequate IT resources and 
staff capacity was another worry.

Konnektis is an easy-to-use platform (currently preparing for its hard launch) 
for use on internet-enabled tablets. It aims to provide those giving care with 
a complete picture of an elderly person’s needs – whether they are in a home or 
live independently – and help manage all aspects effectively, from nutrition 
and hydration to sleep. By storing information digitally, it can be mapped out, 
creating algorithms that can highlight any missed support or clinical 
interventions and enable quick action.

“The real potential of digital systems is in creating views of data and user 
journeys that bring the right information to the right person at the right 
time,” says Nuno Almeida, founder ofNourish <http://www.nourishcare.co.uk/>, a 
Dorset-based company that has built a similar system to Konnektis for 
smartphones and tablets.

“We have several examples of people who used to skip a service – refusing a 
breakfast, for example – and because all the information about them is 
structured in a person-centred way, the reasons for those services being 
skipped become immediately obvious. This allows care providers to make changes 
that result in clear improvements of the care they provide,” he says.

Related: How social robots are dispelling myths and caring for humans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/may/09/robots-social-health-care-elderly-children>

Although such technology can streamline day-to-day operations, both Almeida 
and Howells agree that systems shouldn’t be designed for the clients paying for 
the software. “At its core, the sector is about people,” says Howells. “While 
technology can play an important role to enable real-time flows of information 
between care networks, it will only be truly effective when it’s built with 
users [in mind].”

Konnektis has built the platform from the bottom up by spending time with care 
workers, families and those receiving the care. Holly May Mahoney, chief design 
officer at Konnektis, says that listening to all users, identifying their needs 
and doing something about it is likely to encourage adoption of any technology, 
as users feel more empowered when they’re part of the process.

As well shifting away from paper records, the Sehta report identified smart 
innovation, such as alerting devices, as a way to improve day-to-day operations 
for care workers. Natalie Price is the creator of theProximity Button 
<http://www.proximitycare.co.uk>, a wearable device that alerts carers whenever 
a person with dementia is wandering. “My mum has cared for people with dementia 
for more than 15 years, so I know how stressful it can be,” she says. “It can 
involve a lot of long hours and unpaid overtime.”

Wandering affects around 60% of people with dementia and results in many 
accidents, some fatal. Price says the majority of products available are GPS 
trackers that “often have monthly subscription costs, as well as the issue of 
privacy, with many people believing it’s unethical to track a person’s 
location. They also don’t prevent the problem before it happens.”

The Proximity Button uses a bluetooth beacon and alerts the carer via a 
smartphone app whenever the person wearing it, clipped onto their clothes, 
moves a certain distance away from the phone.

Price is aware that there’s no easy fix and says her product won’t solve the 
problem altogether. But any technological solutions that make the lives of 
carers easier, she adds, will mean less stress and more time spent on 
delivering quality care.

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.


All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Paid for by” – find out morehere 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
