
Midway through a party Michael Chow is throwing for Jennifer Lopez, a white 
acrylic disc 20 feet in diameter descends from the ceiling, pivots, separates 
apart, goes up, tips, comes down and finally comes to rest.


The operator is almost certainly Mr Chow himself, a man of mischief in an 
eggplant-colored corduroy suit and pink socks who would not be out of place in 
Peter Seller’s The Party, who started his eponymous restaurant chain in London 
48 years ago.

At 74, Chow considers that he’s lived a richly cinematic life – with himself 
as the central character, of course, in many roles and filmed from many 
flattering angles.

The son of China’s most famous opera singer Zhou Xinfang, he was sent to an 
English rural boarding school to escape Mao’s cultural revolution, studied at 
St Martins School of Art, and fashioned a theatrical life in the restaurant 
trade, and then returned to painting, 50 years on, fired with the belief that 
creative expression will triumph.

Now, with the opening of a new restaurant in Las Vegas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/las-vegas> and an exhibition of his art – 
and paintings of him by artists including Andy Warhol, Jean-Michel Basquiat, 
and Ed Ruscha – at the Andy Warhol museum next month, the Chinese-British, 
London-Hollywood, restaurateur-artist is on a kind of late-career expansion.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g38f%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g38f%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4c34f9b23996d518fa762c55d80494367de3535%2F0_649_2832_1694%2F2832.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mr%20Chow%20restaurant%20opens%20in%20Las%20Vegas%3A%20'The%20only%20thing%20Chinese%20is%20my%20name'&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g38f%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mr+Chow+restaurant+opens+in+Las+Vegas%3A+%27The+only+thing+Chinese+is+my+name%27&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g38f%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4c34f9b23996d518fa762c55d80494367de3535%2F0_649_2832_1694%2F2832.jpg>
 Mr Chow: ‘I am 20th century, left and right, global, fucked-up.’ Photograph: 
Patrick Gray/Kabik Photo Group/Courtesy of Caesars Entertainment 
“I am 20th century, left and right, global, fucked-up,” he tells the Guardian 
plainly. “I came from this very powerful theatre family. God set me up as frail 
asthmatic child. Hardly go to school. Lived with fame and glamour. Spoiled. 
Thrown into a poor man’s Harry Potter school. Touch of prison. Eating black 
potatoes. Don’t understand a word. Toast with cheese on it. They call it Welsh 
rarebit. Oh, never mind ...”

One gets the impression that Chow is to some degree entertaining himself. Here 
in Vegas, a city he bizarrely considers to be like Vienna during the 
Secessionist period, he’s in his element being out of this element. Not that 
he’s had to come far: five years after setting up Mr Chow in London, he opened 
one in Beverly Hills and has lived in Los Angeles ever since.

If he was expecting the elegance of director Ernst Lubitsch, it wasn’t what he 
found. “I couldn’t believe it. I thought Hollywood would be the most 
sophisticated thing in the world, but in reality it’s a one-street town. Very 
provincial.”

With a checkered floor copied from Rudolph Valentino’s villa and customers 
from Lana Truner to Groucho Marx (he didn’t eat Chinese and ordered a hamburger 
delivered), Mae West, who received a standing ovation, to Yuri Geller, who bent 
the cutlery, the restaurant remains an institution.

Not that there’s much variation between Beverly Hills, London, Miami, New 
York, Las Vegas or, soon, Mexico City. The food in one location is much the 
same as another. A Mr Chow feast-formula – Beijing duck, glazed prawns with 
walnuts, drunken fish – that’s unlikely to win any awards but is dependable.

It’s made him a wealthy man with a glamorous lifestyle and string of glamorous 
wives. The drive to create an empire, he says, partly comes from being from a 
such a famous family. He knew he couldn’t stage Beijing opera or put on shows 
of Chinese painting. He experienced injustice and a sense of exclusion based on 
his ethnicity.

“I collect sleights all day long. Everything Chinese was considered a piece of 
shit. So I became the most patriotic Chinese that ever lived. I appointed 
myself a cultural ambassador. But I know that anything that reminds the 
clientele that the food is related to China, the prices goes down. So nothing 
here reminds of China – no calligraphy, no Chinese music – the only thing 
Chinese is my name. But I keep the cuisine as true as possible. It’s like 
divide and rule. Italian waiters, Chinese food. Every detail perfect. My 
restaurants are theatres with some food. It’s been an exhausting journey. Now 
it’s a machine. I’m the busiest and least busy restaurateur in the world. ”

But can a restaurateur who hasn’t worked as a visual artist in the traditional 
sense for half a century pull off such a late-career switch? Another serving of 
Beijing duck can’t be too exciting.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g38f%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g38f%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F944ece8a414daef246c6db5178d09ee9df311398%2F0_177_2700_1620%2F2700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mr%20Chow%20restaurant%20opens%20in%20Las%20Vegas%3A%20'The%20only%20thing%20Chinese%20is%20my%20name'&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g38f%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mr+Chow+restaurant+opens+in+Las+Vegas%3A+%27The+only+thing+Chinese+is+my+name%27&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4g38f%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F944ece8a414daef246c6db5178d09ee9df311398%2F0_177_2700_1620%2F2700.jpg>
 Main dining area of Mr Chow Las Vegas. Photograph: PR 
 “Do I have a shot? I might. I’ve always been brave and stupid. But I wear my 
passion on my sleeve,” he says. “There is this thing ‘cause I’m old but Barnett 
Newman said painting is for old men.”

Chow adjust his shoes, made from rough leather recovered from a Czarist ship 
sunk more than a century ago by the famous London shoemaker George Cleverley. 
Chow used to work for the highly influential Swinging London gallerist Robert 
“Groovy Bob” Fraser, entertaining Fraser’s friends and clients, including the 
Beatles and Rolling Stones, all of whom would become patrons of Mr Chow, the 
restaurant. He knows the art world well; he and wife Eva wererecently named 
<http://www.wmagazine.com/culture/art-and-design/2013/01/michael-chow-artistic-family/>
 as important influence in the success of the of Los Angeles County Museum of 
Art.

His friends in art world, Urs Fischer and Julian Schnabel, are supportive and 
he’s got plans to turn a 57,000 square foot industrial space in the Vernon 
district of Los Angeles into a studio space that might function as a kind of 
salon for artists and writer and thinkers, whom, he feels have little direct 
contact with one another.

Despite experiencing a sense of disconnection, and sometimes exclusion, Chow 
has always found a way round the problem. The thing about England, he learned, 
was that if you were aristocratic, eccentric or artistic, you could always have 
a place at the table. A sense of injustice, too, could be good for art. He’s 
overtly political but he mentions Goya – “very angry” – Van Gogh, Monet, his 
friend Jean-Michel Basquiat, Egon Schiele.

“Good ingredients for artists – death, sex, injustice, racism. That’s what 
artists do. I’m dealing with death also but in a more bourgeois fashion. Art is 
the healer for this craziness. Take it away and the world will crumble. Artists 
are healers and it’s the luckiest thing you can be.” Chow adjusts his round 
spectacles and considers his new salon-commune project. “An environment for 
creative people. Yes, why not? Maybe give them some free food and wine. That 
always seems to help.”

Michael Chow aka Zhou Yinghua: Voice for My Father opens 13 February 13 to 8 
May atThe Andy Warhol museum <http://www.warhol.org/> in Pittsburgh.

Mr Chow <http://www.mrchow.com/> opens in Caesars Palace Las Vegas at 3570 Las 
Vegas Blvd South.
