
I don’t want to get lost in the politics of envy here, but Lost in Showbiz 
could live to 100 and never get over the fact of its exclusion from the Tory 
summer party.

The event took place in London on Tuesday night, and before we go any further 
let’s get one thing straight: these guys know how to party. Accounts of the 
raffle takings alone read likeKLF performance art 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/K_Foundation_Burn_a_Million_Quid>. “Tonight we 
are offering a unique prize: the chance to own the photograph of the first 
majority Conservative cabinet for 18 years,”enticed the catalogue 
<http://blogs.spectator.co.uk/steerpike/2015/07/tory-summer-party-auctions-a-photo-of-the-cabinet-for-200000/>
, insisting that the lot constituted a “truly special piece of history”. I’m 
assuming they hired the same copywriters who flog kitten plates and Princess Di 
figurines in the lesser Sunday supplements.

Bidding was fierce, according to reports, and the photo ended up going for 
£210,000. Not only that, organisers persuaded the next highest bidder to part 
with his final bid too, bringing thetotal amount raised for a signed photo of 
the cabinet to £410,000 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-3146675/SEBASTIAN-SHAKESPEARE-Tory-donors-blow-410-000-photos-ministers.html>
. I know! I love this funding model. If they did a WI-style nudie calendar, 
they could afford some planes for our new aircraft carrier.

As for what else can be gleaned from reports, I’m afraid details are sketchy. 
I can tell you thatCelebrity <http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/celebrity>
 Conservative Kirstie Allsopp was in attendance, though Peter Stringfellow 
appears to have been decommissioned as one of the party’s big guns. And I feel 
duty-bound to draw attention to a vintage Daily Mail sentence. See if you can 
spot the key change: “While the 700 guests – who paid either £450 or £1,000 a 
ticket depending on where they sat – whooped with delight at video images of Ed 
Balls’s defenestration at the general election, the mood on the evening was 
understandably restrained following recent shocking events in Tunisia.”

Oh man. Totally. And look, I like tales of electoral snuff videos as much as 
the next weirdo, but I do feel there was a missed opportunity to get the phrase 
“what they would have wanted” into that sentence. Still, there’s more: “An 
open-neckedDavid Cameron <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> 
made a sombre, joke-free speech about the need to confront Islamic militants.”

Best. Party. Entertainer. EVER. God knows how they topped that, but given this 
night sounds like one whose legend will echo down the ages, I’m working on the 
assumption thatBianca Jagger 
<http://www.vogue.co.uk/news/2015/04/29/bianca-jagger-white-horse-studio-54-misleading>
 rode in on Iain Duncan Smith.
