
Thirty-eight per cent of adults in the UK hear jokes about sexual assault or 
sex offenders regularly, according toa new survey by OnePoll 
<http://www.onepoll.com/rape-culture/>. The nationally representative study of 
1,000 British adults found that a quarter of men and 11% of women said they had 
made this type of joke themselves.

The poll disproves the notion that these attitudes towards sexual violence are 
dying away. It found that 71% of 18-24-year-olds have made a rape joke or 
flippantly used the word rape, and 88% of respondents in this age group were 
familiar with the term “frape”, or Facebook rape, which is usually used to 
describe the act of logging into somebody else’s Facebook account and posting 
using their profile. Thirty-six per cent of people aged 25-34 reported that 
they frequently hear the word rape used to mean “beat in some form of 
competition”.

The results come amid a flurry of recent high-profile cases where companies 
have been forced to apologise after using rape, or appearing to allude to 
sexual assault, in festive advertising. A Singapore-based online retailer, 
SuperGurl, acknowledged it had “made a mistake” afteradvertising its Black 
Friday sale 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/asia/online-retailer-supergurl-apologise-for-rape-us-now-black-friday-advert-a6755561.html>
 with the slogan “rape us now”. The department store chain Bloomingdale’s 
apologised for its holiday advert, which featured a young man creepily eyeing a 
laughing young woman beside the slogan:“Spike your best friend’s eggnog when 
they’re not looking.” 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/nov/11/bloomingdales-apologizes-holiday-ad-date-rape-joke>

This follows on from controversy last Christmas about a rape-themed Christmas 
T-shirt available for sale online 
<https://twitter.com/EverydaySexism/status/539734181258215424>, and a reference 
to chloroforming your partner ina 2012 Virgin Mobile US Christmas advert 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/dec/09/virgin-mobile-us-holiday-ad>. 

It isn’t a coincidence that these cases seem to spike in the holiday season, 
when consumer culture reaches fever pitch. Such adverts, alongside the use of 
female bodies to sell unrelated products, promote the idea of women as 
consumable objects, there for the taking, with their own autonomy and choice 
conveniently left out of the picture. The fact that rape is seen as an 
acceptable topic to joke about, and use as a hook to sell products, reveals our 
social normalisation of the concept – a phenomenon also described as “rape 
culture”.

It is a difficult topic to discuss. Objections to rape jokes are frequently 
dismissed by those who argue that they represent a form of free speech, or 
those who point out that there is no evidence to prove a direct link between 
objectifying or sexually degrading images of women and sexual violence.

In fact, there is evidence of some links 
<http://image.guardian.co.uk/sys-files/Guardian/documents/2009/05/29/joiningupthedots.pdf>
 between the portrayal of women as sexual objects and attitudes that underpin 
violence against women and girls. The government-commissionedSexualisation of 
Young People review 
<http://dera.ioe.ac.uk/10738/1/sexualisation-young-people.pdf> found evidence 
to suggest a clear link between consumption of sexualised images, a tendency to 
view women as objects and the acceptance of aggressive attitudes and behaviours 
as the norm. And the 2010 report by the American Psychological Association on 
theSexualisation of Girls 
<https://www.apa.org/pi/women/programs/girls/report-full.pdf> detailed links 
between sexually objectifying images of women and girls in mainstream media and 
significantly higher levels of acceptance of rape myths, victim-blaming, sexual 
harassment and interpersonal violence.

One particularly problematic aspect of the widespread and flippant use of the 
word “rape” is that it contributes to the idea that sexual violence is an 
acceptable topic about which to joke. Jokes in which rape victims are treated 
as a punchline are especially significant in a society in which only about15% 
of victims feel able to report serious sexual assault to the police 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/214970/sexual-offending-overview-jan-2013.pdf>
. But while 87% of those surveyed by OnePoll said they would never make a rape 
joke in front of somebody they knew to be a survivor of abuse, nearly a quarter 
of respondents said they felt it was acceptable to make these types of comments 
among friends. Yet when you tell a rape joke,statistically one in five women 
who hear you have experienced or will experience some form of sexual assault 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/214970/sexual-offending-overview-jan-2013.pdf>
, whether you know it or not.

The idea that those who object to rape culture represent a threat to free 
speech is, ironically, a form of silencing in itself. There is a significant 
difference between expressing concern about rape jokes or images objectifying 
women and suggesting that all such content should be “banned”. Indeed, it is 
unlikely that any kind of censorship would be particularly successful, as the 
problem lies as much with underlying attitudes as it does with the adverts or 
jokes themselves.

The feminist endgame is not to publicly punish everybody who makes a rape 
joke, or ban every advert that uses rape as a titillating way to sell products. 
It is to create a society in which it would never occur to anybody to do either 
in the first place.
