
It has been a testing year for humanitarian emergencies, with conflicts in 
Syria, Iraq, Palestine, South Sudan and Central African Republic stretching aid 
budgets to the limit. On top of these manmade emergencies, the Ebola epidemic 
has demanded a global response, with theUN calling for $988m 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/datablog/ng-interactive/2014/oct/28/-sp-ebola-funding>
 to tackle the outbreak.


Helen Clark, the head of the UN Development Programme, summed up the 
prevailing climate 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/aug/13/gaza-ebola-iraq-approaching-disaster-overload>
 when she said earlier this year that it was “hard to remember a time when more 
crises were jostling for space in the headline news”.

Support for humanitarian disasters is limited, and inevitably some situations 
will remain underfunded or even be ignored. The UN has already cautioned that 
it will be forced tocut food rations 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/sep/18/world-food-programme-cut-aid-syria>
 for Syrian refugees if it does not receive more funding, and a similar warning 
has been sounded aboutfood aid to Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/14/world-food-programme-cuts-rations-afghanistan>
. Meanwhile, a food crisis in Somalia has left more than 1 million people in 
need of assistance, and there are fears that a plea from the UN Food and 
Agriculture Organisation for more funding isfalling on deaf ears 
<http://allafrica.com/stories/201410311679.html>.

We want to know your thoughts. Why do some humanitarian emergencies receive 
more support than others? Is a fairer system for funding allocation possible? 
Submit a response of 250 words or fewer and we’ll publish a selection of the 
best ones. Keep your response clear and concise, avoiding development or 
academic jargon. Email your response todevelopment@theguardian.com 
<mailto:development@theguardian.com> with “Students Speak” in the subject line. 
Please include your name, the country where you live, and the university or 
college you attend. Submissions close at 6pm BST on 27 November.

 * Read the responses to our previous Students Speak question on empowering 
girls. 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/oct/14/education-men-empower-girls-students-speak>