
Does becoming an academy improve pupils’ Sats 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/sats> results? That is the implication of 
much of the debate coming from the Department for Education, as ministers seek 
to drive more primary schools, in particular, into academy status.

But is this argument statistically valid? Well, last week the UK Statistics 
Authority (UKSA) cast serious doubt on it, in a judgment that suggests 
ministers may have to rethink how they present data on their flagship reform.

The development centres on a DfE statistical publication 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/428838/SFR50_2014_Text.pdf>
, released in December and seized on by ministers repeatedly in advocating more 
academies. This showed, correctly, that Sats results over 2012 to 2014 improved 
more quickly in sponsored academies – former local authority schools taken over 
by a sponsor – than in non-academies.

But sponsored academies generally take over schools with poor results, with 
perhaps more room for improvement than most non-academies, we thought. So was 
the DfE comparison fair?

Sponsored academies often take over schools with poor results and perhaps more 
room for improvement

In fact, statistical analysis 
<https://www.dropbox.com/s/7sm8h292rlwtyat/wmlettertouksa.pdf?dl=0> by your 
correspondent, sent to the statistics authority, suggested that these 
differences in results gains may not have been anything to do with whether the 
schools were academies or not. Rather, they seemed to be part of a general 
trend, for all schools, whereby those starting off with poor results in 2012-13 
closed the gap on those that had been formerly been ahead.

And non-academies starting with the same – generally poor – test results as 
sponsored academies in 2013 actually registered faster improvements in 2014, we 
found. There was no sign of this analysis in the DfE release.

UKSA agreed with us, saying last week the DfE should in future state that the 
data as presented could not be used – by ministers and others – to imply a 
“causal link” between academy status and improvements in test results.

In a letter to me, Ed Humpherson, UKSA director general for regulation, said: 
“DfE presented comparisons of improvement in performance by school type with no 
comment on limitations, supporting narrative or analysis. We conclude that this 
presentation did not make it clear that the differences in rates of improvement 
in performance were not necessarily caused by school type.”

So, a victory for this column in the cause of informed debate, perhaps. 
Whether it will be taken on board by the DfE remains to be seen, however, with 
a spokesman saying only that the UKSA’s view had been “noted”.

Trust to raise £11m from selling playing fields

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ahy2%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ahy2%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F10%2F1436549027297%2Ffccef0ce-0354-4db8-9166-3b5c607b3ad9-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Department%20for%20Education%20rapped%20over%20use%20of%20Sats%20data&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ahy2%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Department+for+Education+rapped+over+use+of+Sats+data&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ahy2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F10%2F1436549027297%2Ffccef0ce-0354-4db8-9166-3b5c607b3ad9-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Simon Spiers of Vale Academy Trust outside King Alfred’s academy, Wantage. 
Photograph: Cliff Hide 
Controversial news arrives of an academy trust’s plan to raise £11m by selling 
off school land – including playing fields – for housing.

About 140 homes could be built on one of three sites belonging to King 
Alfred’s academy in Wantage, Oxfordshire. The trust tells us “every penny” of 
the money raised would go into improvement works to facilities on the other two 
sites.

A source who pointed us to the Oxford Mail 
<http://www.oxfordmail.co.uk/news/13359858.School_aiming_to_sell_grounds_for_housing/>
 story on this questions the process involved in deciding where the money 
should go, and may have a point. “In the old days if land occupied by schools 
became available as surplus to requirements … the sale receipt went to the 
local authority to allocate according to its prioritised need [across all its 
services, including education]. Now it seems that an academy can simply sell 
off some land for housing and keep the benefit for itself.”

Simon Spiers, executive headteacher of the Vale Academy Trust, says King 
Alfred’s – which was formed in the 1980s by the amalgamation of three schools – 
had suffered a lack of spending on its buildings for 30 years and that the cash 
would fund a new science block, an expanded sixth-form centre and other 
improvements. This would allow the school to expand from 1,850 to 2,200 pupils. 
The project is backed by the local authority, he adds.

The scheme still needs planning approval and a sign-off from the DfE. Spiers 
is convinced of the strength in the trust’s arguments but those interested in 
issues of academy land ownership will be watching this closely.

Doubts over phonics screening benefits


Ministers may need to rein in their oft-stated enthusiasm 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/nick-gibb-the-importance-of-phonics> 
for the controversial phonics screening check for six-year-olds after a final 
official evaluation report found no evidence that it improved pupils’ overall 
literacy performance.

Most teachers are positive about the value of phonics 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/sep/25/phonics-test-results-credit-government>
 as an approach to reading, the evaluation found. But there is only “some 
evidence” that the introduction of the check in 2012 has led to an improvement 
in pupils’ attainment in phonics itself, while no evidence yet that it has 
driven up pupils’ wider reading and writing results in key stage 1 assessments.

The DfE says the report shows teachers have changed classroom approaches as a 
result of the check, and that this is improving teaching. The proportion of 
pupils achieving expected reading standards at KS1 has risen by five percentage 
points since 2011, it added.

But with those test gains not directly attributable to the check, some will 
wonder why pupils are still being put through it.

Parents in dark on test ‘maladministration’


Why are official investigation reports into schools’ alleged 
“maladministration” of Sats tests not being published? We have come across 
three recent cases where schools have had their pupils’ results annulled after 
probes by the Standards and Testing Agency, but where parents remain in the 
dark as to what went on.

We have now seen a freedom of information response from the STA with regard to 
one of them:Grinling Gibbons 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jun/02/pearson-sats-marking-problems-software>
 primary in Deptford, south London.

It says that the investigation report into the school’s 2014 tests cannot be 
released as it would “prejudice the effective conduct of public affairs” 
because there could be “disruptive press attention” for the school. Publication 
could also prejudice any actions against individuals that might follow, it says.

Lewisham council has said the school continues to provide an “extremely high 
standard” of education. As we went to press, Lewisham said it had completed its 
own investigation into this “serious matter”, and was working with the 
governing body to consider what action to take. But further details remain 
elusive. Lewisham council merely says its policy is not to release information 
that “related to individuals”. Would the same happen in a case involving, say, 
alleged fiddling of data on operations in a hospital, we wonder? Patients might 
consider they had a right to know what was going on.
