
Bold promises to empower women economically will come to nothing if the 
structural barriers that prevent women from getting decent jobs are not 
removed, civil society groups have warned.

A high-level panel backed by the World Bank, UN Women 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women>, the International Monetary 
Fund and the International Labour Organisation (ILO) is producing an action 
plan to improve women’s economic opportunities over the next 15 years.

The panel, launched during 
<http://www.unwomen.org/en/news/stories/2016/1/wee-high-level-panel-launch> the 
World Economic Forum in January, held its first consultative meeting at the UN 
on Wednesday during the annual Commission on the Status of Women. Itincludes 
business leaders, politicians, academics and civil society 
<http://www2.unwomen.org/~/media/headquarters/attachments/sections/news/stories/2016/hlpwomenseconomicempowermentbiographiescochairspanelists.pdf?v=1&d=20160315T220634>
, and is chaired by Luis Guillermo Solis, the president of Costa Rica, and 
Simona Scarpaleggia, CEO of Ikea Switzerland.

Related: Bertha Cáceres: 'My mother’s is not the first assassination. I don’t 
want another' 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/16/berta-caceres-bertha-honduras-not-first-human-rights-defender-assassinated>

Campaigners said they were disappointed not to have heard more from panellists 
about women’s unpaid work, exploitative contracts that keep women poor, and 
dangerous working conditions

Chiara Capraro, gender policy adviser at Christian Aid, said empowering women 
is not just about getting more female CEOs.

“The ILO estimates that, by 2020, 80% of people across the world will be 
affected by austerity policies. When services are cut, women have to pick up 
the slack and that affects their ability to make a living and access decent 
work,” she said.

Many women work in special economic zones, or for companies that don’t pay 
tax, or a living wage, and are denied access to unions, she added. “It’s really 
essential to see these dimensions reflected [in the panel],” she said.

Rachel Noble, women’s rights policy adviser at ActionAid, said: “It’s 
absolutely critical they pay attention to the fundamental structural issues 
blocking women from participating in the economy.

“There’s not nearly enough recognition of the fact that this is about women’s 
human rights, not just about creating economic growth.

“The biggest role companies can play is ensuring women have access to decent 
work, paying a living wage, giving them secure contracts, and ensuring their 
right to form unions and engage in collective bargaining.”

Ann Kargbo, head of Rehabilitation and Development Agency, a Sierra Leonean 
NGO working on gender equality in Bo county, added that women’s economic 
empowerment goes hand in hand with gender equality and will only be fully 
realised when women can take control of what they earn.

Related: UN Women's head: 'Historic shift' needed to find concrete ways to end 
gender inequality 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/15/un-women-historic-shift-concrete-ways-end-gender-inequality-commission-status-women>

“We need to know who owns the resources, who controls the resources and who 
makes decisions on the utilisation of resources.”


Allison Julien, from the National Domestic Workers Alliance, told the panel 
that the right to organise “has a profound impact on women’s ability to move 
from poverty and negotiate for a living wage and have access to social 
protection”.

“Unpaid care is the major structural barrier for women’s economic empowerment. 
Domestic work makes all other work possible. Without someone taking care of 
your home and children, people wouldn’t be able to take their jobs.”

According to the McKinsey Global Institute 
<http://www.mckinsey.com/global-themes/employment-and-growth/how-advancing-womens-equality-can-add-12-trillion-to-global-growth>
, if women in every country were to play an equal role to men in labour 
markets, up to $28tn could be added to the global annual GDP by 2025.

But women spend more than twice as much time as men doing unpaid care and 
domestic work, while earning on average 24% less than men for doing the same 
work. Women in poorer areas are more likely to work in informal unprotected 
jobs.

Related: Tackling gender inequality could add $12tn to world economy, study 
finds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/24/tackling-gender-inequality-could-add-12tn-to-world-economy-study-finds>

The high-level panel will continue its consultations over the coming months 
before publishing the first of two reports in September. The report promises to 
include practical ways to improve women’s lives and “promote women’s leadership 
in driving economic growth”.


“I assure you, this panel is going to be bold, aim high and keep it focused,” 
said Solis. “We can’t afford to wait. It’s clear we need to move forward very 
fast and do everything that needs to be done to give more autonomy to women. We 
have to inspire.”

Justine Greening, the UK’s international development secretary, who sits on 
the panel but was not in New York for Wednesday’s meeting, said in a statement 
that the panel marked “a major step forward in the battle to close the gender 
gap in economies around the world. We now need to work hard to make sure it 
delivers real change for the world’s poorest women.”
