
Nearly 60 million people are displaced 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/18/59m-people-displaced-war-violence-persecution-says-un>
 by conflict and crisis – an unprecedented number in modern times.More than 
half are under 18 <http://www.unicef.org/hac2016/>, creating challenges for 
host communities that must provide education and care forchildren who have lost 
their families 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/12/childrens-services-call-for-resources-to-deal-with-rise-in-child-refugees>
 or are separated from their loved ones.

Ban Ki-moon, the UN secretary general, says next week’s humanitarian summit in 
Istanbul 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/05/medecins-sans-frontieres-world-humanitarian-summit-istanbul-fig-leaf-pulls-out>
 offers “a turning point in the way we address the challenges facing our common 
humanity”. His framework for the summit –Agenda for humanity 
<https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/2282agendaforhumanity.pdf>
 – calls on everyone to do more to help those in need and build a safer world.

Related: Why are so many children around the world out of school? – podcast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/audio/2016/may/19/why-are-so-many-children-around-the-world-out-of-school-podcast>

But to lay any claim to success, the summit must prioritise the protection of 
the youngest and most vulnerable in humanitarian emergencies.Children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> often bear the brunt of 
separation, neglect, abuse and trauma.

The challenges are daunting. Nearly one in four school-age children live in 
nations that are affected by crisis 
<http://www.unicef.org.uk/Media-centre/Press-releases/New-report-reveals-nearly-a-quarter-of-the-worlds-school-aged-children-live-in-crisis-hit-countries/>
. Of these 462 million children, theOverseas Development Institute estimates 
<https://www.odi.org/publications/10405-education-cannot-wait-fund-education-emergencies>
 that 75 million have either no or limited access to education.

In Europe last year, nearly 90,000 of the people seeking asylum were 
unaccompanied minors,Eurostat reports 
<http://ec.europa.eu/dgs/home-affairs/what-is-new/news/news/2016/20160502_1_en.htm>
.

Our experience shows that when youngsters are deprived of the basic care 
usually taken for granted – regular schooling, a place to play, caring adults – 
this dramatically increases the trauma and emotional strain of conflict and 
dislocation.

Vulnerability and a lack of emotional care also put children at long-term risk 
of falling behind their peers, ultimately making it difficult for them to 
return to “normal” life.

Furthermore, children who are separated from their families, or who set out on 
their own in search of a better life, risk exploitation, trafficking or being 
recruited into crime.

A senior official from the EU police agency Europol told the Guardian in 
January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/30/fears-for-missing-child-refugees>
 that thousands of refugees under 18 have fallen through the cracks, possibly 
forced into crime and prostitution.

We support the Agenda for humanity’s call for a shared responsibility in 
creating a safer world, better equipped to help those in need. But it is 
equally important that world leaders, and all those involved in relief, 
emergency response and development, use theworld humanitarian summit  
<https://www.worldhumanitariansummit.org/>to put the youngest and most 
vulnerable first. We need to send a clear message that:

 * Refugees who are children, especially those who are unaccompanied or 
separated from their families, must be a priority; 
 * When reunification is not possible or in the best interest of the child, 
special arrangements must be made for the care and education of separated or 
unaccompanied children, including the provision of social, emotional and trauma 
support; 
 * All children fleeing conflict and unrest need access to food, shelter, 
medical care, education and child-friendly spaces throughout their journeys. In 
the countries where refugees finally settle, authorities need to provide 
children with a nurturing environment where they can learn and grow with their 
own family or other caregiver. To deliver this care, governments and relief 
organisations must allocate sufficient funds; 
 * The authorities in receiving countries have a responsibility to ensure 
proper registration, temporary care and follow-up to avoid minors becoming 
victims of trafficking, exploitation and abuse. Their asylum cases should be 
expedited. 
Related: Everything you need to know about the world humanitarian summit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/19/world-humanitarian-summit-istanbul-everything-you-need-to-know>

The UN convention on the rights of the child 
<http://www.unicef.org.uk/Documents/Publication-pdfs/UNCRC_PRESS200910web.pdf>, 
theGeneva conventions 
<https://www.icrc.org/en/war-and-law/treaties-customary-law/geneva-conventions> 
as well as many regional agreements prescribe special protections for refugee 
children. We must never shy away from using legal tools to compel governments 
everywhere to abide by their commitments, nor from reminding them that razor 
wire and border fences do not constitute a humanitarian policy.

Early intervention is critical in any humanitarian response. It’s like raising 
a child: from the very beginning, it requires a commitment to care, a long-term 
investment in education, and a promise to give the child the space to grow and 
determine their future.

The summit offers an opportunity to improve the way we help people in need. An 
absolute first step must be making sure that this event, to borrow a phrase 
from Ban, marks a turning point in the way we protect vulnerable children.

 * Carsten Völz is the chief operating officer and Andreas Papp is 
international director of emergency responseat SOS Children’s Villages 
International <http://www.sos-childrensvillages.org/> 