
A government TV ad that said “great” teachers can make up to £65,000 a year 
has been cleared, despite 140 complaints that it misrepresented potential 
salaries.

The TV ad, part of the Department for Education’s Get Into Teaching 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/teaching> campaign, featured teachers 
explaining the attributes that make people good at the job.

It ended by saying that a good teacher “probably makes more than you think”, 
citing a minimum starting salary of £22,000 to £27,000 and “up to £65,000 as a 
great teacher”.

Related: Guide Dogs ad banned for targeting children 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/09/guide-dogs-ad-banned-for-targeting-children>

The Advertising Standards Authority <http://www.theguardian.com/media/asa> 
received 140 complaints that the claim of earning up to £65,000 misrepresented 
teachers’ potential salary, with a union claiming it had been “instantly 
ridiculed” by the profession.

The DfE said that it was common practice for ads to show the bottom and top 
salaries available, and that the £65,000 was an “aspirational figure”.

Complainants were concerned that the figure was the maximum salary for the 
highest level of classroom teachers working in inner London.

Figures provided showed that in November 2014 there were 12,845 teachers who 
earned £65,000 or more; 485 of those were defined as typical classroom teachers.

The ASA noted that the ad depicted a number of teachers conducting classes in 
subjects such as sciences, Chinese and drama, but did not consider that viewers 
would infer that the salary information represented a pay scale for classroom 
teachers only.

“We considered that viewers were likely to understand that the salary 
information represented a pay scale, from starting salary to an aspirational 
but achievable salary for ‘good’ or ‘great’ teachers, including those who had 
progressed to senior or leadership roles,” said the ASA.

“We considered that most viewers would understand that the achievement of top 
range salaries would depend on a number of factors, such as location, 
responsibilities and competence.”

The ASA concluded that the DfE did not mislead viewers with the salary claim 
and did not breach the advertising code.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvTzzZaaJ9uw&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvTzzZaaJ9uw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvTzzZaaJ9uw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvTzzZaaJ9uw&media=>
 The Department for Education’s Get Into Teaching TV ad 
National Union of Teachers deputy general secretary Kevin Courtney said: “At 
one stage we were quite hopeful that the ASA would uphold the complaint.

“Considering the advert’s misleading nature, it is therefore quite surprising 
that they didn’t.

“The advert was instantly ridiculed by teachers, and they were right to do so. 
It is no surprise that the ASA received over 100 complaints. When only one in a 
thousand classroom teachers earn £65,000, it is obviously ridiculous for the 
DfE to give the impression that this is a likely salary.

“Rather than attempting to deceive the public about teaching’s financial 
rewards, the DfE needs to be addressing the issues that are having a disastrous 
effect on the profession.

“Teachers face five more years of 1% headline-pay rises and huge uncertainty 
because of the chaotic implementation of performance related pay. Workload is 
through the roof, with many hours spent on tasks that have nothing to do with 
creating exciting lessons.”

A DfE spokesman said: “We are pleased the ASA has dismissed the complaint that 
our efforts to recruit more excellent teachers were misleading. Far from being 
inaccurate, the ASA has ruled that it is right to say teachers can earn up to 
£65,000 – as many outstanding individuals do.

“Rather than repeatedly talking down the profession and complaining about 
initiatives to bring in more top graduates, the NUT should instead be working 
with us to promote the hugely rewarding career of teaching.”
