
Madame Fromage and Science Cream

A deli and cafe across two facing sites in Castle Arcade, Madame Fromage is a 
Francophile stalwart whose dedication to serving “real homemade food” is 
evident from the produce and baking displayed everywhere: dangling from the 
ceiling, stacked in the windows, in serried ranks in the appetising deli. Its 
day-time menu focuses on Breton and Welsh dishes, with main courses – such as 
filled galettes, baked camembert, beouf bourguignon and rarebit – coming in at 
around £8. However, if you take away, there are generous discounts to be had. I 
bagged a pot of Madame Fromage’s legendary lamb cawl (the well-seasoned, 
veg-packed stock had fathoms of flavour and it was full of unapologetically 
fatty, tasty chunks of lamb), and a slice of cherry and chocolate tiffin for £5.

While you are in Castle Arcade 
<http://www.visitcardiff.com/seedo/castle-arcade-2/>, do not miss the chance to 
grab dessert at the remarkableScience Cream <http://www.sciencecream.co.uk/> 
(from £3.95. 28 Castle Arcade), where the ice-cream is made to order with 
liquid nitrogen. Kids will love the science lab setup of the kitchen, just as 
adults will be thrilled by the ice-cream. Liquid nitrogen freezes the mix 
immediately so the ice crystals are tiny, which produces an exceptionally 
smooth ice-cream that is very true and clean in its flavours. Science Cream is 
not cheap, but even a small tub would satisfy two. Frankly, how can you pass up 
the chance to try some of the best ice-cream this side of Heston Blumenthal’s 
Fat Duck?
• Takeaway meals around £5. 21-25 Castle Arcade, madamefromage.co.uk 
<http://www.madamefromage.co.uk/>. Open Mon-Fri 10am-5.30pm, Sat 9.30am-5.30pm, 
Sun noon-5pm

Bar 44

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4em48%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4em48%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d02818dffc0e056a530d494aed30fe8d29ff39f%2F0_143_960_576%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20budget%20restaurants%20in%20Cardiff&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4em48%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top+10+budget+restaurants+in+Cardiff&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4em48%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d02818dffc0e056a530d494aed30fe8d29ff39f%2F0_143_960_576%2F960.jpg>
As with the better-known Ultracomida <https://www.ultracomida.co.uk/> in west 
Wales, Bar 44 is a small restaurant group (it has sites in nearby Penarth and 
Cowbridge) that serves good tapas. Its newest venue, opposite the Millennium 
Stadium, is a slick bar-restaurant where decorative Spanish touches (bright 
neo-Moorish tile work, a gallery of vintage Tío Pepe adverts) have been 
tastefully deployed. The food is similarly refined and assured and yet, between 
noon and 6pm on weekdays, you can eat three tapas for £10 or daily-changing £6 
one-pots, such as a Galician fish stew or that slow-cooked meat-and-chickpea 
concoctioncocido. Of those sharp tapas, the salad of fried crispy chickpeas, 
tomatoes and aged zamorano cheese stood out, as did the exceptionalcroquetas of 
jamon ibérico. The trembling, molten béchamel in these crisp-shelled wonders 
had taken on a funky, almost truffled earthiness thanks, in part, to the 
presence of that complex, hugely savoury ham.
• Afternoon, three tapas, £10. 15-23 Westgate Street, 029-2009 0444, 
bar44.co.uk <https://www.bar44.co.uk/>. Open Mon-Thurs, Sun 11.30am-11pm , 
Fri-Sat 11.30am-midnight

The Plan
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4em48%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4em48%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc49fb20b0e7049f32d3b8971b484cb4b9ecd45fc%2F353_803_3758_2253%2F3758.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20budget%20restaurants%20in%20Cardiff&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4em48%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top+10+budget+restaurants+in+Cardiff&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4em48%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc49fb20b0e7049f32d3b8971b484cb4b9ecd45fc%2F353_803_3758_2253%2F3758.jpg>
Cardiff’s numerous covered Victorian shopping arcades are home to several 
sound, affordable places to eat, not least this friendly, laid-back cafe-bar 
which, in its stripped-back, wooden simplicity, makes a feature of this grade 
II-listed building’s architectural details. The kitchen prides itself on its 
local sourcing and scratch-cooked honesty – across a menu that runs from 
organic chilli or aubergine curry to filled jacket potatoes. Eggs Benedict was 
everything you would want it to be: served on proper breakfast muffins, the 
organic Welsh eggs creamy and fresh, the hollandaise light, lemony and elegant. 
The Plan is also serious about its coffee (its head barista, Trevor Hyam, is a
UK Barista Championship <http://www.scaeuk.com/uk-barista-championship.php> 
finalist) and it serves an impressive flat white (£2.35).
• Breakfast dishes from £3.75, sandwiches from £5.70, mains from £7.10. Morgan 
Arcade, 28-29, 029-2039 8764,theplancafe.co.uk <http://theplancafe.co.uk/>. 
Open Mon-Fri 8.45am-5pm, Sat 8.15am-5pm, Sun (and Bank Holidays) 10am-3.30pm

Pizza Pronto

Down on Cardiff’s waterfront in the shadow of the Millennium Centre, is Pizza 
Pronto, a shipping container kitchen that dispenses 8in ovalpizzette to hungry 
office workers and clued-up visitors. No pizza was ever improved by a 
scattering of dried herbs on top but, otherwise, the base was crisp and fresh, 
the tomato sauce was fresh, and the pepperoni offered a good fiery, meaty 
flavour. This was a tasty, value-for-money snack and foodies will be tickled by 
specials that dip into trendy Italian ingredients such as the soft, spicy 
sausage ’nduja. There is space to hover and eat at ledges in the adjacent yard, 
and if you nip across the road to Portuguese bakery-cafeNata & Co 
<http://www.nataandco.co.uk/> (96 Bute Street), you can pick up a terrific 
pastel de nata custard tart for dessert (£1).

Talking of street food, visitors may also be interested in pop-up specialist 
Depot <http://depotcardiff.com/>’s warehouse-based Winter Social (£4-£7, 
Dumballs Road), which runs every Friday and Saturday until 19 December and 
brings together such well-known Cardiff outfits as Hokkei, Brother Thai and 
Science Cream.
• Pizza from £3.50. 7-8 Bute Crescent, pizzaprontopenarth.co.uk 
<http://www.pizzaprontopenarth.co.uk/>. Open Mon-Thurs 10.30am-7.30pm, Fri 
10.30am-11pm, Sat 12.30pm-11pm, closed Sun

New York Deli
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4em48%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4em48%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7ccf63b8ed651958189afe15eb5a686c357e216%2F206_0_5630_3376%2F5630.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20budget%20restaurants%20in%20Cardiff&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4em48%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top+10+budget+restaurants+in+Cardiff&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4em48%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7ccf63b8ed651958189afe15eb5a686c357e216%2F206_0_5630_3376%2F5630.jpg>
 Photograph: Alex Sedgmond 
That my “sandwich” comes with a knife and fork and several napkins tells you 
all you need to know. It is almost the size of my head. A two-man job. A 
mammoth beast. Which explains why New York Deli has become a legendary Cardiff 
troff-spot. This (until very recently, American-owned) cafe and sandwich bar 
concentrates on stuffed-to-bursting bagels, hotdogs, meatball grinders and 
hoagies (long soft rolls) and while the ingredients on my New York hoagie were 
not exactly gourmet (the pastrami needed a more stridently peppery edge), you 
cannot really go wrong with a huge mound of deli meats, Swiss cheese, coleslaw 
and sweet gherkins. Elsewhere on the menu you will find all the Big Apple 
classics: salt beef, salami, provolone, meatloaf, and while prices are high for 
a sandwich (those hoagies hover around a fiver), bear in mind that you will not 
need to eat again for hours. If not days.
• Sandwiches from £3.30. 19 High Street Arcade, Facebook.com 
<https://www.facebook.com/New-York-Deli-Cardiff-199905010054214/>

Café Malaysia
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4em48%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4em48%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd900d179aa46e569cbe3210c867092458005c7c3%2F0_34_960_576%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20budget%20restaurants%20in%20Cardiff&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4em48%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top+10+budget+restaurants+in+Cardiff&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4em48%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd900d179aa46e569cbe3210c867092458005c7c3%2F0_34_960_576%2F960.jpg>
Despite being three years old, Café Malaysia still looks like a work in 
progress. There is no visible street signage, and the dining room is a mishmash 
of minimalist Asian canteen, bare dangling hipster lightbulbs and what looks 
like the old terracotta, trattoria-style flooring from a previous business. But 
– despite the sections of corrugated tin in the ceiling – there is nothing 
provisional about its food. Its stir-fries, curries and noodle soups sing with 
precise flavours and come garnished with authentic touches (such as the 
brittle, salty dried anchovies that top thenasi lemak) that make no concession 
to prissy western diners. Every element of that dish, its coconut-infused rice, 
the moist, crispy turmeric fried chicken, its hot savoury gravy and the jammy, 
chilli-packedsambal, offered layers of flavour. Even the cucumber garnish was 
clean, cool and freshly chopped.
• Starter and main £10 at lunchtime, otherwise mains from £7.50. 101 Woodville 
Road, 029-2023 5616,cafemalaysia.co.uk <http://www.cafemalaysia.co.uk/>. Open 
Mon-Sat noon-3pm and 6pm-10pm, closed Sun

Hogwurst
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4em48%2Fsfb%23img-6&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4em48%2Fsfb%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54a3505fced1d94fea44281f2a2038b0616e448e%2F0_229_5184_3109%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20budget%20restaurants%20in%20Cardiff&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4em48%2Fstw%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top+10+budget+restaurants+in+Cardiff&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4em48%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54a3505fced1d94fea44281f2a2038b0616e448e%2F0_229_5184_3109%2F5184.jpg>
When looking for a city’s best budget eats, it always pays to make a beeline 
for the student enclaves, in this case Cathays, north of Cardiff city centre, 
which is home, to among others, the idiosyncratic Hogwurst. Ostensibly a 
homely, cluttered coffee shop lined with books and bric-a-brac, it serves jazzy 
porridge dishes and streaky bacon baps topped with crumbled hash brown in the 
mornings (how good does that sound?). Later – hence the name – it knocks-out 
high-quality hotdogs that use taut, snappy, flavoursome franks from 
Gloucester’s renownedNative Breeds <http://www.nativebreeds.co.uk/> and 
angelically light brioche rolls from Cardiff bakerAllen’s 
<http://www.allensbakery.com/>. The sloppy, liberally dispensed toppings range 
from a simple combo of sauerkraut and crispy onions to southern fried chicken 
bites with caramelised onions and barbecue sauce. The student-friendly vibe 
extends beyond the invitation to “chill out, study” on Hogwurst’s flyers to 
include 10% student discount and a bring-your-own-booze policy. All told, it 
makes Hogwurst a cost-effective night out. “Relax, it could be wurst,” runs the 
legend on the ceiling. It certainly could.
• Hotdog with fries from £6.50. 56 North Road, hogwurst.co.uk 
<http://www.hogwurst.co.uk/>

Falafel Kitchen
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4em48%2Fsfb%23img-7&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4em48%2Fsfb%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F002a7e7c15c489ee064afe1f5fd71e5b9c9c5b92%2F0_54_960_576%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20budget%20restaurants%20in%20Cardiff&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4em48%2Fstw%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top+10+budget+restaurants+in+Cardiff&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4em48%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F002a7e7c15c489ee064afe1f5fd71e5b9c9c5b92%2F0_54_960_576%2F960.jpg>
It is not often you see falafel handmade and deep-fried in front of you when 
ordering a takeaway filled pitta, but this small cafe (lunch only) clearly 
operates to its own impeccable standards. Those falafel, light and fragrant, 
and falling apart like couscous in your mouth, are stuffed into a fluffy, soft 
pitta. It’s then liberally smeared with good hummus to which you can add, from 
the self-service salad bar, myriad toppings and sauces, from tahini or terrific 
smokeybaba ganoush to red cabbage and Moroccan seasoned carrots. The wider menu 
includes such items assabich (fried aubergine) or chicken shawarma served in 
pittas or as salad plates. Throw in bottles of Budvar at £2.50 a pop and 
Falafel Kitchen is certainly worth the walk out of town up Crwys Road.
• Lunch dishes from £4.50. 76 Crwys Road, falafel-kitchen.co.uk 
<http://falafel-kitchen.co.uk/>. Open Mon-Sat 11am-3pm, closed Sun

Got Beef
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4em48%2Fsfb%23img-8&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4em48%2Fsfb%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48b04b53308bb0e30c10a9cb070a4a5dd91f771b%2F0_699_3820_2292%2F3820.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20budget%20restaurants%20in%20Cardiff&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4em48%2Fstw%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top+10+budget+restaurants+in+Cardiff&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4em48%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48b04b53308bb0e30c10a9cb070a4a5dd91f771b%2F0_699_3820_2292%2F3820.jpg>
 Photograph: Graham Pritchard 
Local burger fanatics swear by Got Beef, a new-wave burger joint two miles out 
of the city centre at the top of Cathays. In many ways, it is modern and 
on-point: decent skin-on chips, very good brioche buns, small craft beer 
selection. However, my sample burger was one of those sweet, densely packed 
Welsh Black, steak-style burgers that seem to be uniquely popular in Wales, 
despite the fact the rest of the UK increasingly favours loose-packed, coarse 
ground, prominently beefy patties. That said, this was an enjoyable burger, 
lifted, particularly, by Got Beef’s tangy “secret recipe” sauce, which is a 
dead-ringer for the garnish on McDonald’s Big Mac. And yes, that is meant as a 
compliment.
• Meals from £8.95. 83 Whitchurch Road, gotbeef.co.uk 
<http://www.gotbeef.co.uk/>. Open Tues-Sun noon-10pm, closed Mon

Kumar’s
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4em48%2Fsfb%23img-9&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4em48%2Fsfb%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef717cab6ae9be4b39086090d08f01ef6405986e%2F0_52_960_576%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20budget%20restaurants%20in%20Cardiff&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4em48%2Fstw%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top+10+budget+restaurants+in+Cardiff&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4em48%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef717cab6ae9be4b39086090d08f01ef6405986e%2F0_52_960_576%2F960.jpg>
It would be easy to overlook Kumar’s among the numerous restaurants that line 
City Road, but this humble south Indian food spot is knocking out some 
seriously accomplished, freshly cooked and assiduously spiced food. Its lacy, 
pancake-likedosa is crisp and ever-so-slightly chewy at the edges, softer near 
the centre, slightly lactic in flavour and partnered with fine chutneys and a
sambar, that, like the best examples, tastes like an amazingly hot and savoury 
winter broth. It is the Indian equivalent of a hug in a mug. Kumar’s dhals are 
similarly good. The yellow lentil and spinachpalak had many dimensions of 
flavour. Fresh spices and chillies were evident in every mouthful. Talking of 
Indian food, if you are looking for something novel, tryKatiwok 
<http://www.katiwok.co.uk/> (from £4.99, 53 Crwys Road, 029-2037 6222). It is 
best known for its eponymouskati rolls, that Indian street food that sees 
spiced, grilled meats wrapped in aparatha, like an Asian burrito.
• Set lunch £7-£8, mains from around £6. 129 City Road, 029-2009 4094, 
Facebook.com <https://www.facebook.com/Kumars-Restaurant-271024336404520/>

Travel between Manchester and Cardiff was provided by Arriva Trains Wales, 
arrivatrainswales.co.uk <http://www.arrivatrainswales.co.uk/>
