
Promoting abstinence as part of HIV prevention programmes in sub-Saharan Africa
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> has failed to reduce risky sexual 
behaviour, a study has found.

 Some US-funded programmes, including the US president’s emergency plan for 
Aids relief (Pepfar <http://www.pepfar.gov/>), promote abstinence from sex and 
faithfulness to one sexual partner as a way to prevent HIV transmission.

 But research “provides mixed evidence on the efficacy” of abstinence and 
faithfulness promotion, says the study.

Related: Mozambique's enduring discrimation leaves gay men untreated for HIV | 
Andrew Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/29/mozambiques-enduring-discrimation-leaves-gay-men-untreated-for-hiv>

 Pepfar was “the largest funder of abstinence and faithfulness programming in 
sub-Saharan Africa, with a cumulative investment of over $1.4bn [£960m] in 
2004-13”, according to the paper,published in the May issue of Health Affairs 
<http://content.healthaffairs.org/content/35/5/856>.

 But the authors “were not able to detect any population-level benefit from 
this programme”, saidlead author Nathan Lo, a medical PhD candidate at Stanford 
University in the US 
<http://med.stanford.edu/news/all-news/2016/05/promoting-abstinence-fidelity-for-hiv-prevention-is-ineffective.html>
.

 Using figures from the US-funded Demographic and Health Surveys 
<http://www.dhsprogram.com/> database, Lo’s team found no significant 
difference in “high-risk sexual behaviours” between people in 14 African 
countries that received Pepfar support for abstinence and faithfulness between 
1998 and 2013, and those in eight countries that did not receive such funding.

 The team compared the reported numbers of sexual partners in the past year, 
the ages at first sexual intercourse and the rates of teenage pregnancy in both 
groups of countries. They found “no evidence” that Pepfar funding improved any 
of these outcomes, and suggest that HIV prevention should focus on other 
funding priorities that may “yield greater health benefits”, such as 
distributing free condoms and educating people on risk.

The study included a representative sample of about 478,000 people under 30 
years old in the 14 countries where Pepfar was active, but the researchers were 
unable to distinguish between those the abstinence programmes within each 
country did or did not reach.

Related: Shuga: the taboo-breaking African TV show confronting unsafe sex and 
HIV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/30/shuga-mtv-african-tv-show-safe-sex-hiv>



“I would not conclude [from this research] that abstinence promotion does not 
work,” says Justin Parkhurst, a global health policy researcher at the London 
School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine.

Abstinence education is not a simple variable that works on everybody in the 
same way, like some vaccines or drugs, Parkhurst explains. “If a goal of a 
programme is to reduce coital frequency, or delay onset of sex, this needs to 
be done in ways that take into account the reasons why people are engaging in 
these practices in the first place,” he says.

“Simply telling people to abstain is unlikely to achieve results – and telling 
people what to do is a pretty poor way to try to promote a behaviour in any 
case.”

 Sarah Hand, chief executive officer of UK charity Avert 
<http://www.avert.org/>, which provides HIV and Aids prevention services in 
sub-Saharan Africa, echoed Parkhurst’s comments.

 Lo’s paper “reminds us that it’s vital not to look for quick fixes in HIV 
prevention”, she said. On the contrary, fighting HIV transmission requires 
long-term interventions that take into account the sexual norms and practices, 
and the social and religious context of people who are vulnerable to HIV, “not 
just the mechanics of how one becomes infected”, Hand said.

 Parkhurst agreed about the need for cultural perspective. “Telling people to 
not have sex is incredibly complicated,” he said, adding that HIV prevention 
workers need to understand a community’s context to tailor their message to its 
needs.
