
Hugo Young, who wrote a twice-weekly column in the Guardian from the time he 
joined the paper in 1984 until his death in 2003, is widely considered one of 
the greatest British political journalists of the modern era. Eloquent, 
judicious, authoritative and profoundly moral, he was an indefatigable critic 
of Margaret Thatcher and an equally passionate pro-European.


His final book, This Blessed Plot, published in 1998, ruthlessly dissected 
what he saw as the failure of successive British leaders to guide the country 
to its destiny at the heart ofEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. In this essay, published the 
following year before the launch of the euro, Young explains his journey from 
“Euro-agnostic” to European.

Some of it is of its time, and on the single currency itself, Young – with the 
benefit of hindsight – seems to have been proven wrong. But days before a 
referendum that could eject Britain from the EU altogether, its account of the 
“demons and panics” of British exceptionalism that have “seduced generations of 
our politicians into believing ‘Europe’ is somewhere to escape from” seems more 
relevant than ever.

Jon Henley <http://www.theguardian.com/profile/jonhenley>, European affairs 
correspondent, the Guardian
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y3j6%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y3j6%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F642745a0e0abc1350af3f254e1f32bbdcddff926%2F0_0_1676_2686%2F1676.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98The%20Eurosceptics%E2%80%99%20Little%20England%20is%20a%20claustrophobic%20timewarp%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20why%20I%E2%80%99m%20glad%20to%20be%20a%20European&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y3j6%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98The+Eurosceptics%E2%80%99+Little+England+is+a+claustrophobic+timewarp%E2%80%99+%E2%80%93+why+I%E2%80%99m+glad+to+be+a+European&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y3j6%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F642745a0e0abc1350af3f254e1f32bbdcddff926%2F0_0_1676_2686%2F1676.jpg>
 Hugo Young , July 1996. Photograph: The Guardian 
As a boy, I was entirely English. There was nothing else to be. This was true 
even though an education by Catholic monks offered alternative possibilities. 
Henry VIII, we learned, was a very bad man, and the heretics burned at the 
stake by Mary Tudor deserved their fate, whereas the victims of Elizabeth were 
martyrs and saints. The arrival from Holland of William of Orange, displacing 
the Catholic Stuarts in 1688, far from inaugurating the Glorious Revolution 
from which, as I now believe, most British constitutional freedom flowed, was a 
disaster for the one true faith.

This bias in the teaching of history didn’t touch our real allegiances in 
everything that mattered: cricket, soccer, rugby, the ubiquitous redness of the 
map, the naturally British order of things. Allegiance, with victory as its 
quest, was the habit that school instilled in me: gangs, cliques, houses, 
teams, Sheffield Utd FC, the Yorkshire County Cricket Club and all who played 
in it. There had to be something to support, and on the international plane 
Britain, or England, had to win.

This tendency stayed with me for many years. It has never really gone. When 
Brits do well, it still gives me a warm glow. Cricket continues to matter, 
especially when Darren Gough plays a blinder, and partisanship defeated all 
temptations (those swilling lager louts, the union jack as offensive weapon) to 
forget the World Cup was going on. I’m obscurely glad thatSimon Rattle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/18/the-seasons-review-simon-rattle-lso-haydn-barbican>
 is British. When a great British movie, such asSecrets and Lies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/aug/30/secrets-and-lies-best-british-films>
, captures the world, its national origin matters. When theSAS took the first 
Serbian war criminals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/aug/03/former-yugoslavia-war-crimes-hunt>
, I remember feeling quietly pleased it was us.

My esteem for Britishness also stretches into professional fields. We do some 
governmental things better than other people, and should want to keep it that 
way. Our public life is relatively honest, our judges are straight, almost all 
our politicians selflessly industrious. Our parliament is a living thing. As 
for our history, it is a wonderment, reaching out from this tiny island, 
producer of a language and a literature and a record of power that the people 
of pretty well every other nation must regard with awe.

So I can confess to being disgracefully congruent with a typical reader of the 
Daily Telegraph. And in the early days of “Europe”, this collection of 
awarenesses sheltered me from the new cause. Voting yes inthe 1975 referendum 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/25/britains-1975-europe-referendum-what-was-it-like-last-time>
 was a routine orthodoxy, shared with two-thirds of the British people, 
including quite a number who now seem to have changed their minds. For years, I 
never felt zeal for either side.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y3j6%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y3j6%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa223a34dab5342229e4c190e36579996600b82e6%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98The%20Eurosceptics%E2%80%99%20Little%20England%20is%20a%20claustrophobic%20timewarp%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20why%20I%E2%80%99m%20glad%20to%20be%20a%20European&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y3j6%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98The+Eurosceptics%E2%80%99+Little+England+is+a+claustrophobic+timewarp%E2%80%99+%E2%80%93+why+I%E2%80%99m+glad+to+be+a+European&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y3j6%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa223a34dab5342229e4c190e36579996600b82e6%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 European street scene … Barcelona’s Ribera district. Photograph: Alamy Stock 
Photo 
But now I do, and I wonder why. What has happened, while the majority 
allegiance appears to have gone into reverse, to push me effortlessly the other 
way? The initiation began with a book I wrote about the history of these 
matters. I started work onThis Blessed Plot 
<http://www.lrb.co.uk/v20/n24/ian-gilmour/hauteur> as a Euro-agnostic, but 
completed it a few years later in a state of struggling incredulity at the 
demons and panics I had uncovered: the British exceptionalism that has seduced 
generations of our politicians into believing that “Europe” is somewhere to 
escape from: the hallucinations, both positive and negative, that have driven 
so much of the British debate for so long.

Having begun with the idea of writing a history that might call itself 
detached, I found myself in a process of self-instruction that now concludes, 
as the new currency gets under way, with the great simplicity of describing why 
I am a European.

The most obvious but least relevant part of this is cultural. It’s easy to say 
how keenly I adore Schubert, and wallow in Proust, and am anticipating my next 
journey to consort with the shades of Virgil in the Roman Forum. But this is 
almost completely beside the point. European culture is the world’s 
inheritance, absorbed on every continent, and the ability to appreciate the 
works of Johann Sebastian Bach, or even to speak his language, says nothing 
important about anyone’s sense of “being” a European.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y3j6%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y3j6%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd64eb45b07e19d1b6dc24f4647f28348794c29b%2F0_107_1152_1440%2F1152.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98The%20Eurosceptics%E2%80%99%20Little%20England%20is%20a%20claustrophobic%20timewarp%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20why%20I%E2%80%99m%20glad%20to%20be%20a%20European&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y3j6%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98The+Eurosceptics%E2%80%99+Little+England+is+a+claustrophobic+timewarp%E2%80%99+%E2%80%93+why+I%E2%80%99m+glad+to+be+a+European&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y3j6%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd64eb45b07e19d1b6dc24f4647f28348794c29b%2F0_107_1152_1440%2F1152.jpg>
 Michael Portillo, Brexit supporter. Photograph: Don McPhee for the Guardian 
Even Peter Lilley <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peter_Lilley> loves 
Michelangelo, as he and his colleagues never cease to explain, by way of 
proving that they are not anti-Europe, merely anti-“Europe”: the European 
Union, the artefact of federalists, the dismal construct that has illicitly 
purloined the received identity of what Europe is held to mean these days. 
Lilley has a house in France, andMichael Portillo 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/may/09/portillo-call-exit-eu> has 
roots in Spain, and there’s a cross-party agreement that Umbro-Tuscany is where 
the British political classes most like to take their holidays. Does this not 
show their uninsular engagement with the continent, and expose the calumny that 
they might be Europhobic?

But the test cannot be who has heard more versions of The Ring between 
Bayreuth and Covent Garden. As the boy becomes a man, the discovery that 
Shakespeare has a peer-group who write in different tongues may begin to 
broaden the mind. It is helpful to learn that these are not rival cultures, a 
zero-sum game of allegiance, but that they mingled and grew together. This 
discovery makes no demand on anyone’s sense of belonging. Though the 
Conservative government proposeda ban on Beethoven’s Ninth as the theme music 
for Euro 96 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/beethoven-loses-after-extra-rhyme-1349766.html>
, a football competition staged in England, it’s safest to say that a taste for 
the Renaissance and Enlightenment is too universal to be significant. Like the 
travel, it proves nothing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y3j6%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y3j6%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0903081787cd0634971400d1a2dfdba1ce4cc038%2F0_107_1536_922%2F1536.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98The%20Eurosceptics%E2%80%99%20Little%20England%20is%20a%20claustrophobic%20timewarp%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20why%20I%E2%80%99m%20glad%20to%20be%20a%20European&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y3j6%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98The+Eurosceptics%E2%80%99+Little+England+is+a+claustrophobic+timewarp%E2%80%99+%E2%80%93+why+I%E2%80%99m+glad+to+be+a+European&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y3j6%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0903081787cd0634971400d1a2dfdba1ce4cc038%2F0_107_1536_922%2F1536.jpg>
 England fans before the start of the Euro 96 quarter final clash against 
Spain, at Wembley. Photograph: Adam Butler/PA 
Very soon, therefore, what raises itself is the political question. About the 
culture, there is no issue. It may be important to many Eurosceptics to be able 
to say that because they love Mozart, they love Europe, but this isn’t what the 
argument is about. The division between the pro- and anti-Europeans is, in the 
real world, about nothing more or less than theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>. Everything else is sand in your eyes, 
an evasion. The EU, enlarged, or not: reformed, or not: with or without all its 
multiple imperfections, is the only item on the agenda.

It is not possible to be a European, in any meaningful sense, while opposing 
the EU. And it is not possible to support the EU without also supporting the 
success of the euro, and the belonging to the euro of every country that wants 
to call itself European.

I can think of many points which, added together, make a formidable critique 
of the EU. Its bureaucracy is strong, its democracy is weak, its accountability 
is seriously under-developed. The complexity of its tasks is always in danger 
of overwhelming the consensus needed to carry them out. Getting it to act 
demands formidable energy and patience and willpower from national leaders. 
Ensuring the singleness of the market it purports to be is work that is far 
from completed.

Equally, I can make the case against the euro, a project that fills those who 
support it with almost as much anxiety as it does excitement. Will this risk, 
which includes a repudiation of nationhood as traditionally understood, pay 
off? Will its hazards be sustainable? Is the closer political integration, 
which it undoubtedly foretells, something that the members, with or without 
Britain, have the wit, will and wisdom to express in acceptable forms? These 
questions don’t fill me with horror. Their terrain awaits a long unfolding. 
They assume a process not voluntarily attempted anywhere in history: tampering, 
by common agreement, with aspects of national identity, and working to create, 
in limited but significant aspects, a new kind of consciousness. To modify the 
nationstate throughout Europe is an extraordinary ambition, full of risks and 
difficulties. Yet if I am ever tempted to despair of it, I need only remind 
myself of the alternative world summoned up by those, most ferociously in 
Britain, who devote passion to dismantling it.

They have had a long time to describe this non-European Britain, and the 
picture, where it is clear, is not persuasive. I conclude that it is not meant 
to be. Portillo wrote not long ago that even to ask the question was 
“extraordinary”. All the future has to satisfy, in the minds of many 
Eurosceptics, is the need not to be “European”. As long as it meets that test, 
the details hardly matter.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y3j6%2Fsfb%23img-6&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y3j6%2Fsfb%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F894b56b960d767fd575df883523f1c9e3c9482af%2F214_150_3005_1803%2F3005.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98The%20Eurosceptics%E2%80%99%20Little%20England%20is%20a%20claustrophobic%20timewarp%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20why%20I%E2%80%99m%20glad%20to%20be%20a%20European&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y3j6%2Fstw%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98The+Eurosceptics%E2%80%99+Little+England+is+a+claustrophobic+timewarp%E2%80%99+%E2%80%93+why+I%E2%80%99m+glad+to+be+a+European&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y3j6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F894b56b960d767fd575df883523f1c9e3c9482af%2F214_150_3005_1803%2F3005.jpg>
 Conservative party conference, 2004. David Willetts. Photograph: Martin Argles 
for the Guardian 
Thus, Little England (Scotland will be long gone from this) is, incorrigibly, 
a straitened place. Striving to define it,David Willetts 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/David_Willetts>, a Tory front-bencher, wrote a 
pamphlet, Who Do We Think We Are?, which, as well as saying our politics and 
economics were different from Europe, made much of the changing of the guard 
and wensleydale cheese, calling in support some ancient paragraphs from TS 
Eliot and George Orwell to exalt the eternal timewarp in which England must be 
lodged.

In all these tracts, the mystic chords of memory echo. Betraying history is 
most unimaginable, while predicting the future is subsumed into fantasy: the 
dream of an independent Britain, freed to assert her famous sovereignty, 
throwing herself on the mercy and markets of the non-European world.

So the anti-Europe cave is claustrophobic. It is also being refilled (for we 
have been here before) with futile arrogance, making it obligatory not merely 
to criticise Brussels but abominate the Germans, laugh about the French, find 
nothing good to say about another European country, lest this betray our 
beleaguered sense of Britishness. A smart-ass headline writer in the Sun can 
get attention when the BBC finds an item of punning xenophobia so funny as to 
be worth a mention in the news.

At the heart of this is an impenetrable contradiction in the anti-Europe 
British mind. It cannot decide between terror and disdain. Britain is 
apparently so great, as well as so different, a place that she can afford to do 
without her continental hinterland. But she is so puny, so endangered, so 
destined to lose every argument with the continentals, that she must fear for 
her identity if and when she makes the final commitment to belong among them. 
Studying the movements of sceptic thought, I see in their inability to provide 
a clear answer on this fundamental point a mirror of the vacillations, pro- and 
anti-Europe, that mark the personal histories of so many of the characters in 
the story. Either way, the conclusion points in the anti-Europe direction.

The euro presents massive political challenges, but there seems no point in 
being outside it, since our future – the only future anyone has been able, with 
any respect for realism, to describe – is entirely bound up with its success or 
failure. Far from the development of “Europe” being a conceptual barrier to 
belonging, it’s the very reason why belonging ought soon to be seen as 
essential. I know the snags, and will argue for some radical political reform, 
but the European-ness of the euro is what makes it an exciting and benign 
adventure. We need to be a part. It should be Britain’s own millennial leap, 
away from the century of nation-statehood, into a new time. All our neighbours 
are seeking a different way of bringing a better life to the continent and its 
regions.

What is so strange about Britain – so particular, so fearful, so otherworldly 
- that she should decide to withhold her unique wisdom from the enterprise? I 
can reject the premise of the question because I have grown up. Allegiance, to 
me, no longer has to be so exclusive. I still need it, as a psychic prop, a way 
of belonging. But the threat to the national identity now strikes me as bogus. 
This categorising is what anti-Europe people insist on, but the best evidence 
of its falsity is to be found in the places that have been part of the new 
Europe for 40 years, as against our 25.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y3j6%2Fsfb%23img-7&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y3j6%2Fsfb%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3cbadfa7f18a3084492259fff330f79070feb6a2%2F0_70_1458_875%2F1458.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98The%20Eurosceptics%E2%80%99%20Little%20England%20is%20a%20claustrophobic%20timewarp%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20why%20I%E2%80%99m%20glad%20to%20be%20a%20European&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y3j6%2Fstw%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98The+Eurosceptics%E2%80%99+Little+England+is+a+claustrophobic+timewarp%E2%80%99+%E2%80%93+why+I%E2%80%99m+glad+to+be+a+European&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y3j6%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3cbadfa7f18a3084492259fff330f79070feb6a2%2F0_70_1458_875%2F1458.jpg>
 Queen Elizabeth II silver jubilee mug , 1977. Photograph: Alamy 
Would anyone claim that Germany is less German as a result of the experience? 
We are all invaded by America. If cultural defences are needed, it’s against 
transatlantic domination. But do I hear a single soul, on either side of the 
Channel, contend that France is less French than it ever was because of the EU? 
So it will be with Britain. This reality won’t come easy. Decades of propaganda 
defining national identity in the language of scorn for other nations cannot be 
wiped out at a stroke. Persuading the British that they are allowed to be 
European should be the simplest task, yet the accretions of history, 
manipulated by frightened politicians, make it difficult.

Though the Queen in parliament already looks like a bejewelled dot on the 
ocean of the global economy, there are voices that insist the only way of being 
British is by proclaiming her supremacy.

Redefining identity is not a task for the furtive. It cannot be done by the 
back door: another lesson of history. Nor will it be easily done by political 
leaders who still feel obliged to stand aside from the project they think they 
eventually want to join. But neither should the work be too alarming. In the 
21st century, it will be exciting to escape from history into geography: from 
the prison of the past into a future that permits us at last the luxury of 
having it both ways: British and European.

This is an edited version of a piece written by Hugo Young, then the 
Guardian’s senior political commentator, in 1999 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/1999/jan/02/books.guardianreview>
