
The herbaceous border is the ultimate demonstration of gardening skill: a 
masterpiece of juxtaposed shapes, colours and textures, all reaching a climax 
in the summer months. It has humble origins in cottage gardens, where flowers 
for cutting rubbed along with vegetables, but the herbaceous border was dragged,
Eliza Doolittle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/apr/18/real-eliza-doolittle-pygmalion>
-style, into horticultural high fashion by William Robinson and his 1883 book
The English Flower Garden 
<https://archive.org/details/englishflowerga00unkngoog>. He proposed moving 
away from the vogue carpet bedding towards a looser, more natural planting.

The style was taken up in the gardens of grand country houses and suburban 
villas alike, and has been a mainstay of British gardens ever since, mainly 
because a good one is such a very lovely thing. See a herbaceous border in full 
swing and you would imagine botanical knowledge, planting skill and an 
excellent design eye would be needed to pull it off with aplomb.

In fact, it’s not so very tricky – but it is easy to see why a beginner or a 
less confident gardener might feel daunted by the grand history of the border. 
There is a certain level of knowhow about habits and flowering times that is 
handy, if not essential, if you are going to plan a border and plant it all up 
at once. You don’t have to do it this way, of course: you can just pick a 
colour theme, start planting, and fill in with matching and contrasting plants 
as the season and the years go on. But there is a great deal of satisfaction to 
be had from having a plan laid out in front of you and getting all the plants 
into the ground at once. At the explosive rate herbaceous perennials grow, you 
could plan today, plant tomorrow and have a fully flowering border within 
months.

Luckily there are several ways in which you can cheat at the planning and 
creation stage if you haven’t spent five years learning at the knee of the head 
gardener of a country house estate.

Online guidance

Several sites will give you a good starting point and nudge you in the right 
direction if you want to have a go at planning your own border. The obvious 
place to begin is theRoyal Horticultural Society’s website 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/advice/design/design-with-plants>. It provides a list 
of planting styles (contemporary, formal, wildlife-friendly and so on) and then 
a list of plants that will help you to create that style. TheBurncoose Nurseries
 <http://www.burncoose.co.uk/site/category.cfm?cat_id=1184> website offers a 
similar service, though it focuses less on borders and more on designing whole 
gardens. But within each of the planting styles it suggests, it lists 12 
suitable plants and encourages you to have a go at designing with them. The 
beauty here is that you can then click on the link to each plant, pop it into a 
basket and, when you are finished, buy a whole border’s worth.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jj84%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jj84%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ab9225ad502416feacd26aa045f18b538ac2e87%2F0_0_6048_4032%2F6048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gardening%20for%20beginners%3A%20the%20cheat%E2%80%99s%20guide%20to%20herbaceous%20borders&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jj84%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gardening+for+beginners%3A+the+cheat%E2%80%99s+guide+to+herbaceous+borders&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jj84%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ab9225ad502416feacd26aa045f18b538ac2e87%2F0_0_6048_4032%2F6048.jpg>
 Wildlife-friendly clary sage, valerian, Macedonian scabious and centranthus. 
Photograph: Alamy 
Ready-made plans

For a little more hand-holding, turn to companies that have created 
ready-planned borders.Garden On A Roll <http://www.gardenonaroll.com> is one 
that really does everything bar the digging: not only has it designed borders, 
it has printed the designs on to biodegradable paper, to be laid on the earth 
and planted through. Cover the paper with mulch and it will soon rot away. It 
is an excellent way to be guided through the planting process, though the 
choice of colours and themes is not particularly wide. Prices start at £65 for 
two metres.

Slightly more inspiring to my eyes is the range of border designs from Crocus 
<http://www.crocus.co.uk/ready-made-borders/>, which includes such tempting 
fare as Soft Summer, Azure and Gold, and Lady Marmalade, as well as sensible 
designs for particular environments, including Shady Sanctuary (a 
magical-looking scheme featuring wild ginger, oak-leaved hydrangea, ostrich 
fern and lily of the valley), Woodland Edge and Sun Lovers.

Related: ‘Grow three herbs and build up’ – the millennial’s guide to gardening 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/shortcuts/2016/may/23/little-things-big-things-grow-beginners-guide-gardening>

But pipping these has to be the new Beth Chatto Gardens Collection 
<http://www.bethchatto.co.uk/the-beth-chatto-gardens-collection/>, designed by 
the revered plantswoman to help unconfident gardeners put together borders in 
tricky areas. Chatto is famous for her beautiful pioneering gardens built on 
parched gravel and boggy ditches, and so it is just right that she has focused 
on trouble zones, with collections of drought-resistant plants, moisture and 
shade lovers. They will help you do right by your awkward spots, and in style.

Call in the designers

If even these options worry you, consider getting in touch with a garden 
designer. They don’t only redesign whole plots: many will happily draw up a 
planting plan designed around your own border shapes and garden conditions. By 
going down this route, you can include favourite plants and draw on the 
designer’s experience in finding others to complement them. Look on theSociety 
of Garden Designers’ website <http://www.sgd.org.uk> to find one near you, or 
Google a local designer and ask to see photographs of their borders in flower 
for reassurance and inspiration. Whichever way you go about it, a lack of 
confidence in choosing your own plants is really no reason to deny yourself a 
border bursting with colour this summer.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jj84%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jj84%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9769fda56463eb04f3ca7e79419decdba82bba37%2F0_0_5407_3514%2F5407.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gardening%20for%20beginners%3A%20the%20cheat%E2%80%99s%20guide%20to%20herbaceous%20borders&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jj84%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gardening+for+beginners%3A+the+cheat%E2%80%99s+guide+to+herbaceous+borders&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jj84%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9769fda56463eb04f3ca7e79419decdba82bba37%2F0_0_5407_3514%2F5407.jpg>
 A golden border with heleniums, fennel, oregano and veronicastrums. 
Photograph: Alamy 
Herbaceous perennials: the basics

A herbaceous perennial is a hardy plant that dies down in autumn, but only to 
its roots. These stay alive through winter, and in spring the plant starts into 
life again. It will put on a huge amount of healthy, fresh growth from these 
raring-to-go roots in a season, so will very quickly reach flowering size from 
nothing.

It will be in situ for years, so if there are any perennial weeds in the 
ground when you plant, they can become a real problem. Make sure you clear the 
ground completely first, taking care to remove all traces of roots.

Perennials’ quick and lusty growth means they are hungry plants and can 
deplete the soil quickly, so enrich it with compost or well-rotted manure 
before planting, then feed every spring with chicken manure pellets or similar. 
After a few years, flowering can decrease, but you can rejuvenate the plants by 
digging them up, splitting them and replanting. Every winter the foliage will 
die down, leaving dead stems behind. Keep these in place over winter for small 
insects to use as homes, then cut down in spring in time for the flush of new 
growth.
