
In September last year, 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2013/sep/17/irish-independent-ireland>
 I reported that one of Ireland’s leading investigative journalists, Gemma 
O’Doherty, had been fired by the Irish Independent after being called “a rogue 
reporter”.

Having looked into her case, I thought the compulsory redundancy of the multi 
award-winning reporter was a scandal. So I am delighted to report today that 
she has been, to use her own phrase, “fully vindicated”.

 The paper’s owners, Independent News & Media (INM), unreservedly apologised 
to her, paid her an undisclosed sum in damages and agreed to cover her legal 
costs.

The statement issued by the publisher could not be more grovelling:

“Independent Newspapers wish to acknowledge the exceptional work of 
multi-award winning investigative journalist Gemma O’Doherty for theIrish 
Independent <http://www.theguardian.com/media/irish-independent> during the 
course of a lengthy career.

Independent Newspapers accept that Gemma O’Doherty has acted at all times in a 
professional and diligent manner and in the best interests of Independent
Newspapers <http://www.theguardian.com/media/newspapers>.

Independent Newspapers unreservedly apologise to Ms O ‘Doherty for the stress 
and hardship caused to her and her husband as a result of its actions.

Independent Newspapers have agreed to pay to Ms O’Doherty undisclosed damages 
and to indemnify her in relation to her legal costs.”

O’Doherty had launched an unfair dismissal action against Independent 
Newspapers at Ireland’s employment appeals tribunal.

She was made redundant in August 2013 after working for the company for more 
than 18 years, during which she had been responsible for breaking many major 
stories.

Her redundancy followed a conflict with her bosses after she called at the 
home of former Irish police commissioner, Martin Callinan, as part of her 
investigation into the widespread wiping of driving licence penalty points.

The Irish Independent maintained that the Callinan visit played no part in her 
departure. If it wasn’t that, however, O’Doherty - in company with several 
colleagues and many other Irish journalists - could not fathom why she should 
have been fired.

The Callinan incident happened in April 2013. It resulted in Stephen Rae, 
editor-in-chief of the Independent titles, calling her “a rogue reporter” for 
approaching the police chief without editorial permission.

Weeks later, she was informed that she was to be made redundant. She refused 
to go voluntarily and was told she would be made compulsorily redundant (the 
only Independent journalist to suffer that indignity).

These incidents were the culmination of years of dogged, single-minded 
investigative journalism by O’Doherty that brought her into conflict with 
senior police officers, leading politicians, the judiciary and the prosecuting 
authorities.

At the time, the Irish secretary of the National Union of Journalists, Seamus 
Dooley, said: “We believe she has been badly treated and has a case for unfair 
dismissal.”

Today, Dooley said: “We welcome the outcome and the settlement of Gemma’s 
case, and we congratulate her.”

This is only stage one of O’Doherty’s cases against Independent Newspapers. 
She also sued the paper for defamation, and I understand that the company has 
also caved in on that action too. A statement is set to follow.

At the time of writing, I am awaiting a call back from Stephen Rae.


Sources: Irish Times 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/news/ireland/irish-news/journalist-gemma-o-doherty-settles-unfair-dismissals-case-against-independent-1.2046453>
/RTE <http://www.rte.ie/news/2014/1222/668445-odoherty/>/Irish Independent 
<http://www.independent.ie/irish-news/courts/inm-settles-employment-appeals-case-with-gemma-odoherty-30855578.html>
/NUJ
