
Moneysupermarket’s ad featuring a man strutting and twerking in high heels and 
denim hot pants was the most complained-about TV ad in the UK last year.

The TV ad, part of the brand’s “So Moneysupermarket” campaign about consumers 
who have saved cash using the price comparison website, features middle-aged 
“Dave” in an “epic strut” through London’s streets while Sharon Osbourne looks 
on.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_3qZbeRlhrQ&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_3qZbeRlhrQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_3qZbeRlhrQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_3qZbeRlhrQ&media=>
 Moneysupermarket’s ‘Epic Strut’ ad 
The Advertising Standards Authority <http://www.theguardian.com/media/asa> 
received 1,513 complaints from outraged members of the public who felt the ad 
was offensive, although the ad watchdog cleared it of any breach of the UK ad 
code.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hxvb%2Fsfb%23img-1&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hxvb%2Fsfb%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2d6d4d1614689f9869ce0d2a9800e1cac7f5d35%2F0_0_1000_1600%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Moneysupermarket's%20strutting%20man%20in%20hotpants%20tops%202015%20complaints%20list&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hxvb%2Fstw%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Moneysupermarket%27s+strutting+man+in+hotpants+tops+2015+complaints+list&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hxvb%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2d6d4d1614689f9869ce0d2a9800e1cac7f5d35%2F0_0_1000_1600%2F1000.jpg>
 The top ten most complained about ads – 2015 
Moneysupermarket’s ad pales in the offensiveness stakes compared with Paddy 
Power’s 2014 winner, which offered money back if Oscar Pistorious “walked” from 
his murder trial, which is themost complained about ad of all time 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/feb/20/paddy-power-oscar-pistorius-ad-complaints-2014-asa>
 with 5,525.


Booking.com’s tongue-in-cheek use of the word “booking” as a substitute for 
the “F-word” continues to offend, with the travel website taking three of the 
top 10 places in the most complained about list for 2015.

Following on from 2014’s second place 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/feb/20/paddy-power-oscar-pistorius-ad-complaints-2014-asa>
 (1,768 complaints), Booking.com took second, fourth and seventh last year 
totalling 1,291 complaints. None of the ads were found to break the UK code.

The top five also featured PayPal, which amassed 464 complaints for a festive 
ad parents feltruined Christmas for suggesting that Santa was not real 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/nov/03/paypal-christmas-ad-gets-hundreds-of-complaints-for-implying-santa-isnt-real>
. Not upheld, said the ASA.

And fifth spot went to Protein World’s “beach body ready” posters 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/apr/29/beach-body-ready-ad-faces-formal-inquiry-as-campaign-sparks-outrage>
, which 380 people felt were offensive for using a bikini-clad woman and 
promoting an unhealthy sense of body image.

The ASA said the ad did not break rules relating to serious or widespread 
offence, but did order changes to Protein World’s claims about health and 
weight loss.

“Our top 10 for 2015 will no doubt get people talking about [whether] the ads 
are or aren’t offensive,” said the ASA chief executive, Guy Parker. “While 
matters of offence can grab the headlines, the bulk of our work is the less 
glamorous task of tackling misleading advertising.”

The top 10 also included a smattering of charity and public health campaigns, 
which often attract attention for using hard-hitting techniques or for being 
focused on sensitive subjects.

These included an ad for the British Heart Foundation and an anti-smoking 
campaign by the Department of Health.
