
The diverse NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> workforce is working 
tirelessly to meet an ever-increasing demand on the health service. People need 
help to keep pace with the more complex and longer term needs of those they 
serve. I argue we need to look differently at staffing in two ways. Firstly a 
focus on learning the lessons of how new ways of working can help our patients, 
and secondly addressing the real variation in the experience of our people.


Our report with the Nuffield Trust 
<http://www.nuffieldtrust.org.uk/sites/files/nuffield/publication/reshaping_the_workforce_web_0.pdf>
 looking at how we can reshape a future workforce recommended that those 
registered care professionals (nurses, allied health professionals and 
pharmacists) already working for us could be better enabled to deliver care by 
developing new clinical roles and developing the scope and extent of their 
practice. It also highlighted that the training of non-clinical staff to 
support patient care will help meet the changing needs of people today, but it 
will also mark a radical shift in the way that our workforce today is 
structured.

Employers are already taking steps across the health service to cope with 
rising demand but we need to learn from the examples that are working well and 
help employers to think about how they can introduce new roles where it meets 
the needs of their local population. At theNHS Confederation conference 
<http://www.nhsconfed.org/conference> Bradford District Care will talk about 
how they managed to create a successful new role to meet the needs of their 
patients.

Learning and applying the lessons from examples such as Bradford will be 
really important for employers to address their challenges locally. They cannot 
however do this alone, and we must ensure that national interventions support 
the changes that are needed. This includes regulation of new roles such as the
physician associate 
<https://www.healthcareers.nhs.uk/explore-roles/physician-associateassistant/physician-associate>
 (I would propose by theHealth and Care Professions Council 
<http://www.hcpc-uk.co.uk/>) as well as recognising that greater progress is 
needed to support, for example, prescribing by non-medical clinical staff. It 
also includes support for investment in education and training through the
Sustainability and Transformation Plans 
<https://www.england.nhs.uk/ourwork/futurenhs/deliver-forward-view/stp/> 
process.

All this investment and innovation risks being only partially realised if we 
do not provide a more consistent experience for our people. We cannot hope to 
deliver high-quality care to patients if we do not look after the people who 
are responsible for looking after our patients. The annual staff survey results 
were again profoundly sobering in parts with a rise in the number of staff 
reporting that they feel bullied or harassed, for example.

I want to see workplaces where our colleagues are engaged, have real 
opportunities to develop and are a real part of the movement for change. I want 
clear direction and purpose matched with a real recognition of the expertise 
and talent of those that lead and provide our services. These are the cultural 
traits that we know mark out our best teams and providers. These are the 
features we must ensure are found consistently for all our staff wherever they 
work and whatever community they come from. There is much for us to do.

The NHS Confederation annual conference and exhibition 2016 
<http://www.nhsconfed.org/conference> will take place 15-17 June in Manchester 

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
