
Over the starters on their first date, Nora McInerny and Aaron Purmort settled 
a few things. They would be getting married. Three children was a fair 
compromise (he wanted two, she favoured four). Aaron would be a stay-at-home 
parent. Nora would not. “Aaron was the first person with whom I didn’t have to 
do any convincing. No games. He was just like, ‘You’re great. Let’s spend every 
day together’,” says Nora.

Within months, Aaron’s roommate had left his Minneapolis home and Nora had 
moved in. “Everything just felt better if Aaron was there. It was so much fun. 
I remember the first time I stayed over, looking at him and thinking I would be 
looking at this face when I was 80. I was wrong.”

In October 2011, less than a year after their first date – and on the day 
building renovations began on the home they still hadn’t told their parents 
they were sharing – Aaron had a seizure and collapsed. Scans revealed a brain 
tumour. Surgery followed and then a diagnosis of a stage four glioblastoma, the 
most aggressive brain cancer.

Aaron died in November 2014. Nora’s book, It’s OK to Laugh (Crying is Cool 
Too), describes how they crammed a lifetime of experiences into the four years 
they had.

On the night Aaron was diagnosed, huddled together in his hospital bed, the 
couple considered their plans. “He tried saying I shouldn’t marry him because 
of the brain tumour. I said I was going to marry the fucking shit out of him,” 
says Nora. “That was our engagement. I was never a girl who wanted a proposal 
on a beach, a big wedding. I just wanted us to be married. We didn’t want to 
give cancer any more power over us by waiting. We wanted to have something 
good.”

The knowledge that they might not reach old age together was a catalyst in a 
relationship already moving at speed. The milestones that might usually 
punctuate half a century of life together were suddenly more urgent.

“Something like that happens and there is no longer a casual relationship. 
Thankfully, we hadn’t wasted any time. My dad always said not to try and wait 
for your life to be perfect, that you should just do the things when you feel 
them. Aaron was the first person where I really got that. Why over-plan?”

Nora’s sister, Meghan was enlisted to make hasty wedding arrangements. The 
couple were married in the art gallery where they had met, a month after his 
brain surgery. Aaron was 32, Nora 28. “Being married was just a little shift. I 
loved it, this little circle on your finger a signal to the world that you have 
a person and you are someone’s person,” says Nora. “It made me so happy just to 
be his.”

Alongside attending to Aaron’s “chemo grigio” and radiotherapy schedule, the 
couple were house-hunting, planning Christmas, putting furniture together, 
looking after the dog, making dinner and watching Buffy the Vampire Slayer 
re-runs. “That was the stuff that Aaron lived for,” says Nora.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kvxf%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kvxf%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e880c16889103056278beeb9c26de2044dcc3f6%2F0_0_2334_3500%2F2334.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=We%20crammed%2030%20years%20into%20four%20when%20the%20love%20of%20my%20life%20got%20a%20brain%20tumour&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kvxf%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=We+crammed+30+years+into+four+when+the+love+of+my+life+got+a+brain+tumour&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kvxf%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e880c16889103056278beeb9c26de2044dcc3f6%2F0_0_2334_3500%2F2334.jpg>
 ‘By the time Ralph was born, Aaron was recovering from his second brain 
operation’ Photograph: Nora McInerny Purmort 
The couple asked doctors never to tell them how long was left. “We didn’t want 
all the details, knowing all the dosages, googling everything and so on. That 
was depressing. Frankly, I didn’t want to know anything about cancer.”

Neither did they want to tick off bucket list goals. (“Although when tickets 
to Bruce Springsteen were $300 each, I’d say, ‘Buy them, I don’t care. We’ll go 
every night’.”) For the most part, contentment was in the everyday. “I got 
really annoyed at talk of living like you’re dying. That isn’t jumping out of 
airplanes or doing all these epic trips. The minutiae of relationships can get 
dull, but for us they were exciting because who knew how long we would have?”

If the news was good they might go to the DIY shop; if it was bad they would 
go home and watch television. They tried to make hospital stays fun, eating 
takeaways, making jokes, reading each other funny internet stories.

Aaron’s treatment was aggressive and, the couple knew, likely to leave him 
infertile. They banked some sperm before his radiotherapy and on their 
honeymoon of sorts – a trip to Disney World with Aaron’s sister and children – 
decided to try for a baby.

“Aaron wanted family. He was built for that. He deserved it,” says Nora. Aaron 
was concerned. He might die, he pointed out. “I got that. I told him I wouldn’t 
do it if I didn’t think I could cope on my own. I wanted this experience with 
him no matter what. I just knew we’d figure it out.”

Telling Aaron she was pregnant – after their first attempt at fertility 
treatment – is something Nora will remember for ever. “He was so excited. We 
got to talk baby names.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kvxf%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kvxf%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4be3bfeb11438c54515dea13081e9d6e6153c9b3%2F389_771_1953_3810%2F1953.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=We%20crammed%2030%20years%20into%20four%20when%20the%20love%20of%20my%20life%20got%20a%20brain%20tumour&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kvxf%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=We+crammed+30+years+into+four+when+the+love+of+my+life+got+a+brain+tumour&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kvxf%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4be3bfeb11438c54515dea13081e9d6e6153c9b3%2F389_771_1953_3810%2F1953.jpg>
 ‘Occasionally a glimpse of a tall, bald man will trick Nora into thinking she 
has seen Aaron.’ Photograph: Nora McInerny Purmort 
By the time Ralph was born, on his due date, 22 January 2013 (“like he knew we 
couldn’t waste time”), Aaron was recovering from his second brain operation. 
Three days earlier, he had been two floors below the maternity unit having 
chemotherapy.

Life at home with their baby was good. “Ralph was the perfect addition, such 
an easy fit, a good sleeper. He was exactly the baby we needed,” recalls Nora. 
The family settled into a routine of shopping at the mall, working their way 
through Netflix, enjoying being parents. “Maternity leave was so much fun. 
Aaron did it all so joyfully. He had come out of this terrible treatment and he 
was washing bottles, changing nappies. He said, ‘I told you I’d be a 
stay-at-home dad.’”

They accepted the impermanence of the situation, but they didn’t dwell on it. 
“I think Ralph kept Aaron alive. We talked about Ralph graduating or getting 
married. We knew we wouldn’t both be there, but I suppose we let each other 
pretend.”

Related: My husband has ceased to exist – I still can’t understand how 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/21/juliet-rosenfeld-husband-death-lung-cancer-bereavement>

They focused on making Aaron and Ralph’s time together count. “I knew Ralph 
wouldn’t have a father for his whole childhood and his adolescence, but he did 
have that very visceral parenting time when he was tiny, when you just soak 
them up. He got to feel that love.”

After Ralph turned one, Nora began to think about another baby. “I wanted a 
sibling for him and I knew there was limited time – we knew Aaron was getting 
worse,” says Nora.

After three rounds of fertility treatment, Nora was pregnant. An eight-week 
scan looked fine. “Aaron hoped he would be around for the birth, but I just 
felt happy that I was having a baby he knew was coming. That is a story you can 
tell a child.”

A few weeks later, a scan revealed no heartbeat. Losing the baby, followed a 
week later by the death of her father, also from cancer, added new pain to the 
shared experiences Nora and Aaron were notching up. “It felt as if I had been 
bending all of this to my will, and now we knew then there was no controlling 
it,” says Nora. “That was it. I knew I wouldn’t have another baby with Aaron 
and I didn’t even have time to think about it.”

Aaron died eight weeks later, at home with Nora and Ralph.

Nora and her mother are both widows now. Their experience is both the same and 
the opposite. “My mum was watching all of their past go by. I was watching all 
of our future disappear.”

In her dreams, Nora regularly just misses Aaron at a party. She often talks 
out loud to him. Occasionally a glimpse of a tall, bald man will trick her. “I 
hope those magical seconds continue,” she says.

Ralph, who is now three and has inherited “the biggest head and the sharpest 
incisors” from Aaron, has formed his own version of his father from stories and 
photographs. “He will also make some of it up and that’s OK.”

Before long, the time since Aaron’s death will be longer than the time they 
had together. There is no part of her, Nora says, that would not grab Aaron 
back if she could, but she still feels lucky. “We had three years of a really 
good marriage.

“We gave each other so much. Not everyone has that. I didn’t want to miss any 
of it, even the hard bits,” she says. “I feel like I could say we were married 
for 30 years and that would feel just as true.”

It’s OK to Laugh (Crying is Cool Too)  
<https://www.littlebrown.co.uk/books/detail.page?isbn=9780349410128>by Nora 
McInerny Purmort is published by Piatkus, £14.99. To order a copy for £11.99, 
go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/393498/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846
