
By now, you probably think you know where you are with steak. Over the past 
decade, fastidious UK diners have, variously, swapped fillet for rib-eye, 
flirted with grain-fed US beef and la-di-dah wagyu, before, it seemed, a broad 
consensus formed around the idea that some of the best steak you can eat comes 
from properly dry-aged, grass-fed British rare-breeds, such as Longhorn.

But that was before the old Basque cows reared their delicious bovine heads. 

In recent months, a hardcore of British steak enthusiasts has become obsessed 
with superannuated cattle from northern Spain. Internationally, most beef 
cattle are slaughtered before they are three years old (in the UK,due to old 
BSE regulations 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/foodanddrink/11539360/British-beef-is-safe-again-so-why-are-we-clinging-to-BSE-laws.html>
, most farmers slaughter by 30 months), whereas the beef eaten in the Basque 
region comes from elderly beasts aged between eight and 18. The meat, almost 
maroon in colour and edged with distinctive bright yellow fat, is renowned for 
its well-distributed, granular marbling and savoury flavours of great depth, 
complexity and length. The difference to mainline young beef is comparable to 
that between lamb and mutton. This is profoundly beefy beef.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jqyh%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jqyh%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbfc272dbda033051dfc4fd0eddd11c450a2896dd%2F0_186_2448_2886%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=High%20steaks%3A%20the%20new%20craze%20for%20old%20cow&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jqyh%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=High+steaks%3A+the+new+craze+for+old+cow&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jqyh%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbfc272dbda033051dfc4fd0eddd11c450a2896dd%2F0_186_2448_2886%2F2448.jpg>
 Txuleta steak on the menue at Bellita in Bristol. 
These steaks, served in huge Flintstone-style rib cuts of at least a kilo and 
known in the Basque Country as txuleta (pronouncedchoo-letah), are now 
appearing on menus at London restaurants including Lurra 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/02/lurra-london-w1-restaurant-review-marina-oloughlin>
, Chiltern Firehouse, Barrafina and Kitty Fishers, Bellita in Bristol and
Levanter 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/aug/09/levanter-fine-foods-restaurant-review-jay-rayner>
 near Bury, to an often rabid reception. The tiny Levanter sells up to 25 
steaks (1.2kg, £45) every Sunday and demand is such that it has recently 
started serving txuleta on Wednesday to Friday at its sister restaurant, 
Baratxuri.

After travelling to San Sebastian to try the txuleta at Bar Nestor 
<http://londoneater.com/2015/12/22/bar-nestor-san-sebastian/>, a site of 
pilgrimage for the faithful, Levanter’s co-owner Joe Botham has become a firm 
convert: “It has ruined steak for me. I can’t eat it anywhere else now. I go 
home on a Sunday and, seriously, I don’t even have a shower because I can still 
smell thetxuleton on me. It’s all in my beard, the whole restaurant smells of 
it. It’s wonderful.”

Confusingly, this Basque beef <http://www.txuleta.co.uk/> rarely originates in 
the region itself. Instead, beef eaten there usually comes from two sources. 
Entry-level txuleta is produced from ex-dairy cattle imported from around 
Europe, often from Poland and Germany, and finished on grass in the Basque 
country for another four years before slaughter. Galician Blond orRubia Gallega 
is the prized next step-up. These cows and oxen, which are reared in 
neighbouring Galicia, mostly in the province of Lugo, are specifically raised 
as beef cattle (although some Galician Blond milk is used to make tetilla 
cheese) and, by the time they are slaughtered at up to 18 years old, they are 
unusually large, muscular animals.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jqyh%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jqyh%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc5717d4a7963fcb25817bd3c9338579fd93dee5%2F0_65_1413_2057%2F1413.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=High%20steaks%3A%20the%20new%20craze%20for%20old%20cow&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jqyh%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=High+steaks%3A+the+new+craze+for+old+cow&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jqyh%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc5717d4a7963fcb25817bd3c9338579fd93dee5%2F0_65_1413_2057%2F1413.jpg>
 A Galician blond cow: by the time these animals are slaughtered at up to 18 
years old, they are large and muscular Photograph: Daniel Candal/Getty Images 
Galician Blond cattle are sometimes crossbred with the Portuguese Barrosã, a 
similarly elderly cow that chef Nuno Mendes serves at his Spitalfields 
restaurant, Taberna do Mercado. “It’s incredible,” he says, of beef that he 
then dry-ages for 100 days before serving. “It is reared on a strict grass diet 
until 15 or 16 years. This allows it to have a full happy life and also has a 
huge impact on both the marbling and stronger flavouring of the meat. We 
usually serve thicker cuts on-the-bone, anywhere between 800g and 1400g – which 
really benefit from a slow-grilling and basting cooking.”

We have been taught to cook steaks very quickly in smoking hot pans, but 
txuleta – which, in Britain, you can buy mail-order through butchersTurner & 
George <http://www.turnerandgeorge.co.uk/> and Grey’s Fine Foods 
<https://www.greysfinefoods.com/> – requires a different approach. Some fans 
insist that txuleta should only be cooked over a hardwood charcoal. The 
renowned Basque BBQ restaurant,Asador Etxebarri 
<http://www.theworlds50best.com/list/1-50-winners/Asador-Etxebarri>, currently 
ranked tenth in theWorld’s 50 Best Restaurants <http://www.theworlds50best.com/>
, cooks txuleta over grape vines. Elsewhere, txuleta (usually 8cm to 10cm 
thick) are cooked on hot plates but for a patient eight-to-10 minutes on each 
side, in order to achieve the optimum black ’n’ blue result – all crunchy and 
carbonised on the outside and still rare in the middle.

There are some key tricks to achieving that, says Botham. “The important bit 
with txuleta is osmosis. We let the steaks come to room temperature and then, 
with a very fine blade, scratch the surface and put loads of sea salt on it, 
which draws a lot of blood and moisture to the surface. When that reacts with 
the salt – it takes at least 40 and up to 90 minutes – it creates a gooey film, 
and that goo allows you to get a really crisp outside edge to the beef. With an 
8cm thick steak, I cook it for a good eight minutes either side on a plancha at 
350C and then you get this really charred, crispy outer-edge and an absolutely 
blue centre. The fat renders down beautifully.”

Related: Nuno Mendes’ late winter recipes: steak sandwich, piri-piri sprouts 
and gooey cake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/02/nuno-mendes-late-winter-recipes-steak-sandwich-piri-piri-sprouts-cake>

Historically, Basque farmers would swap beef with local cider producers 
<https://www.greysfinefoods.com/spanish-recipes/basque-txuleton-recipe/>, which 
is why it is sometimes referred to as “cider house” steak. Levanter serves it 
in the traditional way with few distractions: a tomato salad, fried green 
Guernica peppers, maybe charred spring onions. The real action is in that 
Galician Blond beef which, once tasted, is never forgotten.

Food is often seen as central to Basque culture. That a region with only one 
native cattle breed, Pirenaica, has continued – in the face of global intensive 
farming – to cultivate such a specialist product, is testament to that 
obsession. British steak connoisseurs are very grateful for that stubbornness.
