
Can Chevron, ExxonMobil and BP be held accountable for the vulnerable 
communities most affected by climate change? It’s a question a legal case in the
Philippines <https://www.theguardian.com/world/philippines> could answer.

Last month, lawyers for the petitioners met with the Commission on Human 
Rights of the Philippines (CHR), a constitutional body tasked with 
investigating human rights violations. Their goal was to identify expert 
witnesses for a hearing into the liability of50 of the biggest fossil fuel 
companies 
<http://www.greenpeace.org/seasia/ph/PageFiles/105904/Climate-Change-and-Human-Rights-Complaint.pdf>
 for violating the human rights of Filipinos as a result of catastrophic 
climate change.

This follows a petition filed on 22 September 2015 by Greenpeace and the 
Philippine Rural Reconstruction Movement on behalf of typhoon survivors, which 
called for the devastation of extreme weather-related disasters to be properly 
recognised: “The real-life pain and agony of losing loved ones, homes, farms – 
almost everything – during strong typhoons, droughts, and other weather 
extremes, as well as the everyday struggle to live, to be safe, and to be able 
to cope with the adverse, slow onset impacts of climate change, are beyond 
numbers and words.”

The hearing will consider whether companies’ policies and investments 
adequately address the human rights issues specified in the petition.
Map of the Philippines 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/maps/embed/may/2016-05-04T11:48:49.html>  Map 
of the Philippines 
The Philippines is among the countries most exposed 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/datablog/2016/apr/25/where-is-the-riskiest-place-to-live-floods-storms>
 to natural hazards in the world, with130m Filipinos 
<http://www.unisdr.org/2015/docs/climatechange/COP21_WeatherDisastersReport_2015_FINAL.pdf>
 affected by weather-related disasters between 1995 and 2015. In 2013, for 
example, Typhoon Haiyan wreaked devastation, killingmore than 6,300 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/mar/25/life-in-the-philippines-preparing-for-the-next-typhoon-haiyan>
 people and causingbillions of dollars 
<http://blogs.wsj.com/indonesiarealtime/2014/03/19/cost-of-typhoon-rebuilding-lower-than-expected-philippine-official/>
 worth of damage. It is widely acknowledged – including by the Filipino 
government’sClimate Change Commission 
<http://climate.gov.ph/index.php/projects/adaptation/philccap> – that climate 
change is exacerbating these problems.

The decision to invite climate scientists as witnesses to the Philippines 
investigation is seen as a significant opportunity to demonstrate the links 
between climate change and extreme weather.

“It’s encouraging because it shows that we managed to get the message out 
there that this branch of science [the attribution of extreme weather events to 
climate change] can robustly say things,” says Dr Friederike Otto, senior 
researcher at the University of Oxford’s Environmental Change Institute.

A decade ago the field was dominated by generalised predictions about the 
frequency of events. Today, advancements in computer modelling mean that 
scientists can make quantitative assessments in real time. When Storm Desmond 
hit the UK in December, for example, researcherspronounced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/11/storm-desmond-rainfall-flooding-partly-due-to-climate-change-scientists-conclude>
 within days that climate change had increased the likelihood of the floods by 
40%.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tzbn%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tzbn%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff094262a2c3471648454103a1ccb3d5dde7cd0b6%2F582_0_2000_2000%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Philippines%20investigates%20Shell%20and%20Exxon%20over%20climate%20change&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tzbn%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Philippines+investigates+Shell+and+Exxon+over+climate+change&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tzbn%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff094262a2c3471648454103a1ccb3d5dde7cd0b6%2F582_0_2000_2000%2F2000.jpg>
 Survivors of Typhoon Haiyan rush for fresh water delivered by helicopter to 
their isolated village north of Tacloban in November 2013. Photograph: Damir 
Sagolj/Reuters 
But, despite progress in the scientific understanding of the connection 
between extreme weather events and climate change, the Filipino case still 
faces challenges. Jurisdiction is a major one. The CHR can only compel the 
seven major carbon companies that have branches in the Philippines – although 
this does include Shell,BHP Billiton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhpbilliton> and ExxonMobil – to defend 
their policies in writing and at public hearings. The 43 other companies will 
also be asked to attend. If they resist, the complainants have recommended that 
the CHR seeks the assistance of the UN to encourage them to co-operate.

The jurisdictional issue touches on one of the central legal hurdles that 
those suffering from the impacts of climate change face in attempting to hold 
governments and corporations to account – does an actor operating in one 
country have legal responsibility towards those who may suffer the consequences 
in another?

Lawyers face many other questions. Is it possible to hold any one corporation 
responsible for its relatively small contribution to a global crisis caused by 
many? Can anyone be held accountable for harm caused by emissions that go back 
to the industrial revolution?

Related: Dutch government ordered to cut carbon emissions in landmark ruling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/24/dutch-government-ordered-cut-carbon-emissions-landmark-ruling>

“The amorphous nature of climate change presents unique problems that courts 
are now being asked to rule upon,” says climate lawyer Gillian Lobo from
ClientEarth <http://www.clientearth.org/>, who cites cases including the claim 
of public nuisance 
<http://cdn.ca9.uscourts.gov/datastore/opinions/2012/09/25/09-17490.pdf> 
brought by the Alaskan Village of Kivalina against 22 energy companies, and the 
Urgenda Foundation case, where the Dutch government was ordered to reduce its 
emissions by a minimum of 25% by 2020. “Judges are generally cautious when it 
comes to developing the law, but given the urgent need to tackle the harmful 
effects of climate change they must be willing to so,” says Lobo.

When the investigation concludes, the Filipino government will be mandated to 
consider the recommendations of the CHR. Although the companies will not be 
legally bound to any changes to their policies and investments requested by the 
CHR unless they agree to be so early on in the process (the case is yet to 
reach this point), Zelda Soriano, the lawyer at Greenpeace acting on the case, 
says that the findings would hold weight with the courts and the CHR could 
recommend that specific cases be filed against corporations by victims.

“The world will be watching this investigation and how the carbon majors are 
responding and behaving,” says Soriano. “If there was a positive finding 
[against these companies] by the commission, it should move the shareholders 
and investors to think if it is worth investing in the carbon majors, not just 
on moral grounds but because the very social licence and the profitability of 
these corporations would also be in question … It will set a precedent.”

 * Is business ready for extreme weather? – open thread 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/mar/29/extreme-weather-climate-change-share-ideas-experiences>