
Supporters of EU membership have failed to make the positive case for Europe, 
according to the Scottish Conservative leader,Ruth Davidson 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/ruth-davidson>, who also says Jeremy 
Corbyn’s equivocal stance on the issue is “risible”.

In her first significant intervention in the Europe debate, Davidson will tell 
an audience in Brussels on Tuesday morning: “I hope that we will use this 
referendum to outline the positive future that a reformed EU can bring. Too 
often, collectively, we have failed to make the positive case about EU 
membership.

 “We shouldn’t simply treat the EU as a dead weight, with the process of 
reform only being to lessen the negative impact it has upon on us. We should 
also be outlining the prize that awaits us if we get EU reform right.”

Supporting David Cameron’s decision to hold a referendum, she will add: “I 
will be backing our national interest and urging Britain to stay within that 
reformed EU. I campaigned forScotland <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> 
to stay part of a wider union. And I believe Britain should stay part of a 
wider union too.”

During last year’s independence referendum campaign the pro-union Better 
Together, which included Davidson’sConservatives 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives>, was heavily criticised for 
failing to make the positive case for remaining part of the UK.

Davidson will also scorn Corbyn’s “anti-market” position on Europe 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/17/jeremy-corbyn-labour-campaign-for-uk-stay-in-eu>
. The Labour leader ended initial uncertainty last week by declaring that the 
party would campaign for the UK to stay in the EU in the forthcoming 
referendum, whatever the outcome of the renegotiation being sought by Cameron.

Davidson will say: “While the European question isn’t as big a driver as 
nationalisation, quitting Nato or creating unlimited benefits, to [the Labour 
party] the European free market isn’t an opportunity for our country, it’s a 
threat.

“We need to make it clear from the outset, this leftwing anti-market position 
is a risible proposition which doesn’t deserve to be taken seriously. And do I 
hope there are enough sensible people left within the Labour party who now have 
the courage to speak up against it.”

Speaking at an event hosted by the New Direction thinktank, Davidson will say 
the ongoing financial crisis and the influx of refugees are straining the EU to 
breaking point.

“The European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> has faced and is 
facing some of its most difficult times as we speak. The financial crisis 
exposed the faultlines with the euro. The current migration crisis has exposed 
the faultlines with the Schengen agreement.

“It is hard to contest the point made by some that the EU is a fair-weather 
union – one which works fine when times are good, but which has no durability 
when the going gets tough. But I find myself falling on the side of those who 
believe the union can – indeed must – find a way to work.”

She will say campaigners must not lose sight of the economic benefits of being 
part of the EU. “I want what is good for Scottish jobs. Not an EU which 
constantly seeks to interfere in our daily lives and which is seen by people as 
a meddlesome burden on the world, but an EU which expands the single market in 
services and is hunting the world for trade deals which will help our local 
Scottish firms capture more global share.”
