
'Do you know about the lady butcher of Coleford?" asked John.

"The shop has chairs, like a continental butcher's," said Sue, "so you can sit 
down for a chat. And books, too, if you don't want to talk while you wait."

"And she cuts her bacon by hand," John said. "She's very particular about what 
meat you should buy. She won't let you have it if she doesn't think it's right 
for what you want."

"Sounds too good to be true," said my brother, Tom, when I told him about it. 
He was wrong. There were chairs in FC Voyce & Son, and books. People do pop in 
for a chat. And Marian Voyce does cut her bacon by hand, and her home-roasted 
ham.

Marian is a trim woman, has a neat bonnet of grey hair and bright eyes behind 
sparkling spectacles. And she has knowledge - wisdom, really - that comes from 
a long time working at something. She has been working with a butcher, and then 
as a butcher, for a long time. She was married to Lionel Voyce for 49 years, 
before he died seven years ago, working alongside him and then running the shop 
when he became unable to do so. "He was a patient teacher," she says in a 
gentle Gloucestershire burr.

In all that time they never took a holiday, which is why she has just got back 
from New York. Since Lionel died, she has been to Tenerife, Malaysia and Cuba, 
too, with three other widows of Coleford. She has had a great time, she says, 
but didn't like New York as much as Malaysia. She found Cuba interesting, 
although the poverty in parts of it reminded her of that in the Forest of Dean 
when she was growing up.

In those days, FC Voyce, Lionel's father, who established the butcher's in 
1932, took meat to the forest mines in a horse-drawn brake. All the meat was 
local then, as it is now, from Ensors in Cinderford. They've been good to her, 
Marian says, because she can't heft the big carcasses around. They break them 
down, so she can serve them as she likes. She leaves the main cuts whole in the 
grey-blue framed window.

"My customers wouldn't buy it if I cut it up into steaks and chops," she 
explains. "They like to see me do that in front of them." She's very particular 
about that. That's why she cuts the bacon by hand, too, with an easy, gliding 
movement of the knife, pink slices of back bacon rimmed with white fat and 
looking like big puppies' tongues falling easily away.

In fact, she's very particular about a good many things. "Meat doesn't hang 
like it used to. I think that's because of all the water they use to hose down 
the carcasses... I don't like selling lamb at the moment because we're between 
seasons. The local new season's lamb hasn't arrived yet, and the old season's 
is likely to be hogget, and you never know where you are with hogget." She's 
critical of the unregulated nature of farmers' markets, too, and of the way 
they're taking business away from traditional butcher's shops; she doesn't have 
much time for organics, either. "I had some organic lamb in and I sold some to 
a customer. She came back in and she said, 'Well, if that's organic, I don't 
want any of it.' "

Marian carefully trims a piece of gristle from the sirloin steak she's adding 
to the pile of bacon, belly pork and ham that I've already assembled, and then 
delicately cross-hatches a piece of skirt across the grain so that it will cook 
more easily and evenly. She adds up the figures she's written on a sheet of 
paper: Â£11.78. It seems too little.

There were seven or eight butchers here when she and Lionel first started, she 
says. Now there are three. And Coleford's in decline, too. "Trickling away," 
she says.

Not like Marian Voyce.

Where to get it

FC Voyce & Son
4 Newland Street, Coleford, Gloucestershire, 01594 836016
