
There are lots of opportunities for students to travel: be it to postpone your 
degree and travel the world after taking your A-levels; to take a placement 
abroad; or to spend your summer months volunteering. Reports show that over 
20,000 UK students spend time abroad for a period ofover three months each year 
<http://go.international.ac.uk/sites/default/files/Further%20up%20the%20road%20carbonell%202014.pdf>
.

It’s hardly suprising so many students decide to spend time away from the UK: 
the benefits of travelling are well documented. You can make new friends, 
broaden your outlook and gain stories to tell. But that’s not all: you may also 
improve your brainpower and become more outgoing.

Blue-sky thinking


According to a study by Adam Galinsky 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2015/03/for-a-more-creative-brain-travel/388135/>
, a professor at Columbia Business School, those who have lived abroad are more 
creative. His research found that the more countries people had lived in, the 
more creative their work tended to be. However Galinsky says that just being a 
tourist isn’t enough to see any benefit. “Someone who lives abroad and doesn’t 
engage with the local culture will likely get less of a creative boost than 
someone who travels abroad and really engages in the local environment,” he 
says.

Related: Five ways to be a global student without doing a year abroad 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/nov/09/five-ways-to-be-a-global-student-without-doing-a-year-abroad>

Gain confidence and independence


Travelling and living abroad can also affect the way we interact with people. 
Research <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23773042> by Dr Julia Zimmermann 
and Dr Franz Neyer compared the personality development of a large sample of 
German university students who had studied abroad for at least one semester 
with a non-travelling group.

 The results showed that those who studied abroad were generally higher in 
extraversion than those who chose not to travel during their studies: the 
travellers were likely to enjoy being around other people more than being 
alone. When they returned home after travelling, the participants also tended 
to show an increase in openness to new experiences, agreeableness and emotional 
stability.

Tom Champion, 26, a PhD student from the University of Sheffield who is 
studying in Singapore for 18 months, says he has become more accepting and 
compassionate since living abroad. “Seeing the world through a foreigner’s eyes 
has led me to realise my previously invisible cultural habits and hone my sense 
of empathy and my ability to understand others,” he says.

Related: Will international love help your language skills blossom? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/oct/02/will-international-love-help-your-language-skills-blossom>

 Moving abroad also allows young adults to gain a new sense of responsibility 
and independence, and to manage their own finances. Nikitha Aithal moved to the 
UK from India when she was 10 years old, and later worked in Spain for a year 
as part of her undergraduate language degree at the University of Leeds. She 
says: “Living and working in Spain made me appreciate the struggle my parents 
went through when moving to the UK – simple things such as setting up a bank 
account or paying the water bills.”

Related: Student travellers: make the most of your holiday. Go it alone 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jun/23/solo-travel-students-abroad> 

Sharpening your mind is a no-brainer


The new and unusual situations we encounter while travelling – whether trying 
to figure out how to navigate the local metro system, or just to order a meal 
in an unfamiliar language – help to keep our mind sharp,according to a study 
<http://articles.chicagotribune.com/2014-01-28/travel/sc-trav-0128-travel-mechanic-20140128_1_brain-20-percent-health>
 commissioned by the U.S. Travel Association.


It found that challenging new experiences can boost cognitive health, as when 
your brain is exposed to an environment that is novel and complex, it reacts by 
forming new connections as it tries to categorise the new and unusual stimuli. 
This grows the brain and keeps it active in a similar way as taking up a new 
hobby or learning a language.


So if you’re in the fortunate position of being able to chose whether or not 
to travel, why not take the plunge and explore the world – your brain will 
thank you for it.


Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
