

I was a student nurse at a major London hospital in the early 1950s, a Roman 
Catholic girl, convent educated and totally ignorant about sex and men.

In the nursing school our working year was divided into blocks, starting with 
an initial period of classroom training, after which I was allocated to the 
gynaecology ward as “the lowest of the low”.

One of my first patients was a girl of my own age (18) who was very ill and 
was isolated in a curtained-off corner of the large ward. She was barrier 
nursed – we had to scrub up meticulously before and after attending her, to 
minimise the risk of cross-infection. I don’t think I even knew what an 
abortion was, but I soon learned. I also learned that induced abortion was 
illegal. It was years later before limited abortion by a properly qualified 
doctor was available in England.

The poor girl had been to a back street abortionist in desperation and had 
been butchered. As a result she had contracted gas gangrene and her body from 
the waist down was yellow. For days her life was in the balance, but she 
survived although she would never have children.

Related: Nigeria must stop unsafe abortions killing women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/apr/22/nigeria-must-stop-unsafe-abortions-killing-women>

I have no idea what happened to her when she left the hospital, but she, like 
me, would be in her 80s now without the comfort of sons, daughters, 
grandchildren and great-grandchildren as I have. She was Irish, and told me she 
hadn’t known what was happening to her, and when she realised her predicament 
she was advised by a friend to come to work in London in order to find someone 
“get rid of it”.

She said her father was very strict and would never accept her shame, and her 
only alternative to abortion was to go to work in one of theCatholic convent 
laundries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/feb/05/ireland-magdalene-laundry-system-apology>
of the time and have her baby adopted; another practice I was ignorant about 
until the shame of the laundries was exposed many years later.


That girl haunts me whenever I hear about anti-abortion activities. There were 
others I met with different reasons for their situation, but I have never 
forgotten her. They were not all young ignorant girls; there were women who had 
too many children already and were too exhausted or ill to contemplate another, 
others who maybe had been unfaithful while their husband was away or had been 
raped.

Contraception was very limited then and was unavailable in Ireland. The pill 
would not be available for several years and many men refused to use a sheath; 
the “Dutch cap” was an alternative for women but was not suitable for everyone 
or every occasion, and no method is 100% foolproof.

Related: Saving a new mother from death almost made me quit as a nurse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/apr/28/saving-new-mother-from-death-almost-made-me-quit-nurse>

The TV series Call the Midwife has told of similar situations at around the 
same time, which of course I found fascinating and I identified with many of 
the stories, boring my family to bits. To my eternal regret I didn’t finish my 
training and left London to marry. My fiancé lived 200 miles away, and anyway 
student nurses were not allowed to be married so I had to leave. Hospital 
discipline was very strict in those days, attitudes were very different and I 
had left school thinking I had got away from the rules and regulations. I’m 
afraid I was a bit of a rebel at heart, although I loved nursing and had never 
wanted to do anything else.

My experience on that ward so many years ago has left me with an unshakable 
belief that there must be legal, safe abortion, albeit with restrictions, 
because there will always be desperate women who will go to any lengths to get 
rid of an unwanted pregnancy.

If it is not legally available we will return to those terrible times of women 
dying or being damaged for life by incompetent, unscrupulous, unlicensed 
abortionists. I think it unlikely that those women who campaign for their 
pro-life ideals have lived in poverty and in dread of a drunken husband coming 
home and demanding his “rights”, when it’s a struggle to feed and house the 
family. They should imagine themselves in such situations and display more 
humanity towards their less fortunate sisters.

If you would like to write a piece for Blood, sweat and tears, read our 
guidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/jul/14/healthcare-workers-tell-us-about-memorable-experience>
 and get in touch by emailinghealthcare@theguardian.com 
<mailto:healthcare@theguardian.com>.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.

 * This article was amended on 27 May 2016. It originally stated that 
contraception is unavailable in Ireland; this is incorrect as contraception was 
legalised in 1979. 