
So I hope we can count on your support – OK, even though you’re not a mum. 
You’ve probably got some caring responsibilities, right? An elderly parent 
you’d like to bring into the chamber for a little snack, like in any regular 
workplace? Well in your dreams, they’re still stuck in the Victorian age, this 
whole place is set up to destroy family life, and even if you get your partner 
on the staff they’re entitled to the occasional break, aren’t they? That’s my 
toddler over near William Gladstone – see the looks she’s getting, just because 
she’s got her scooter with her and her felt pens out? No – noton Mr Gladstone, 
darling, ha ha – I wish the old men here were that well behaved. And she’s the 
one who’s suffered, by rights I’d still be breastfeeding her, like the other 
four – I think they’re in Westminster Hall, building a den, can’t you hear the 
barking? Honestly, the way they stare at you if you bring even a small dog in, 
I can imagine the looks they’re getting, even with their grandma with them. But 
by the time they’re two or three you need somewhere quiet for nursing, and you 
try asking them to create a nice breastfeeding suite where you can get a decent 
latte, like they have in any normal office.

No wonder there aren’t any women in the place, it’s never going to be 
representative until mums have the right to breastfeed babies in the chamber – 
right, or bottle feed, or mash up a banana when they’re older. But it’s only 
when you get here you realise being an MP is nothing like maternity leave, I’m 
still in shock, and don’t get me started on buggies, I’ve had to leave mine by 
the front bench, you can imagine the dirty looks. I’ve tried explaining that if 
they’d only vote to turn Westminster into a nursery cum school cum day centre, 
instead of banging on about politics all the time, women might finally feel 
they were welcome. But oh no, the men aren’t parting with their chamber, I’ve 
never been in a place with so few wet wipes.
