
David Cameron <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> has in effect 
accused leave campaigners, including his own defence minister, Penny Mordaunt, 
of lying about theprospect of Turkey joining the EU 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/21/vote-leave-prejudice-turkey-eu-security-threat>
.

The prime minister said his Conservative colleague had made “a very misleading 
claim” when she said Britain would not be able to stop the accession of new 
countries into the EU.

“She is absolutely wrong. Let me be clear, Britain and every other country in 
the EU has a veto on another country joining. That is a fact,” said Cameron, in 
an interview on ITV’s Peston on Sunday.

“The fact that the leave campaign are getting things as straightforward as 
this wrong should call into judgment the bigger argument about leaving the EU.” 
He said out campaigners were trying to persuade people to vote for Brexit 
solely on the back of an issue “that is not true”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jf57%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jf57%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c1767f8092d9d58f023f64477e31c9c616ef90c%2F0_45_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Cameron%20suggests%20defence%20minister%20is%20lying%20over%20Turkey%20joining%20EU&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jf57%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David+Cameron+suggests+defence+minister+is+lying+over+Turkey+joining+EU&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jf57%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c1767f8092d9d58f023f64477e31c9c616ef90c%2F0_45_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Penny Mordaunt on BBC1’s The Andrew Marr Show. Photograph: Jeff Overs/BBC/PA 
His comments followed an interview with Mordaunt on The Andrew Marr Show, in 
which she said the way the migrant crisis was being handled was speeding up the 
accession ofTurkey <https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey>, in particular, 
but other countries as well.

Asked if Britain had a veto on the issue, Mordaunt replied: “No it doesn’t.” 
She then argued: “I do not think that the EU is going to keep Turkey out. I 
think it is going to join. I think the migrant crisis is pushing it more that 
way.”

She argued that if the expansion policy was being pursued then Britain needed 
the “tools to protect our national security”, which were not currently 
available. And in an attack that appeared to be aimed at Cameron, she agreed 
when asked if the remain campaign was “an establishment stitch-up”.

Related: Vote Leave embroiled in race row over Turkey security threat claims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/21/vote-leave-prejudice-turkey-eu-security-threat>

“I think the public are seeing through this and I think that at moments in our 
history – 1939, 1982 – we have gone against the orthodoxy of the establishment. 
We have stood up and said no, we are not going to be a nation of followers, we 
are going to be a nation of leaders and that’s what we need to happen in this 
referendum.”

She accused her opponents of scaremongering and said it was a “shame that 
there are a lot of people who want us to be frightened right now”.

Cameron hit back, arguing that Mordaunt was doing a good job in the Ministry 
of Defence, “but on this question of whether or not we have a veto, the leave 
campaign are wrong”.

“It is not remotely on the cards that Turkey is going to join the EU any time 
soon. They applied in 1987. At the current rate of progress, they will probably 
get round to joining in about the year 3000.”

Leave campaigners pointed out that in recent years the prime minister had made 
positive arguments in favour of Turkey’s accession, including during a visit to 
the country in 2010.


Matthew Elliott, chief executive of Vote Leave, said: “David Cameron has said 
he wants to pave the road to Ankara and has repeatedly confirmed it is 
government policy for Turkey to join the EU. The EU is speeding up the process 
of Turkey joining and we are paying nearly £2bn to help make it happen. If it 
isn’t on the cards why are taxpayers footing the bill for it already?”

David Owen, the former foreign secretary, added: “Only nine weeks ago David 
Cameron <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> committed the 
country at the European council to re-energise the accession process of Turkey 
into the EU. The EU is continuing the preparatory work for Turkey at an 
accelerating pace with all of this going forward in parallel.”

Asked about the pressure the battle was putting on the Conservative party, and 
in particular Boris Johnson calling his points “demented 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/may/11/pmqs-corbyn-cameron-osborne-boris-johnson-interview-politics-live?page=with%3Ablock-5732f564e4b01a6abab1c0a3>
”, Cameron said he was remaining focused on the arguments.

“Boris is hugely capable in lots of ways but I’m not going to go into Boris 
today,” said the prime minister.

Cameron said he believed the government and Conservative party would reunite 
at the end of the campaign and focus on its legislation agenda but admitted 
that the result of the June referendum was high stakes.

“What is a more important decision – a general election or this Europe vote? 
Actually theEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> vote is more 
important because if you don’t like the government, you can always get rid of 
them in five years’ time.

“Whereas if we make this decision to leave the EU, and get out of the single 
market and hit our economy and hit jobs it would be very, very difficult if not 
impossible to reverse that decision.”


Asked about Conservative succession and whether George Osborne 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> should be the next leader, 
Cameron said: “We have been working together for the last 11 years. I think he 
is a man of great talent. I am not going to pick my successor. The Conservative 
party will do that. But George is hugely talented, a brilliant chancellor of 
the exchequer. In politics you have to have partnerships, you have to have 
teamwork. Prime ministers do not do this on their own.”
— David Cameron (@David_Cameron) May 22, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/David_Cameron/status/734281174621822977> 
Great to join @HarrietHarman <https://twitter.com/HarrietHarman> at @Asda 
<https://twitter.com/asda> in Hayes. We are clear - prices will rise if we 
leave the EU.#StrongerIn <https://twitter.com/hashtag/StrongerIn?src=hash>. 
pic.twitter.com/78vPDrnL4L <https://t.co/78vPDrnL4L>
 <https://twitter.com/David_Cameron/status/734281174621822977> 
The interview came after Cameron appeared at an event at a west London Asda 
with Labour’sHarriet Harman 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/12/brexit-could-derail-fight-for-womens-rights-says-harriet-harman>
, in order to warn that Brexit could push up the price of people’s grocery 
shopping.

The Guardian’s Gaby Hinsliff <http://www.theguardian.com/profile/gabyhinsliff> 
pointed out that the prime minister’s tweet – “great to join @harrietharman at 
@Asda in Hayes” – was probably something he had never imagined saying.


Cameron and Harman claimed that family shopping could rise by £220 a year 
after a vote to leave, as a result of a fall in sterling.

 The finding will be included in a Treasury report to be published on Monday, 
which also shows a potential decline in house prices.

“Independent studies show that a vote to leave would hit the value of the 
pound, making imports more expensive and raising prices in the shops,” said the 
prime minister.

Andy Clarke, the Asda president, agreed that there would be uncertainty for 
prices, which is why the supermarket was calling for a vote to remain.


Former chief executive of Waitrose, Mark Price, said: “While retailers make 
individual decisions on pricing in their stores, there is an established link 
between the sterling exchange rate and prices in shops.” The potential of 
higher tariffs post Brexit could have an additional effect, he added.

In the interview, Cameron rejected the claim that the Treasury could not 
possibly forecast the level of detail on issues such as house prices and food 
bills.

“The reason why our economy would be less well off is relatively 
straightforward – we are part of a market of 500 million, the leave campaign 
want us to come out of that market … that will make us poorer as a country,” he 
said, adding that it would clearly impact on sterling.

He said leave campaigners had in effect concluded that the economic hit was a 
price worth paying, something they reject.
