
Tell me about your new programme, Kitchen Criminals.

It's a competition between [Michelin-starred chef] John Burton Race and me to 
see who can turn the worst cooks in the country into the best apprentices. It's 
a bit reality TV, but after the first week, it does become more food related.

Aren't we already a nation of foodies?

No. Generally, people are eating out more. They are watching all these TV 
shows, they are buying all these cookbooks, they are travelling abroad to 
markets, but it's all voyeurism, not actually coming home and cooking. We are 
not like the continent - we don't come home every night and cook - we are way 
off that.

Who turned you on to cooking?

My grandmother was Italian. She emigrated when she was 19. I started to cook 
seriously with Nonna when I was about 10 or 11. We used to make tortelli 
together and we'd make bread. We also did this thing at Christmas, which we 
still do, called anellini, which is stuffed pasta with veal and beef - we make 
about 600 to 700 of them. Even when I was at college, I was still called home 
to make the anellini.

How did you get from that to being a chef?

I did a history degree, then I got a job at Midsummer House in Cambridge, 
where I was a waiter. I blagged my way into the kitchen, and then I just 
learned on the job. After that I worked abroad a bit, and then I came back to 
London when Gordon [Ramsay] was just starting out. He'd had his own restaurant, 
Aubergine, for a year and I started working with him.

There is a story about Gordon Ramsay and Marcus Wearing [now head chef at 
Savoy Grill] making bets on how long you'd last in Gordon's kitchen.

I laugh about it now and say, "I'm still here, guys, 15 years later, you 
haven't got rid of me." You started at seven in the morning, you finished at 
1am, you did it six days a week. You were knackered, Gordon was constantly on 
your case, but that was for a year. If you get better, your position gets 
better. Everyone looks at Gordon and thinks he's a monster, but the good thing 
about him is that it always stops at the kitchen door, it's never personal.

Are you making a conscious decision to step out from under his shadow?

Yes. Gordon is pretty good like that. He is the one pushing me.

What was your strategy in his kitchen?

If someone was screaming at you, the last thing you do is cry or show it has 
upset you, so you just go, "Yes Gordon, yes chef." You front it, face it, look 
him in the eye, stand your ground.

Did you ever cry in the kitchen?

If I did, I never did it in front of him. I'd rather go in the fridge and call 
him every name under the sun.

Do you need to be a bully in a kitchen?

No, you can be tough, but you have to be fair.

What do you think of the theory that women are good cooks and men are good 
chefs?

That's nonsense, total and utter rubbish. You've got people like Anne-Sophie 
Pic in France, who has got three Michelin stars; you've got Nadia Santini in 
Italy.

Does the job attract certain personalities? Is that why there's a history of 
chefs succumbing to drugs and alcoholism?

In the 80s there were stories of all these chefs on coke and there was that 
work-hard, play-hard sort of ethos, whereas I think now it's calmed down a lot. 
But there is probably an addictive personality, and there is definitely an ego 
to stroke, for me as much as the next person. I defy anyone to say it's not 
flattering to go into a book store and see your own book. And you are a form of 
artist. I wouldn't say we're the next Rembrandt or Michelangelo, but we are 
creating something.

What do you think of the sexualisation of women cooks on TV? Will you be 
licking your fingers like Nigella?

I'm not like that, so I'm not going to be like it on TV.

Tell me a cooking secret.

Do brunch instead of dinner parties. There is less alcohol and people 
generally go home sooner.

Can I have a look in your fridge?

Yes, but it's a disaster. There is probably something going off. 

Â· Kitchen Criminals is on weekdays, BBC2 at 6.30pm.
