
Lisbon, 2004. A quiet crowd is gathering on the platform of the sparkling 
Lisbon metro. We are waiting for the train that will take us to the game 
between England and Croatia. It comes rumbling into the station and instantly 
it is obvious that we are going nowhere; every carriage is packed withEngland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> fans. On the platform we are all 
silent and motionless, there’s no point edging towards the doors. They open 
with a hiss, and on cue, as if we had just flicked the mute switch off, the 
whole train bursts into song; to the tune of “Knees Up Mother Brown”, “You’re 
not getting on, you’re not getting on, you’re not getting, you’re not getting, 
you’re not getting on”. The doors snap shut. Silence. We all look at each other 
bemused and amused, and the show rolls out of town.

Bloemfontein, 2010. We are standing on the rooftop car park of the city-centre 
shopping mall where England fans have gathered before the game with Germany. 
Below, the bars and lawns, walkways and side roads are awash with red and 
white. Immediately below us a roving conga line of blokes is tumbling through 
the crowd. They are wearing an assortment of novelty hats – most seem to be 
blow-up balloon Spitfires. Suddenly, from around the corner, what appears to be 
a Wehrmacht staff car of second world war vintage pulls up with a uniformed 
driver and a “German officer” – but they are flying union jacks from the car 
aerial and one has been tied to the back of the boot. The boys immediately 
strike up, “There were 10 German bombers in the air, 10 German bombers in the 
air”. My heart sinks, they’ve started with 10, this will go on for ever. The 
German officer is conducting the chorus. I wonder what the real Germans are 
making of it. “And the RAF from England shot them down, the RAF from England 
shot them down.” Since when did the RAF come from England rather than Britain?

Such were the contrasts and contortions of the English football nation in the 
21st century. On the one hand, a riotously funny cavalcade, the real Carry on 
England, mining a distinctly English seam of music hall and comedy. On the 
other, a cultural farce in which only the English caricature of the Germans 
will do, while the royal house and its military are imagined as English rather 
than British institutions.

Over the past three decades, the England team and the fans that follow them 
have played out a compelling drama for the nation, one followed by an ever 
wider slice of the media and the public. At the critical moments of the story – 
England’s climactic defeats in the knockout rounds of European Championships 
and World Cups – the spectacle has forced schools and businesses to shift their 
timetables and attracted television audiences of between 20 and 26 million 
people.

Yet these moments when the English have rallied behind the flag have been 
rare. English identity is still a subject that makes people nervous. For much 
of the last two decades politicians have ducked the English question. The 
devolution of the New Labour years, that shifted law-making powers to Scotland 
without changing arrangements at Westminster, made England’s lack of 
constitutional representation starkly apparent. But with no resolution in sight 
to the West Lothian question, most politicians decided it was better not to 
stir things up. Some even tried to conflate Englishness with the aggressive 
behaviour of hooligans and the far right. Jack Straw, while Labour home 
secretary, argued that English nationalism was “potentially very aggressive, 
very violent <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/596703.stm>”. William Hague 
considered it “the most dangerous of all nationalisms”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F42j8t%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F42j8t%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F21%2F1413906807285%2F7dff7919-9b62-4667-b9dd-4ae2853dc3ed-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20England%20football%20team%20came%20to%20embody%20Englishness%20%7C%20David%20Goldblatt&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F42j8t%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+the+England+football+team+came+to+embody+Englishness+%7C+David+Goldblatt&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F42j8t%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F21%2F1413906807285%2F7dff7919-9b62-4667-b9dd-4ae2853dc3ed-1020x612.jpeg>
 England fans watch the team’s victory over Germany in the 1966 World Cup 
final. Photograph: PA 
Scotland, by contrast, has provided a different model – a confident, modern 
national identity. The Scottish model of civic nationalism that has emerged 
over the last 30 years, was built on the basis of the distinct Scottish 
institutions of church, law and education. Where were their English 
equivalents? The crown, Parliament, the BBC, the NHS and the armed forces were 
British. The law was shared with the Welsh, the literary canon was considered 
English but the language was now used by most of the world. The Church of 
England was available, but the multifaith character of religious England and 
the indifference of the secular majority made it a poor candidate. But there 
was one more arena where the English could perhaps construct a contemporary 
form of civic rather than ethnic nationalism.

Until now, football has not really featured in the wider debates about 
Englishness. Even when intellectuals have engaged with the game and its 
relationship to social identities, their focus has been on clubs, class or 
cities rather than the nation as a whole. Over the past 30 years, the English 
national football team has offered one of the very few civic institutions where 
Englishness was publicly on display and up for grabs. This ensemble of team, 
fans and media has offered a focus for the construction of England’s imagined 
community.

Once upon a time, the England national team was identified with Britain as a 
whole. The 1966 World Cup was hosted by England but its iconography was 
British. World Cup Willie, the tournament’s leonine mascot, sported a union 
jack waistcoat, the publicity material and programmes had the flag all over 
them, and among the crowd at Wembley the union jack outnumbered the St George’s 
Cross by 20 to one. The defeat of West Germany in the final was widely viewed 
through the prism of the second world war. When Geoff Hurst’s goal made it 3-2, 
the crowd spontaneously broke into “Rule, Britannia!” The victory party in 
London was likened to VE day. (In Edinburgh or Cardiff, it was a different 
story – the English victory was not experienced as a British triumph. The great 
Scottish striker Denis Law remembered it as “the blackest day of my life”.)

As late as the 1990 World Cup, England’s turbulent ride through the tournament 
was still accompanied by the union jack, but at Euro 96 English football and 
its fans looked different. Although the union jack was not entirely absent, it 
was, for the first time, completely overwhelmed by the St George’s Cross. By 
2006 the flag of St George had left the stadium and gone mainstream. During the 
World Cup that year, the Guardian reported that 20% of adults in England had 
bought a flag. Shops began to sell not only flags, but a whole range of 
England-themed tat – chocolate footballs, school lunchboxes, even plastic chain 
mail for the full St George look. The English public, in the midst of the 
country’s longest credit-fuelled consumer binge, lapped it up. Marks & Spencer 
gave the team its seal of approval, stocking St George’s Cross underpants.

The centrality of football to English culture has been cemented by the 
commercial ascent of the Premier League, whoserevenues exceeded £3bn 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-27667472> last season. And although not 
tied to a conscious nationalist project, the idea that England was the home of 
football, and that football was the people’s game are longstanding. The 
national team can be held up as exemplars of both past glory and post–imperial 
decline, while widespread notions of a distinctive English style of play 
(rough, honest, manly) made plausible the idea that the England team was a 
product of deeper national characteristics. The public theatre of England’s 
performances offered an opportunity for those stories and ideas to be 
embellished, transformed and challenged by new kinds of fan behaviour and 
public engagement.

Since the Scottish independence referendum those geological plates have been 
shifting again. The union has survived but as an ever more distinct and 
separate Scottish identity takes shape, the governance and the identity of 
England cannot be ignored any longer. In taking stock of who they are and what 
they might become, and given the paucity of alternatives, the English can no 
longer ignore the meaning of English football.

***

During the 1980s and 1990s England’s travelling support confirmed all the 
reasons why unionists of both the left and the right preferred to keep 
questions of English identity unanswered. Prior to the 1980s, England away 
supporters could be counted in the hundreds rather than the thousands, but by 
the early 1980s they were making their presence felt. There were outbreaks of 
fighting at both the 1980 European Championships and the 1982 World Cup. After 
the Heysel disaster in 1985, in which 39 people died in a stadium crush before 
the Liverpool-Juventus European Cup final, Uefa banned English clubs from 
European football. Without the option of following their club abroad, the hard 
core switched their travel arrangements: there was a perceptible growth in the 
numbers and volatility of the England team’s away fans. The “English disease” 
of hooliganism had been diverted rather than eradicated. The team went to the 
1988 European Championships in Germany and played dismally. Around 7,000 
England fans fought running battles with German fans and police in the medieval 
warrens of old Düsseldorf. It was with these events in mind that Italian 
security forces at the 1990 World Cup opted for a corral-and-charge-first, 
ask-questions-later policy when policing the larger contingent of England fans.

Throughout this period, England’s support remained a recruiting ground for 
rightwing organisations, such as the BNP. Matches against the Republic of 
Ireland provided the perfect stage for a particularly vicious display of 
British/unionist anger. In 1995England played Ireland in Dublin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/may/25/england-ireland-1995-rioting-international>
. When Ireland went 1-0 up in the 21st minute a group of England fans in the 
upper level of the main stand started hurling objects into the stand below. A 
phalanx of Nazi-saluting men formed up towards the front. They were later 
revealed to be members of the BNP splinter group Combat 18 who had come 
planning trouble. Fights broke out on the edges where Irish and English fans 
were not segregated, and progressively larger chunks of jagged wood from the 
old stadium were chucked into the terraces beneath them while they chanted “No 
Surrender to the IRA”. Stadium security could do no more than hold its lines, 
get people out of the way of the missiles and prevent Irish fans from storming 
the English section. Eventually the riot squad arrived and the stadium was 
cleared.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRJqimlFcJsM&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRJqimlFcJsM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRJqimlFcJsM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRJqimlFcJsM&media=>
 David Baddiel and Frank Skinner perform Three Lions in 1996 
Although England’s narrow semi-final defeat could have led to disaster, Euro 
96 was a watershed; generally free of disorder within or around the stadiums. 
The tournament and the behaviour of the England crowds provided a public 
rehabilitation of English football. The official song for Euro 96, Three Lions, 
became a staple of the England crowd’s repertoire. Written and performed by the 
blokeish comedy duo David Baddiel and Frank Skinner and Ian Broudie, lead 
singer of the Lightning Seeds, the song’s success rests on the infectious 
simplicity of its main refrain, “Football’s coming home”. The phrase connected 
on many levels: the return of English football to Europe after the post-Heysel 
ban; the end of the game’s pariah status in English culture; the assertion that 
despite its global reach the English could still claim to be the game’s 
inventors. Nonetheless, a toxic combination of xenophobia and alcohol remained 
part of English football culture. After England’s defeat to Germany on 
penalties in the semi-final there was a night of small-scale rioting in 
Trafalgar Square, with German cars targeted for burning. There were also 
violent incidents in the following two international tournaments.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0T1pXsJp_go&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0T1pXsJp_go&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0T1pXsJp_go>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0T1pXsJp_go&media=>
 Vindaloo by Fat Les 
The new peaceful majority got their turn in the limelight at the 2002 World 
Cup in Japan and South Korea. Debarred by police bans and dissuaded by the 
expensive itinerary, much of the old troublemakers stayed at home. The result 
was that fewer than 10,000 England fans travelled to Japan. Once there they 
were surprised to find considerable support, even affection, for them and their 
team. Alongside the official Japanese-English fans, delegated to support the 
honoured visitors, the popularity of English music and David Beckham in the 
country gave the whole chorus an unexpected sheen of contemporary youth cool. 
With barely any kind of trouble reported, England fans dipped their toes in the 
water of the carnivalesque, celebrating the defeat of Denmark in the knockout 
rounds with a thousand-person conga around Niigata Stadium. Chants of 
“Vindaloo” could be heard, drawn from the popular and bizarre tune of that 
name. The song’s video was a spoof of the one that accompanied the Verve’s 1997 
hit Bitter Sweet Symphony, in which lead singer Richard Ashcroft moodily barged 
his way down the pavement of a busy market street in Hoxton. While Ashcroft 
bangs shoulders with a recognisable cross-section of inner city folk, his 
avatar in Vindaloo encounters an altogether more surreal England. On the street 
and in the ever-growing crowd following the singer we see chalk-dusted Sumo 
wrestlers, kids in ice-hockey kits, characters drawn from saucy seaside 
postcards, naughty schoolgirls, strumpet nurses and a tart in a leather skirt 
and leopard-print top. Keith Allen, who had also featured in the video of the 
1990 World Cup song World in Motion, serves as the maniacal pied piper who 
rallies the crowd, bringing together the citizens of a mongrel nation bound by 
its love of football, family and food – especially Indian takeaways.

* * *

What brought about this shift? How did the travelling English football nation 
mutate from a brawling, xenophobic mob into a boisterous, globetrotting 
love-fest? In part, it reflected the broader trends in domestic football, where 
a combination of all-seater stadiums, stewarding and an older, more 
middle-class crowd had made violence at football a much rarer occurrence. It 
helped that, under pressure from Uefa and the public, the Home Office 
introduced tougher legislation to control the international travel of known 
hooligans. Perhaps most importantly, the idea that one could hitch the notion 
of white racial nationalism to the England football team and its fans became 
simply ridiculous, stripping ultra-nationalists and old-school racists of their 
niche in the crowd.

The challenge to the idea of an unambiguously white England was of course the 
work of two generations of black players

The challenge to the idea of an unambiguously white England was of course the 
work of two generations of black players, both foreign and English, who had 
fought their way past the institutionalised racism of the clubs and the public 
racism of the stands. Viv Anderson’s first cap for England in 1978 broke the 
equation of Englishness and whiteness, and the prominent role of players such 
as John Barnes, Des Walker and Paul Ince in the late 1980s and early 1990s 
rendered it meaningless. By the 21st century England would field a team that 
had a majority of black players.

If the presence of black players in the squad made the team a poor place for 
expressing a racist political nationalism, it wasn’t immediately clear that it 
made Englishness more appealing to the country’s minorities. The prevalence of 
the St George’s Cross in 1996 sent ripples of anxiety through the black press, 
where there remained considerable unease with the notion of Englishness. The 
lingering air of racism in stadiums discouraged minority ethnic football fans 
from joining the crowd in the early 1990s, but even this began to change. The 
journalist Sarfraz Manzoor captured the ambiguity of the shift after 
celebrating England’s victory over Argentina at the 2002 World Cup: “That 
night, as Asians, blacks and whites joined together … I remember thinking: this 
is what patriotism could be like if we could defang it of its nastier 
elements.” Two years later, the journalist Leon Mann was less ambiguous when 
describing his trip to Euro 2004: “The first fans I saw were a group of 10 to 
15 Asian lads who were draped in the flag of St George – I thought ‘wow’.” 
Perhaps, at last, the flag had lost its stigma. Speaking of the 2006 World Cup, 
John Sentamu, the Archbishop of York, recalled: “In the city of Birmingham, 
where a good number of taxi cabs are operated by Asians, often Muslims, the 
flag of St George became an addition to every cab.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F42j8t%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F42j8t%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F22%2F1414004070569%2Fb17c0b6a-77a1-43f1-8285-4c020f4995db-2060x1456.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20England%20football%20team%20came%20to%20embody%20Englishness%20%7C%20David%20Goldblatt&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F42j8t%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+the+England+football+team+came+to+embody+Englishness+%7C+David+Goldblatt&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F42j8t%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F22%2F1414004070569%2Fb17c0b6a-77a1-43f1-8285-4c020f4995db-2060x1456.jpeg>
 A house in Bristol during the 2010 World Cup in South Africa. Photograph: Matt 
cardy/Getty Images 
At a distance, united in the stadium, the English football nation appears a 
homogeneous collective. On closer examination, it is not so simple. The 
composition of the crowd reflects wider changes in English society in recent 
years. The middle-aged remnants of the old hooligan firms rub shoulders with 
members of the official supporters’ club, many of them women, and members of 
the growing corporate brigade who take advantage of hospitality packages. 
Alongside these, there are small groups of friends, networks of tournament 
junkies and stag-party posses. Some will have planned itineraries, others will 
have taken pot luck on the official website and landed tickets for a whole 
variety of non-England games; in between they are following England when and 
however they can.

In terms of identity politics, the picture is equally complex. The English 
have not quite decided yet where they stand. Though there has been a drift from 
Britishness to Englishness as the leading identity, the English have not 
abandoned Britishness en masse. The continuing popularity of British songs and 
imagery, if not the British flag, among England fans underlines this. “Rule, 
Britannia!” remains a crowd favourite. The second world war, or rather its 
cinematic versions, provides an important part of the soundtrack. The 
Hillsborough band from Sheffield, now officially promoted to be the England 
Supporters Band, have been a fixture at games since 1996, relentlessly churning 
their way through the music from The Dambusters and The Great Escape. The 
England fans still belt out the British national anthem with gusto. The first 
mutterings have been heard that the English, like the Welsh and Scots, should 
have their own anthem on sporting occasions, but there is no consensus for 
change. Surveys of the fans suggest that they are more inclined to describe 
their national identity as English rather than British by comparison to the 
general population, but they are by no means convinced of the need for a 
politically and constitutionally separate England. There remains a significant 
minority who are shy of all forms of nationalism, while among fans from the 
north of England there is a sense that the team and its base at Wembley are too 
closely linked to London and the South.

Football, for all its intense moments of collective ecstasy, is also about 
narrative. What football stories have the English told themselves about 
themselves over the last quarter of a century? As with the nation’s political 
conversation, the tone has consistently been set by the tabloid press. Until 
2012, the tabloids set the narrative arc of every tournament in which England 
played – from the overinflated expectations that accompany the team, to the 
splenetic recriminations and vacuous postmortems that follow defeat. A second 
crucial part of the tabloid coverage has been to overemphasise the importance 
of the England manager, who has been pursued with a vindictiveness usually 
reserved for politicians; a strategy that has obscured the real structural, 
economic and social problems in English football’s recruitment, coaching and 
development.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F42j8t%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F42j8t%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F21%2F1413912040255%2F84aa2712-288f-4e11-9d36-1504f7074666-2060x1365.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20England%20football%20team%20came%20to%20embody%20Englishness%20%7C%20David%20Goldblatt&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F42j8t%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+the+England+football+team+came+to+embody+Englishness+%7C+David+Goldblatt&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F42j8t%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F21%2F1413912040255%2F84aa2712-288f-4e11-9d36-1504f7074666-2060x1365.jpeg>
 The England Wags out and about in Baden Baden during the 2006 World Cup. 
Photograph: Mark Large/Rex Features 
The tabloids have also taken the lead in framing England’s opponents in terms 
of comically antiquated stereotypes that bind the story of England to British 
military history. In 1996 the Daily Mirror sent an armoured car to the German 
team hotel in London. On the eve of the 2006 World Cup the Daily Mail opened 
the tournament with a football scarf around Nelson’s neck and the headline 
“England Expects”. Since sex and violence sell, the press have gone looking for 
such stories. In the 1990s they simultaneously pilloried and delighted in the 
violence that accompanied many of England’s games. Something similar happened 
with sex in the 2000s. At the 2006 World Cup, when England was based in the 
upmarket spa town of Baden Baden, the FA placed the players’ families in the 
same hotel as the journalists. While the team struggled, the Wags went out on 
the town, staging opulent shopping trips and racking up fabulously expensive 
bar bills. The press had a morality tale they were looking for: wastrel women 
and gold diggers, living it up and stealing the stage, while the nation’s 
football team went to pot.

If the 2006 World Cup demonstrated how far England’s fans had come, it also 
demonstrated how far the team and the FA had to go. In 2001, not long into his 
term as the chief executive of the FA, Adam Crozier ill-advisedly declared that 
the new wave of players, nurtured in the elite clubs of the Premier League, 
were the golden generation. He pinpointed 2006, when in terms of age they would 
be around their collective peak, as England’s best chance to win the World Cup. 
In fact they were eliminated, again on penalties, in a quarter-final after 
torpid performances in the early rounds. But Crozier was right in one sense: 
this was their peak. England failed to qualify for the European Championships 
in 2008, were knocked out of the World Cup in short order in 2010 and departed 
in the same way at Euro 2012. At the 2014 World Cup they didn’t even make it 
out of the group stage. At the moment that the boom years of New Labour came to 
an end and the financial bubble popped, the stock of the golden generation was 
properly evaluated and found to be oversold and overrated. It has yet to 
recover.

***

In this more sombre light, stripped of the hyperbole of the boom years, what 
is the state of the English football nation? Like the nation itself, its 
identity shuttles between Britishness and Englishness, still tied to nostalgic 
memories of empire and war. It has, by and large, rejected the notion of an 
ethnic or a white identity, now borne out by the cross-ethnic appeal of the 
sport, and the makeup of both crowd and team. It is predominantly conservative, 
has an overlarge business class component of corporate trippers and sponsors 
and a radical cosmopolitan wing of old lefties, but retains a small rump of 
unreformed xenophobes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F42j8t%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F42j8t%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F21%2F1413906604919%2F3b636b4b-21c8-4cf0-a7e8-ffc9455397f6-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20England%20football%20team%20came%20to%20embody%20Englishness%20%7C%20David%20Goldblatt&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F42j8t%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+the+England+football+team+came+to+embody+Englishness+%7C+David+Goldblatt&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F42j8t%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F21%2F1413906604919%2F3b636b4b-21c8-4cf0-a7e8-ffc9455397f6-2060x1236.jpeg>
 England fans watch the team play Italy at the 2014 World Cup in Brazil. 
Photograph: Tom Jenkins 
More promisingly, the football nation has continued to embrace the 
carnivalesque and explore the cosmopolitan possibilities of football fandom. 
England fans in South Africa in 2010 and Brazil 2014 were more mixed than ever 
before. As one observer noted, “I was struck by how many women and families 
were at the England games and people were there for a party.” Building on the 
success of similar initiatives in Portugal and Germany, English fans played in 
schools, supported grassroots football projects and visited Robben Island, the 
townships of Johannesburg, and the favelas of Rio. By contrast, the England 
team’s engagement with the South African and Brazilian public was microscopic.

England’s campaign at the 2014 World Cup was accompanied by an almost total 
absence of St George’s flags on the nation’s cars and houses, and the most 
downbeat of expectations. Shorn of most of the “Golden Generation”, the team 
certainly appeared more likable, while the measured, unflappable Roy Hodgson 
brought a welcome degree of moderation to the circus. This was just as well, 
for one point from three games represented England’s worst performance at a 
World Cup for over half a century. England’s travelling support - loud, loyal 
and in love with their hosts - performed far better.

Outclassed and exposed on the pitch, the players apologised, but, as Barney 
Ronay suggested in the Guardian, maybe the blame lay elsewhere: in the 
desperate state of England’s grassroots infrastructure and coaching; in the 
power of the commercial imperatives of the Premier League and its predominantly 
foreign owners to trump the sporting and cultural imperatives of the England 
team; in the impotence of the FA, an organisation that could potentially 
regulate the game’s finances and insist on the importance of the common good. 
For all its limitations, the England football nation has become a more 
attractive reimagining of the stateless nation than its commercial football or 
the national team. But if the English want a team worth watching then it will 
take more than congas and chants. We must become, as in the rest of our 
national life, citizens not merely consumers, critics not merely cheerleaders.

The Game of Our Lives by David Goldblatt is published by Penguin

