
Reporting for duty on his first day at Ukip’s “call centre”, a shop space 
minutes from Ramsgate’s harbour, Darren Meacher explained why he has trekked 
from Manchester to join others working their way by phone through lists of 
voters as part of Nigel Farage’s bid to capture the Tory-held seat ofSouth 
Thanet 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/mar/16/farage-curtains-for-me-ukip-leader-south-thanet>
.

For the 17-year-old, won over by watching YouTube videos of Ukip’s leader, the 
party represents “something different, something fun”.

In the east Kent constituency, however, where Farage is currently leading the 
polls, the presence of Meacher and others reflects the scale of the Ukip drive 
to achieve a long sought-after general election breakthrough.
Cartogram and social statistics from the constituency 
<http://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2015/03/britain-thinks-cards/index.html?location=E14000948>
“The whole range of strategies going on has been, I suppose, rather non-Ukip, 
rather more professional, rather more organised and targeted than they have 
been in the past,” said Chris Wells, a Ukip councillor and Tory defector who 
cites door-knocking, mass leafleting and – perhaps most importantly – a series 
of local public meetings attended by hundreds, where a focus has been place on 
winning over undecideds.

If Farage overturns the 17% Tory majority, it won’t just be the culmination of 
a career-long personal quest for a seat in parliament, it’ll be the centrepiece 
of a breakthrough tipped to be largely concentrated in a cluster of eastern 
English constituencies regarded as particularly fertile on account of 
possessing, to varying degrees, ‘Ukip-friendly’ demographics. They include: 
ageing populations, concentrations of so-called ‘left-behind’ low-skilled 
working class voters and a relative absence of student and ethnic minority 
households.

The list includes Grimsby, Thurrock, Yarmouth and Clacton, which provided 
Ukip’s first Westminster election victory when Tory defectorDouglas Carswell 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/oct/10/ukip-wins-clacton-first-parliamentary-seat-douglas-carswell>
 won last year’s by-election (The party’s second seat in the younger, more 
middle-class Kent constituency ofRochester and Strood 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/nov/21/ukip-win-in-rochester-and-strood-piles-pressure-on-david-cameron>
 is a relative outlier).

An economically stagnant swath of the most easterly part of Kent stretching 
around the Isle of Thanet and then south towards Dover, South Thanet includes 
Ramsgate, the neighbouring seaside town of Broadstairs and other districts 
ranging from an economically deprived chunk of Margate to the ‘Cinque Port’ 
town of Sandwich and surrounding countryside.

Yet while much of South Thanet’s local demographics should still make it 
fairly Tory-friendly, Conservative head office might even have more cause for 
alarm as a result of the most recent public poll, which showed not just that 
Farage is leading (38.6%), but that Labour’s Will Scobie (27.6%) is ahead of 
the Tory candidate,Craig MacKinlay 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/nov/04/ukip-fringe-pressure-group-moneyed-political-force-nigel-farage>
 (26.6%), a former UKIP leader selected to defend the seat vacated by the “One 
Nation” ToryLaura Sandys 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/dec/23/european-union-exit-uk-spit-tory-laura-sandys>
. Other challengers include Al Murray, standing in the guise of his comedy 
character the Pub Landlord though with work to do on his 1.4% rating.

Related: Election 2015: The Guardian poll projection 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/ng-interactive/2015/feb/27/guardian-poll-projection>

In a focus group conducted for the Guardian 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/mar/23/voters-feelings-general-election-2015-main-parties-britain-thinks>
 byBritainThinks <http://britainthinks.com/> in the constituency, name 
recognition of MacKinlay was low – as a result, evidence emerged of a shift 
towards Ukip among male voters wavering between it and the Tories.

In this constituency the relative balance between Ukip and the Tories will not 
just help Farage defeat theConservatives 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives>, but also prevent Labour 
coming through the middle, according to current polls. Nationally, how the 
battle between the parties settle will also help determine the outcome of the 
election as many voters fluctuate between the two.

Neil, a lifeguarding trainer from Ramsgate, sums up the appeal of Farage: 
“He’s a snake, ruthless, but that’s why I’d vote for him. The rest are trying 
to be nice, and he doesn’t care if he’s popular or what people think.”

At the same time, perceptions of Labour 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> as elitist also meant the voters 
saw the party as little different to the Tories.

The BritainThinks verdict


Panellists’ views of the Conservatives were vivid and deeply held.

'Farage is a snake, ruthless, but that’s why I’d vote for him'

A Conservative would live in a country mansion (with a place in town too), 
working on “daddy’s estate” or as a banker, and playing polo and yachting round 
the world at weekends. Their Come Dine With Me menu would be “caviar to start, 
a three bird roast and gilded meringues or Eton Mess” and they’d only drink 
“champers, darling!”
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F24%2Fgeneral-election-south-thanet-voters-video&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F24%2Fgeneral-election-south-thanet-voters-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F3%2F24%2F1427196772093%2Fcrop_KP_136302_640x360.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Battleground%20Britain%3A%20South%20Thanet%20voters%20have%20their%20say%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F24%2Fgeneral-election-south-thanet-voters-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Battleground+Britain%3A+South+Thanet+voters+have+their+say+%E2%80%93+video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F24%2Fgeneral-election-south-thanet-voters-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F3%2F24%2F1427196772093%2Fcrop_KP_136302_640x360.jpeg>
 South Thanet voters have their say 
Tellingly, panellists’ perceptions of the Labour brand weren’t very different 
from those of the Conservatives at all. “Mr Labour” would live “in a four-bed 
detached house with a double garage, with a little pied à terre in town”, and 
he’d be a banker too. For his Come Dine With Me menu he would have “pretentious 
fish and chips” or “sausage en croute – some kind of regional, working class 
food, seriously tarted up”.


While for some, a Ukip candidate would be living in a townhouse, serving 
British beef, for others, it would be a “run-down house in Thanet – to try to 
fit in with society” and a job “in a gun shop”.

Neil put this down to a disjuncture between the party leadership and the party 
support: “There’s a dislocation between the people who support Ukip and Nigel 
who is of a different class – I think we think that it’s more of a working 
class support, but with more of an upper class leader.”

Read the full conclusions by BritainThinks here 
<http://britainthinks.com/battlegroundbritain/fieldwork-note/wave-1/south-thanet>
.

The local Tory effort might yet be helped though by approval for Cameron among 
some tempted by Ukip. “He’s proven that he knows what he’s talking about,” said 
Alex, a worker in telecom sales who voted Labour in 2010 but was now 
considering Ukip and the Tories.


Related: Finding out how voters really feel as the general election looms 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/mar/23/voters-feelings-general-election-2015-main-parties-britain-thinks>

Already, the Tory national strategy is being brought to bear on the local 
battle. Travellers between Sandwich and Ramsgate encounter roadside billboards 
bearingthe party’s Saatchi-designed ‘wrecking ball’ warning 
<http://www.campaignlive.co.uk/news/1336423/> that Labour would ruin the 
economic recovery.


MacKinlay himself insists that he has been doing more canvassing than Ukip and 
Labour put together and points out that the most recent public poll was funded 
by Alan Bown, a longstanding Ukip donor who funded other polls in Ukip targets.

As for the suggestion that Eurosceptic voters would choose Farage over a 
‘Ukip-lite’ candidate, he responded: “The difference is that the Conservatives 
will deliver a referendum. That’s in the world of political reality.”

On Come Dine With Me, a Tory would have ‘caviar to start’, while ‘Mr Labour’ 
would have ‘pretentious fish and chips’

Outside the group, even in the Tory heartland of Sandwich, it’s not hard to 
find mutterings of discontent. Enjoying coffee last week on one of the town’s 
Tudor lanes with his wife Pauline, Nigel Hayward suggested that Farage was the 
right man to “shake things up” before zeroing in on their biggest concern. 
“Well, it’s immigration, really? Isn’t it?” said Hayward, a clock and watch 
repairer in his late 60s, as he lit a pipe.

Meanwhile, on the doorsteps of the Margate district of Cliftonville, one of 
Kent’s most deprived areas and historically a Labour stronghold, Scobie, the 
party’s 25-year-old candidate, was working hard last to consolidate core 
support in what he characterised a three way marginal where he could emerge as 
the “anti-Ukip” choice.

It didn’t take long for immigration to come up. A pensioner who opened the 
first door quickly moved from talking about poor street lighting to a familiar 
allegation of anti-social behaviour in a nearby street where eastern European 
immigrants have been among those renting decaying former mansions and 
guesthouses.


Related: Battleground Britain: Labour 'cannon fodder' desert to SNP in Glasgow 
East 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/mar/23/labour-cannon-fodder-desert-to-snp-in-glasgow-east-general-election>

After listening, Scobie suggested he had heard that the real blame for the 
noise was said to have lay with some unemployed white British residents and 
convinced the man to take a Labour election leaflet with particular prominence 
given to the party’s line on immigration – including preventing new immigrants 
from claiming benefits for two years.

Later on though, an awkward reminder of national politics comes when the 
Labour team’s minibus moves away from the area. A man flags it down to wish 
them well, but urges: “You’ve got to get rid of Miliband.”


Scobie admits that some Labour support has leaked to Ukip but insists that 
momentum is behind his campaign.

“We have seen it shift in particular since the Meet the Ukippers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/feb/23/meet-the-ukippers-beware-people-who-own-porcelain-clowns>
 programme,” he added, referring to a recent BBC documentary about the local 
Ukip branch which led to one of its councillors being expelled after she was 
filmed saying that she had a “problem” with black people and using racial 
epithets.

Since then, Ukip also appears to have tightened up considerably on its 
management of its members’ contact with the press, perhaps because of the 
programme but also because it believes that it is within sniffing distance of 
victory. Senior central strategists have been more closely involved in the 
campaign.

Some commentators have also interpreted Farage’s pledge to step down as party 
leader if he fails to win the seat as another indication that he is confident 
of victory.
Navigation 
<http://interactive.guim.co.uk/2015/mar/battleground-britain/embed/?row=5> 
Either way, the maxim that “all politics is local” could yet be crucial, such 
as the strong support in South Thanet forthe reopening of the airport at Manston
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/19/manston-airport-kent-closure-plans-jobs-risk>
.


“I want to vote for a party that will bring back the airport – but it will be 
down to the council,” said Christine, a retired clinical analyst and a former 
worker at Pfizer’s sprawling research centre near Sandwich,where thousands of 
jobs were lost after it closed in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jan/26/thanet-conflict-confusion-pfizer-recovery>
.


Anger, which Christine confessed to feeling about politics and even towards 
her likely choice of the Labour party, is also ever-present.

While concerned about the possibility of a win by Ukip, a party he regarded as 
racist, retired head teacher Chris was at least glad that people were furious 
at the political system.

“I’m heartened that people are getting angry. My youngest works at a 
supermarket – 7.5 hours a week, and 3¾ hour shifts so they don’t have to give 
him a break. He has no employment rights, but no one is getting angry about 
zero hours. We put up with anything and making money is the point.”

• Surnames of panellists have been withheld to ensure they are not 
deliberately targeted by canvassing or on social media in the early stages of 
the campaign.
