
Judging by Ben Silbermann’s latest pins, the co-founder and chief executive of 
Pinterest is a great cook, a keen photographer and a marvellous husband and 
father. His boards, as they’re called, may be self-promotional but they made me 
wish I’d seen hisideas for things to do with small children 
<https://uk.pinterest.com/8en/fun-things-to-do-with-max/> when mine were 
smaller; want to cooka Star Wars-themed breakfast 
<https://uk.pinterest.com/pin/2533343518759385/>; and covet a leather and 
waxed-canvas backpack <https://uk.pinterest.com/pin/157837161917757277/> for a 
roomy $420.

And that’s sort of the point of Pinterest, a site Silbermann likes to call “a 
catalogue of ideas”, but which offers a vision of the internet as a temple to 
consumerism. With a focus on food, fashion, home decor and parenting,Pinterest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pinterest> is not as shouty as Twitter, 
as instant as Instagram or as sexy as Snapchat, but acts like a glossy magazine 
with childcare advice and lovely helpful people in it.

When we meet in Pinterest’s new London headquarters, built for the original 
manufacturer of car speedometers but now kitted out with the obligatory fridges 
and blond wood of a technology company Silbermann describes himself as “really 
typical” of his company’s users. Seeing my raised eyebrow at the idea of a man 
with a sizeable chunk of a company recently valued at $11bn being a typical 
user, he says, “I meant in what I collect. I enjoy cooking so I collect lots of 
recipes. I have two kids and I collect activities for the older one and toys 
and books for the younger one. I have a collection of business articles or 
quotes that I think are memorable.”

His gender as well as his billionaire status separates him from the majority 
of the more than 100 million active monthly “pinners”. Women dominate the site 
– they make up some 80% of users – although the gender split is said to be more 
balanced outside the US. One-third of all new sign-ups are men This female bias 
and the fact that lower-income midwesterners are thought to make up its largest 
individual grouping are often seen as reasons why a site which stacked up 2bn 
searches last month is less well reported and perhaps less valued than its 
technology rivals.

Launched by Silbermann in 2009 with a college friend, Pinterest was called 
both the “hottest small startup in the world” and the “next Facebook” as long 
ago as 2012. Today, the breathless articles have decreased in number while the 
usage has not. The number of active users has doubled in the past two years. 
Even seven years in, Pinterest is difficult to define. “When we talk to people 
about Pinterest we often describe it as not a social network,” says Silbermann. 
“Social networks are about communicating with other people. Pinterest is really 
about planning and getting ideas for your own personal life.” He likes to cite 
the views of early adopters, who said: “With social networks, it’s them time. 
With Pinterest, it’s me time.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kqf8%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kqf8%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b587040d62b9ca69d870b7d1589cafd7d70d84a%2F543_0_5433_3261%2F5433.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pinterest%20chief%20Ben%20Silbermann%3A%20%E2%80%98we%E2%80%99re%20not%20a%20social%20network%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kqf8%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pinterest+chief+Ben+Silbermann%3A+%E2%80%98we%E2%80%99re+not+a+social+network%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kqf8%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b587040d62b9ca69d870b7d1589cafd7d70d84a%2F543_0_5433_3261%2F5433.jpg>
 Ben Silbermann says Pinterest ‘is for saving ideas, not riling people up or 
big statements’. Photograph: Graeme Robertson for the Guardian 
A native of Iowa, Silberman is also now an atypical pinner because more than 
half of users are based outside the US. After opening in London three years 
ago, He has described international markets - which include other parts of 
western Europe as well as Brazil and Japan - as the company’s “highest 
priority”. As if to prove this, Pinterest last month launched its first ever 
global advertising campaign on Channel 4’s Eating Well With Helmsley And 
Helmsley food programme, and staged a takeover of London’s Bond Street tube 
station last week.

Although companies such as John Lewis and Tesco like the 
straight-through-to-purchase nature of the site, its revenues (just $169m in 
2015 but with a target of $2.8bn by 2018, according to figures leaked to 
TechCrunch) are all derived from promoted pins. The fact that it can be quite 
hard to tell the corporate and homegrown content apart is what excites 
advertisers, according to Sarah Treliving, head of digital at the company’s 
media agency Mediacom. “It’s native advertising as it was meant to be,” she 
says.

When searching for a corporate comparison Silbermann cites Google, where he 
once worked as a product specialist. “I don’t know if you’d consider it a media 
platform, but what Google really did is make information retrieval incredibly 
fast, easy and universal. We want to do for discovery what they want to do for 
search.”

What this “discovery” has led to is a relatively friendly place full of 
strangers who largely shun politics or anything too unpleasant. “The biggest 
thing about Pinterest is that people are there saving ideas for their personal 
lives,” says Silbermann. “Not to rile up other people or make a big statement.” 
He adds, “We do think of ourselves as a technology company but at the same time 
we really value really good design and a really good community, without being 
snarky.”

Unlike other technology companies, Pinterest appeared to recognise early on 
that the images posted by its users could also be damaging. Perhaps unusually, 
Silbermann is happy to say the company has “efficient ways of identifying that 
[content] and pulling it down”. It refuses ads for weight loss products and 
services, prescription drugs, tobacco, weapons and gambling among other things, 
for example.

Yet Silbermann’s own experience suggests policing the internet is easier said 
than done. As part of a policy prohibiting promotion of self-harm, the company 
worked with the National Eating Disorders Association in the US, with a warning 
and links to websites offering help prompted when the word “thinspiration” is 
searched for. Yet asimple search 
<https://uk.pinterest.com/search/pins/?q=thinspiration&rs=typed&0=thinspiration%7Ctyped&remove_refine=yukari%7Ctyped>
 suggests there are plenty of pictures of really skinny young women and only a 
tiny “Are you struggling with an eating disorder?” link.

Unwholesome messages do not shift food and drink, of course, but the character 
of the site also seems to echo the character of its founder, one of the most 
polite and unassuming chief executives I’ve ever interviewed. When I make a 
mistake over the name of a co-founder (easy to do, there are four of them and 
this one joined ages after it actually started), Silbermann fails to pick up on 
it. Slight and incredibly softly spoken, he may refuse to answer questions 
about, say, his personal stake but at least he has the good grace to ask “Does 
that answer your question?” twice.

He is too an atypical tech billionaire, despite his crumpled white shirt and 
black jeans. “From the outside there’s a perception Silicon Valley is full of 
really young geeky guys. The reality is there are lots of different types of 
people there,” he points out. The relentless focus on all things technical in 
Palo Alto does mean that he appreciates getting away, particularly back to see 
family in the midwest - he comes from a long line of doctors. “It’s sometimes 
good to travel somewhere else, just because you get a bit more diversity of 
interests.”

Asked about his five-year plan for the company, Silbermann cites two main 
goals: making consumers visit for “ideas for everyday life” and “to make as 
many of our pins buyable as possible”. He says he also wants Pinterest to 
remain “self-sufficient”, which could suggest a stock market listing is not 
imminent. “The product is still very, very young. And five years is a long time 
in the technology business.”

Curriculum vitae

Age 33

Education Roosevelt High School, Yale University

Career 2003 consultant at Corporate Executive Board 2006 product specialist at 
Google focused on display advertising products2009 co-founder and chief 
executive of Pinterest
