
I get fairly regular emails from the "corporate communications manager" for 
the regional publisher,Archant <http://www.theguardian.com/media/archant>. They 
tell of editorial successes, promotions, awards and so on.

For some reason, I didn't receive an email seven days ago following the 
Norwich-based publisher's latest annual general meeting. It must have been an 
oversight.

So, belatedly, I am now able to report that Archant, which is facing a 
potential £13m tax bill 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2013/mar/12/archant-profits-tax-bill>, has 
suspended dividend payments to shareholders.

That revelation comes in the final two lines of a report about the AGM on 
Archant's website <http://www.archant.co.uk/news_article.aspx?aid=157>, which 
states:

"Group finance director Brian McCarthy then addressed in detail the matter of 
a complex dispute with HMRC over possible payment of corporation tax and 
interest dating back to 2003.

In the light of this the company has decided to suspend payment of its final 
dividend, and future dividends until the outcome of the tax dispute is known."

What were the details? How did a medium-sized publisher (Archant is the 
seventh largest regional publisher by circulation) get into such a fix? Have 
any heads rolled?

Similarly, on another significant matter about the company, why did no member 
of the board or senior executive wonder at thecirculation rises of its titles 
at a time when every other regional title was losing sales? 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2012/aug/29/regional-abcs-archant-circulation-held>

Evidently, none of these questions were addressed at the meeting - attended by 
120 people - by the company's chief executive, Adrian Jeakings, who also 
happens to be president of the industry's trade body, the Newspaper Society.

Instead, according to the website report, Jeakings spoke about the Leveson 
inquiry while the company's chairman, Richard Jewson, talked about the board 
remaining confident in challenging times about its ability "to adapt to the 
continuously changing environment in which it operates."

I think that's code for cutting costs. Meanwhile, why is Archant facing a £13m 
tax bill? And, should it be necessary to pay it, does it mean more editorial 
staff walking the plank?

Sources: Archant <http://www.archant.co.uk/news_article.aspx?aid=157>/
HoldTheFrontPage 
<http://www.holdthefrontpage.co.uk/2013/news/publisher-halts-dividends-over-possible-13m-tax-bill/>
/The Guardian 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2013/mar/12/archant-profits-tax-bill>
