
Rapid urbanisation in many parts of the developing world is putting an 
increasing strain on the ability of cities to deliver critical services such as 
water and sanitation. More thanhalf of the world’s population 
<http://www.un.org/en/development/desa/news/population/world-urbanization-prospects-2014.html>
 – 54% – live in urban areas and some700 million 
<http://www.unicef.org/publications/files/Progress_on_Sanitation_and_Drinking_Water_2015_Update_.pdf>
 of them do not use an improved sanitation facility, where human waste is 
separated from human contact.

Related: 'We want to turn poo into gold': how SMS is transforming Senegal's 
sanitation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/aug/12/poo-uber-sms-senegal-sanitation>

But even where there are such facilities, this does not necessarily translate 
into environmentally safe practices. More thantwo billion people 
<http://www.gatesfoundation.org/What-We-Do/Global-Development/Water-Sanitation-and-Hygiene>
 in urban areas use toilets connected to septic tanks or latrine pits that are 
not safely emptied or that discharge raw sewage into open drains or surface 
waters. With another2.5 billion people 
<http://www.un.org/en/development/desa/news/population/world-urbanization-prospects-2014.html>
 expected to live in cities by 2050, authorities urgently need to keep up with 
the growing urban population, ensure equitable access to improved sanitation, 
and safeguard the appropriate and environmentally-safe management of human 
waste.

Believe it or not, mapping the journey of faecal waste is an important part of 
the solution. IRC’snew sanitation assessment tool 
<http://www.ircwash.org/blog/calculating-shit-volumes-can-be-messy-business%20> 
offers a simple representation of the volumes of sludge safely (and unsafely) 
dealt with at each stage of the sanitation chain, allowing city planners to 
determine where the biggest losses are and where to focus their (often limited) 
budgets.

Although tools to assess faecal sludge management (FSM) do already exist, they 
are either not able to include qualitative information or the scorecards they 
provide do not give adequate explanations for a bad score, nor do they provide 
actual volumes, which makes it difficult to translate the results into action. 
IRC’s tool, however, analyses the availability and enforcement of policy and 
legislation, and the presence of and adherence to health and safety through 
specific scorecards.

The tool works by conducting interviews with relevant city officials and 
collecting information about the current sanitation situation, which is 
supplemented by data from existing plans and reports. Teams of sanitation 
professionals and local support staff will then visit selected neighbourhoods 
to check the various facilities and validate the data already obtained. Teams 
will also visit existing wastewater or faecal sludge treatment plants to verify 
whether the waste actually gets there.

After all this data is collected and validated, it is entered into various 
spreadsheets that make up IRC’s tool. The tool then processes the calculated 
volumes and generates score cards, which are reviewed and used for reporting.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4te3p%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4te3p%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e013a9ccb4a6e64dd5f65faaee8c373ed096496%2F0_0_960_720%2Fmaster%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20mapping%20faecal%20flows%20cut%20the%20crap%20in%20developing%20cities%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4te3p%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can+mapping+faecal+flows+cut+the+crap+in+developing+cities%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4te3p%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e013a9ccb4a6e64dd5f65faaee8c373ed096496%2F0_0_960_720%2Fmaster%2F960.jpg>
 Percentage scores are given a traffic light code. A score below 50% = red, 
between 50% and 75% = orange and above 75% = green. In this example, from a 
site in Indonesia, many percentages are in red which means these areas would 
need improvement. Photograph: IRC Wash 
The tool was tested in the city of Mataram, the capital of West Nusa Tenggara 
province in Lombok, central Indonesia. The city has an estimated population of 
450,000 people, but within two weeks enough data was collected to give the 
local government a comprehensive insight into the current sanitation situation. 
While city authorities were worried about citizens who did not have access to 
any type of toilet facility, the findings of the rapid assessment revealed a 
much bigger challenge.

Even though 99% of the population use a toilet, the findings of our rapid 
assessment show that close to 100% of the faecal waste accumulated was ending 
up somewhere in the environment. Although it is not clear where exactly the 
faecal waste that has been collected ends up, it can be safely assumed that 
most of it pollutes fields, rivers and tourist beaches as most of it never 
reaches a treatment facility.

Related: We only have five years to achieve clean water and safe toilets for 
all 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jul/01/we-only-have-five-years-to-achieve-clean-water-and-safe-toilets-for-all>

These findings from Indonesia are not a cause for pessimism, though. It is a 
great start for a thorough understanding of where things go wrong, and the 
results are expected to be a wake-up call for city authorities. Using the 
results of the rapid assessment, authorities in Mataram now know which problems 
need to be addressed most urgently, and can start making the necessary plans 
for incremental change. This kind of assessment can hopefully help more local 
governments start considering the entire sanitation service chain and treat 
faecal waste more seriously.

Erick Baetings is a senior sanitation specialist, and Ingeborg Krukkert leads 
Asia programmes, atIRC <http://www.ircwash.org/>, a water sanitation and 
hygiene think-and-do tank in the Netherlands.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter, and have your say on issues 
around water in development using#H2Oideas 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23H2Oideas&src=typd>.
