
For a second or two I was tempted to apply 
<https://publicappointments.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/appointment/majestys-chief-inspector-education-childrens-services-skills/>
. The job of replacing Sir Michael Wilshaw as Ofsted chief is up for grabs and 
I’m sure, deep down, every school leader wouldn’t mind having a crack at it. 
Nothing stirs up more angst among headteachers than Ofsted. So we’d all like to 
make things better.

Since I became a headteacher in 1998, the chief inspector has often been 
portrayed as a pantomime villain – an essential part of the plot, but 
everyone’s least favourite character. I’ve seen seven chiefs come and go, and 
with each one comes the heralding of a new dawn.

As an inspector myself for seven years, I lost count of the new-and-improved 
Ofsted <http://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> frameworks we had to get 
to grips with. No sooner was the ink dry than a new one came along.

Related: Secret Teacher: I see Ofsted for what it is – a purposeless farce 
<http://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/feb/20/secret-teacher-see-ofsted-for-what-it-is-purposeless-farce>

Each reincarnation came with mandatory retraining at £95 a pop (yes, we had to 
pay for ourselves). We’d spend a day in a windowless hotel conference room 
trawling through datasets and slides. Now and again we’d watch a video of some 
children in a lesson – was it a good lesson or not? Inevitably we couldn’t 
agree. Out of 400 or so inspectors, there would be a four-way split on how we’d 
judge it. Thankfully, Ofsted eventually saw sense on this and changed its 
policy, finally realising that what the teaching profession had been saying for 
years was correct: you cannot judge a school byobserving lessons 
<http://www.learningspy.co.uk/featured/ofsted-teachers-schools-must-allowed-teach-see-fit/>
.

But this surely raises the question: what’s the point of visiting a school in 
the first place? Herein lies the problem with inspection: it’s flawed to the 
point that it is nigh on impossible. Can you judge a football team without 
watching it play? And so, do you watch the team play, or do you just look at 
their results? And how do you compare two teams with entirely different 
resources? Leicester City, say, and Barcelona?

I got into a bit of bother 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/dec/08/academy-governors-resign-schools-inspection-ofsted>
 for mentioning this while I was serving as an inspector. I suggested that 
although we were all trying to do good as we go – all being dedicated and 
desperate to get it right – the inspectors were doing so within a framework 
that simply does not work. I wrote about it ina blogpost 
<https://standoutlearning.me/2015/09/14/doing-good-as-we-go/>, but Ofsted 
didn’t like it and demanded I take the comments down. I refused, and soI 
resigned <https://standoutlearning.me/2015/12/01/blog-1-v-0-ofsted/>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h9dn%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h9dn%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde1badfd9ef36290b3ee3690dc2dab4cb457f0a7%2F0_4_5616_3371%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Advice%20for%20the%20next%20Ofsted%20chief%3A%20it%E2%80%99s%20time%20to%20scrap%20your%20job&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h9dn%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Advice+for+the+next+Ofsted+chief%3A+it%E2%80%99s+time+to+scrap+your+job&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h9dn%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde1badfd9ef36290b3ee3690dc2dab4cb457f0a7%2F0_4_5616_3371%2F5616.jpg>
 Sir Michael Wilshaw: stepping down next year. Photograph: Andrew Fox 
This was a great shame to me because I loved working for Ofsted, especially as 
a serving head trying to reform from within. Headteachers generally came up to 
me during inspections, grateful that I was on the team as “one of them”. Unless 
an inspector has experienced the pressures of a £250k budget deficit, a third 
of your teachers on maternity leave and class sizes nudging towards 40, then 
they shouldn’t be inspecting.

Education is too important to leave the decision-making to the whim of one or 
two people. I guarantee that in any inspection, if you repeat it a week later 
with two different inspectors then the outcome will be different. And given 
that decisions can rip the heart out of a local community, inspection at its 
worst is both cruel and unusual.

Related: How would you improve Ofsted?  
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jun/30/how-would-you-improve-ofsted-teachers-schools-education-inspection>

Even though the framework for inspection is a slimmer beast than it used to 
be, there are still hundreds of criteria that need to be considered in real 
time by inspectors. All of this then needs to be triangulated and tested, all 
the while tearing round classes, snatching 10 minutes here or there with a 
teacher who, while under this immense pressure, has the small task of keeping 
35 excitable four-year-olds happy.

You cannot make a meaningful judgment on how effective a school is by spending 
a day in it. Even I as a headteacher in my own schools cannot do that. But to 
expect a complete stranger to arrive at 8.30am and make a decision several 
hours later about whether a school is likely to be “outstanding” or placed in 
“special measures” is plain wrong. Last month Wilshaw told theeducation select 
committee 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/education-committee/news-parliament-2015/purpose-quality-education-evidence2-/>
 he could tell how good a school was within half an hour. Personally, I don’t 
think that’s the best sort of judgment.

I remember at one inspection we were seriously panicking at lunchtime on day 
two, because, try as we might, we simply hadn’t found any good teaching. The 
lead inspector, an ex-head, was desperate to make the right call. He was under 
pressure from the Ofsted office to find evidence that would match the school’s 
published data. No matter where we went – lessons, classrooms, books, displays 
– the quality simply wasn’t there. After a lengthy phone call with the regional 
office, we were told that we had to give the school a “good”, even though our 
evidence said otherwise.

So please don’t tell me that inspection is not flawed. If that were the case, 
why the continual new frameworks? Why were 40% of theinspection workforce culled
 <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-33198707> last year? More to the point, 
how many schools have been placed in special measures on the back of reports 
that were written by this 40%?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h9dn%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h9dn%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19993da9bfe829dc0cc3d6e73f59473eea01a6f3%2F2097_853_1674_2093%2F1674.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Advice%20for%20the%20next%20Ofsted%20chief%3A%20it%E2%80%99s%20time%20to%20scrap%20your%20job&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h9dn%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Advice+for+the+next+Ofsted+chief%3A+it%E2%80%99s+time+to+scrap+your+job&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h9dn%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19993da9bfe829dc0cc3d6e73f59473eea01a6f3%2F2097_853_1674_2093%2F1674.jpg>
 Andrew Morrish. Photograph: Andrew Fox for the Guardian 
The new chief inspector needs to acknowledge that the situation is far from 
ideal, and have the humility to do so in public.

To whoever takes on the role, here is your first task: scrap yourself. Ofsted 
has outgrown its original remit, so you need to abolish the organisation in its 
current form. Instead, you could morph it into a School Inspection Service – 
always remembering that you are there to provide a service. You’ll need to make 
sure it is impeccable, relevant and of a consistently high quality. You also 
need to be accountable.

In place of inspection by a watchdog, we need to develop accredited schemes of 
peer review – perhaps based on those already in use such as the neatly named
“Instead” 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jun/30/ofsted-learn-instead-alternative-inspections-headteachers-schools-naht>
 scheme by the National Association of Head Teachers. It will be owned by the 
profession and won’t keep changing every couple of years because we will take 
our time, consult and confer, and get it right first time.

Essentially the service that you will provide will ask two key questions: does 
a school meet minimum agreed standards? And is the quality of the new national 
peer review scheme robust?

Related: What could Ofsted learn from ‘Instead’ inspections run by 
headteachers? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jun/30/ofsted-learn-instead-alternative-inspections-headteachers-schools-naht>

I’m very happy for you to check every few years if my school complies with 
agreed national minimum standards, on items such as safeguarding, floor 
standards, parental complaints. If I meet all of these then my school is 
“good”. With that established, leave it for the professional experts to then 
visit my school and tell me exactly how good (or bad) I am through peer review. 
Think of yourselves as restaurant health and safety inspectors: your job is to 
check for food hygiene compliance, ensuring consistency. Leave the tasting of 
the food to the professional experts – the restaurant critics. Let it be the 
serving heads who get to dish out the Michelin stars. It would save quite a bit 
of money, too.

We need a national moratorium on the process and purpose of inspection so that 
we can regroup and redirect. We must seize the moment.

Andrew Morrish is CEO and executive head of Victoria Academies Trust in the 
West Midlands. His new book, The Art of Standing Out, will be published later 
this year
