
A major academic body is proposing that editors of its journals be banned from 
blogging in an effort to maintain a “professional” environment.

The International Studies Association (ISA), which connects international 
studies scholars to promote research in the field, created the proposal to 
officially ban editors from blogging because “the issue of ‘maintaining and 
promoting a professional environment’ is particularly pertinent to the material 
that is made public through the use of blogs.”

The proposal is “pretty antithetical to the entire academic enterprise,” said 
Stephen Saideman, a Paterson chair at Carleton University's Norman Paterson 
School of International Affairs and president of the ISA’s foreign policy 
analysis section, who postedthe proposal text  
<http://saideman.blogspot.ca/2014/01/are-blogs-inherently-unprofessional.html>
on his blog on Monday.

“Academic blogging grew from the desire to compensate for people being unable 
to access academic scholarship,” Saideman told the Guardian. He said academic 
blogging has become a part of a professor's job and that it is part of a 
movement to share scholarship with broader groups of people, including 
translating it into other languages.

One of his many critiques of the ISA’s proposal is that it further reduces the 
plurality of voices in scholarship, potentially affecting the number of 
minorities and women heard in academic discussions. If you’re telling people 
that the only way to be on editorial teams is by reducing your voice elsewhere, 
then that’s logically going to reduce the amount of voices out there,” Saideman 
said.

Members of the academic blogging 
<http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/2014/01/inherently-unprofessional> 
communityquickly voiced <http://tompepinsky.com/2014/01/28/isa-and-blogging/> 
their opposition 
<http://www.whiteoliphaunt.com/duckofminerva/2014/01/blogging-and-teaching.html>
 to the measure 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/monkey-cage/wp/2014/01/28/another-ill-conceived-attempt-at-regulating-academic-blogging/>
. Amanda Murdie, an assistant professor of political science at the University 
of Missouri, said the policyviolates the protections the ISA claims 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/monkey-cage/wp/2014/01/28/another-ill-conceived-attempt-at-regulating-academic-blogging/>
 to grant academics who are published in its journals.

“I have personally found that blogging, as one of many tools available in the 
21st century, aids greatly in my teaching, service, and research 
responsibilities,” Murdie wrote in a post for the blogging collectiveThe Duck 
of Minerva 
<http://www.whiteoliphaunt.com/duckofminerva/2014/01/shame-on-you-isa.html>. 
“It’s these responsibilities – not my responsibility to set up your conference 
or shepherd a few manuscripts – that is at the heart of why I became an 
academic.”

If the proposal is passed, it would prevent the editors of six journals from 
blogging: International Studies Quarterly, International Studies Review, 
International Studies Perspectives, Foreign Policy Analysis, International 
Political Sociology and International Interactions.

Saideman said he is confident the proposal will not pass, but: “If it has to 
be between blogging and participating on a journal’s editorial board – I’ll 
choose blogging.”

The 50 voting members of the ISA’s governing council are set to debate the 
proposal at the organization’s annual meeting on 25 March.

"Often the sort of 'professional environment' we expect our members to promote 
is challenged by the nature of the presentations and exchanges that often occur 
on blogs," said ISA president Harvey Starr in an email.

He said that the purpose of the proposal is to address confusion that may 
arise from people confusing personal blogs of ISA journals with the editorial 
policies of their journals.

"The policy was proposed to avoid a situation where journal blogs are 
conflated with personal (or non-ISA) blogs and editors use them seamlessly," 
Starr said. "Such a situation creates confusion and controversy particularly 
when some of these personal and group blogs are controversial in terms of their 
views, and when they seem to cause discomfort in sections of ISA membership."

In December, the Kansas board of regents adopted a social media policy that 
allowsKansas state universities to fire employees for “improper use” of social 
media 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/monkey-cage/wp/2013/12/19/kansas-board-of-regents-restricts-free-speech-for-academics/>
 – defined as making violent comments, writing negative statements about 
students and sharing things that are “contrary to the best interests of the 
university”.

That policy is now under review after protests by faculty groups.
