
It’s been a sweet summer, but winter is definitely now arriving, and for me 
the cold is a threat. My leukaemia doesn’t mind it, but my bad chest hates it. 
Short already of breath and energy, I might run out of both before the spring. 
But in spring my Collected Poems will be coming out, and that’s a book that I 
would like to hold. So I look out into the garden with anticipation as well as 
apprehension. My Japanese maple tree is now in its first flames. Last year I 
saw the transformation as a sign of the end. Now I prefer to see it as a 
portent of spring.

Each glimpse of the tree reminds me of a beautiful Italian word my future wife 
taught me 50 years ago in Florence. The word wasscorcio (say “score-cho”). It 
means a glimpse. From one of our coffee bars we could look down a narrow street 
and see the spire of the abbey-church of theBadia 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Badia_Fiorentina> outlined against the sky. The 
spire was a revelation of elegance, as my tree is now. Looking back, you 
realise that glimpses are all you ever get. There is so little time.

I save time on the web by reading nobody’s opinion that contains the word 
“methinks”. Nor is anyone worth reading who leaves out the punctuation. Those 
who have no idea where the apostrophe goes, but shove it in anyway, can also be 
ignored. Another sign of stupidity is now cropping up in the Australian blogs: 
the locution “you are bias”, meaning “you are biased”. The average gathering of 
blog commentators in any country is like a student meeting in which everybody 
carries a megaphone and there is nobody who is not bias. They all have time to 
burn. I wish I did.

The epidemic of birthdays in the family continues. For her birthday, my elder 
daughter and son-in-law went out to dinner, leaving my granddaughter to be 
babysat by my wife. I was there to hear some reading aloud: excellent. The 
ballet routines were also superb. Later on there would be a piano recital, but 
first there was a viewing of the latest must DVD among pre-teens: something 
calledYonderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/jul/13/yonderland-welcome-return-of-the-daftest-elves-on-tv>
, featuring elves and goblins. The thing took place on several levels of 
reality and left me dazed, but my wife, as usual, caught on immediately. 
Different worlds don’t frighten her. It’s an ideal frame of mind for coping 
with Dante, into whose world she gave me my first glimpses, all those years ago.

My younger daughter and I continue to plough through the box sets. Methinks I 
might write a seriously academic book about them, perhaps called FromThe 
Bada-Bing <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bada_Bing> To King’s Landing 
<http://gameofthrones.wikia.com/wiki/King's_Landing>: A Study In Mythical 
Milieux. Or, methinks, perhaps not.
