
Some campaigners gravely warned the talks were about to fail, while others 
criticised the obduracy of participants who refused to budge from pre-set 
positions. But after three days of sometimes tense negotiations in the 
Ethiopian capital, a deal onfinancing global development 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/series/financing-for-development>
 was struck late on Wednesday.

The Addis Ababa action agenda 
<http://www.un.org/esa/ffd/ffd3/press-release/countries-reach-historic-agreement.html>
 lays out the different ways nations aim to pay for an ambitious plan to end 
poverty, ensure equality and put an increasingly fragile world on the path to
sustainable development 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jul/13/addis-ababa-development-finance-summit-all-you-need-to-know-sustainable-development-goals>
.

Related: Where are the concrete plans for action in the development finance 
deal? | Alex Evans 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jul/16/where-are-concrete-plans-action-development-finance-deal>

But just what kind of deal was struck is seemingly still up for debate.

The UN, which organised the financing for development (FFD) summit, described 
“a series of bold measures to overhaul global finance practices and generate 
investments for tackling a range of economic, social and environmental 
challenges”.

“Historic”, “groundbreaking”, “a milestone” – just some of the words the UN 
used to describe a blueprint that it said would forge “an enhanced global 
partnership that aims to foster universal, inclusive economic prosperity and 
improve people’s wellbeing while protecting the environment”.

Neven Mimica, the European Union’s commissioner for international cooperation 
and development, tweeted late on Wednesday: “Great night in#Addis 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Addis?src=hash> – we have an agreement for our 
world, our dignity, our future!”

The hosts might be expected to talk up their party. Some of the guests were 
not so impressed.Civicus <http://civicus.org/index.php/en/>, a global network 
of civil society organisations, said the meeting had brought no new money to 
the table.


“We are disappointed that the FFD process has neither yielded new resources to 
fund the investments needed to end poverty nor taken meaningful steps to 
address problems in the international financial system,” said Danny 
Sriskandarajah, the group’s secretary general.

Some observers were even blunter.

The European Network on Debt and Development, or Eurodad 
<http://www.eurodad.org/>, decried the failure to commit to an international 
tax body 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jul/14/financing-for-development-conference-addis-ababa-rich-countries-accused-poorer-nations-voice-tax>
 that would include the participation of developing nations.

“After three days of bullying, developing countries were finally run over. The 
consequence of the Addis Ababa outcome is that more than 100 developing 
countries will remain excluded from decision making on global tax standards,” 
said Tove Maria Ryding, policy and advocacy manager for tax justice at Eurodad.

“This is not only a tragic day for the world’s developing countries, who will 
now have to accept that global tax standards will get decided in a closed room 
where they are not welcome. It is a tragic day for all of us, because a global 
tax system where half of the world’s countries are excluded from 
decision-making will never be effective. As long as our governments keep 
failing to cooperate on tax matters, multinational corporations will be able to 
dodge taxes,” Ryding said in a statement.

Others took a glass half-full view. 


Irene Dotterud of Save the Children said: “Addis isn’t everything we wished 
for but it’s an important step forward.” There was an opportunity now to build 
momentum towards the UN summit in September where thesustainable development 
goals 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive>
 – the priorities that will define the development agenda for the next 15 years 
– will be ratified, she added.

But the charity was also disappointed that calls for a new global tax body 
went unanswered. It said the “the genie of international tax reform” was out of 
the bottle and it expected rapid progress in the coming months.

Oxfam 
<https://www.oxfam.org/en/pressroom/reactions/rich-countries-provide-poor-outcome-addis-financing-development-conference-oxfam?utm_source=oxf.am&utm_medium=ZPkE&utm_content=redirect>
 said the summit had delivered “unresolved rigged tax rules and privatised 
development” but it too pledged the fight for “true global tax reform and tax 
cooperation” would continue.


“Today, one in seven people live in poverty and Addis was a once-in-a-decade 
chance to find the resources needed to end this scandal,” said Winnie Byanyima, 
Oxfam’s international executive director. “But the Addis action agenda has 
allowed aid commitments to dry up, and has merely handed over development to 
the private sector without adequate safeguards.”

UN secretary general Ban Ki-moon said the deal marked a “critical step 
forward”, suggesting more work ahead. Not only will the focus now be on the New 
Yorkmeeting to ratify the SDGs 
<https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/post2015/summit> but, in December, a UN 
climate conference <http://www.cop21.gouv.fr/en>will be looking for action and 
commitments to combat that peril too by reducing carbon emissions.

“It provides a global framework for financing sustainable development … The 
results here in Addis Ababa give us the foundation of a revitalised global 
partnership for sustainable development that will leave no one behind,” he said.

So what was agreed?


The Addis Agenda includes more than 100 concrete measures, addressing all 
sources of financing, and covering cooperation on issues ranging from 
technology, science, innovation, trade and helping developing countries 
strengthen their systems and institutions, the UN said.

Among the main points are:

 * A social compact: countries committed to set up social protection systems, 
with national spending targets for essential services like health and education.
 * Recommitments to the target of spending 0.7% of gross national income on 
aid. Sceptics might say, however, that thetarget is already 45 years old 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/feb/06/eu-member-states-foreign-aid-pledge-european-commissioner-neven-mimica>
, and only a handful of countries have yet reached the goal. Campaigners now 
want to see clear timetables for action.

 * Commitments to collect more taxes, fight tax evasion and deal with illicit 
financial flows. 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/dec/18/developing-countries-debt-eurodad-report>
 But the absence of a commitment to an international tax body could be rated 
the biggest “fail”. Campaigners said talks went to the wire, but there were no 
major changes to the existing UN tax committee of experts.

This agreement opens the door for the private sector to use development money 
to generate profits
María José Romero, Eurodad 
The role of private investment was underlined, with promises to create 
enabling environments through regulation and public policies. But some NGOs 
warn that the emphasis on private finance might not benefit the world’s poorest 
people. “This agreement opens the door for the private sector to use 
development money to generate profits, while the standards to ensure that 
companies comply with human rights remain non-binding guidelines,” said María 
José Romero of Eurodad.

Countries agreed to work together to fund infrastructure for energy, 
transport, and water and sanitation, and there was also a commitment to promote 
affordable and stable access to credit for smaller enterprises.

There were also promises to create more institutions to tackle some tricky 
issues that require deep pockets: a technology facilitation mechanism is to be 
created at the SDG meeting; a global infrastructure forum will look at 
infrastructure gaps and identify areas for investment; and the creation of a 
global strategy for youth employment was proposed.

Still up for negotiation are a proposal to tax harmful substances like tobacco 
to reduce consumption and boost revenues; and a request to developed countries 
to implement their commitment to a goal of jointly mobilising $100bn a year by 
2020 to address the needs of developing countries.

The battle fought in Addis is still being analysed, but many campaigners 
stressed that the war to secure financing to “leave no one behind” was far from 
over.

“Citizens from all around the world must continue to challenge rigged rules 
that favour vested interests, and governments must listen. 2015 can still 
deliver the change we need towards a fairer future,” said Byanyima.

