
Last year’s Chelsea flower show 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/shows-events/rhs-chelsea-flower-show> represented the 
high point of a certain kind of traditional English horticultural charm. 
Returning to Chelsea for the first time in a decade,Dan Pearson 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/may/17/dan-pearsons-garden-at-the-chelsea-flower-show>
 won best in show for the Chatsworth Garden, inspired by the stately home and, 
in fact, including huge stones brought down from the garden on enormous 
lorries. A trout stream ran through moss and willow.

It was a joy, but Chelsea as a whole met with criticism that it was growing 
tired, with a lack of fresh voices in design. “We found that the number of 
female designers was actually decreasing,” says Matthew Appleby, deputy editor 
ofHorticulture Week <http://www.hortweek.com/>, “but the membership of the 
Guild of Landscape Designers is more than half women. TheRHS 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/> [Royal Horticultural Society] wondered why it was 
happening, and it was because they weren’t putting female designers on their 
shortlist.”

“It’s about time,” adds gardening writer and Chelsea veteran Val Bourne. 
“There’s a lot of talent among the women, but the top jobs tend to go to men.”

This year there are six main show gardens designed by women, up from two last 
year. Jo Thompson is perhaps the best established of them. She has designed the 
Chelsea Barracks Garden, sponsored by Qataria Diar. Rosy Hardy has created 
Forever Freedom for Brewin Dolphin, and Catherine MacDonald has created a 
garden for growers Hartley Botanic. Jekka McVicar, the doyenne of herbs, has 
moved away from the show tents to bring to life “a modern apothecary”. Hay 
Joung Hwang, originally from South Korea, has created the Smart Garden, 
sponsored by electronics giant LG.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jb63%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jb63%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6210820319fb3956fa968a201eb447ca2466adb7%2F238_366_3146_1887%2F3146.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Changing%20Chelsea%3A%20modernising%20the%20Chelsea%20flower%20show&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jb63%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Changing+Chelsea%3A+modernising+the+Chelsea+flower+show&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jb63%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6210820319fb3956fa968a201eb447ca2466adb7%2F238_366_3146_1887%2F3146.jpg>
 Star of the show: Juliet Sargeant, who designed the Modern Slavery Garden at 
Chelsea Physic Garden, London. Photograph: Nick Harvey/Rex/Shutterstock 
Even more radically, and somewhat late, 2016 will see the first black female 
designer create a garden at Chelsea. Juliet Sargeant aims to raise awareness of 
modern slavery. Her garden – in the Fresh category – will have an oak at its 
centre to represent the tree under which William Wilberforce sat when he 
decided to abolish slavery.

“When I was invited to design the garden [my race] didn’t even occur to me, 
but I suppose I am [the first black female designer],” Sargeant says. “And I do 
think that it’s important to say something. The industry isn’t as diverse as it 
could be, and we need to ask ourselves why that is.

“The RHS is a very, very traditional organisation, but hopefully things will 
start to change. I see lots of young people from different cultures enjoying 
their gardens, but that interest isn’t reflected at Chelsea.”

Her garden has not been simple, either. “As it’s an anti-slavery garden, we 
wanted to check that everything in our garden was slave-free, but it’s an 
incredibly hard thing to guarantee – the supply chains from around the world 
are so complex.”

With Diarmuid Gavin, Andy Sturgeon and Cleve West, all loaded with gold 
medals, making appearances, the bookies say the money is still on the boys, at 
least in the ShowGardens <http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gardens> 
category. But the message couldn’t be clearer: change is afoot in SW3.

Beyond the border


Now in its fifth year, the Chelsea Fringe sees dozens of events around the 
country – and further afield – putting on horticultural talks, walks, meals, 
deals and every other kind of event (chelseafringe.com 
<http://www.chelseafringe.com/>), while around the ground itself local 
businesses are competing for the Chelsea in Bloom prize.

The Chelsea flower show 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/chelseaflowershow> runs from 24-28 May
