
I had asked my class to give a presentation to their peers on a topic they 
felt strongly about. I had sat through several monologues on assorted football 
teams, half a dozen on computer games I had never heard of, and learned more 
about skateboarding than I thought was possible.

Related: 'It's only a phase': what not to say to LGBT pupils if they come out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/apr/10/what-not-say-lgbt-pupils-if-they-come-out-teachers>

It was towards the end of the lesson when a shy, quietly spoken boy took his 
position at the front of the classroom, and said that he would be talking about 
lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) rights in his native country. As 
he passionately and articulately expressed his belief that sexuality should 
have no bearing on how a person is treated, you could have heard a pin drop. 
When the time came for questions, one boy asked why he had chosen the topic. “I 
suppose I might as well say it out loud. I am part of the LGBT community 
myself,” the young man replied.

This all took place in an inner city comprehensive school. The other members 
of the class were referred to as “characters” in the staffroom. They were not, 
on the whole, compliant, well adjusted or co-operative students and would 
rarely miss an opportunity to jeer, mock or taunt. Yet not one of them so much 
as raised an eyebrow. This revelation could not have caused less of a ripple. 
In fact, mine was the only mind in the room which was racing at what I had 
witnessed. I was overwhelmed with pride and pleasure at his courage in being 
himself and his bravery in being open about his sexual orientation in front of 
his peers. I was staggered but delighted that the reaction of the rest of the 
class was the same as it was to the other presentations, undulating between 
abject boredom and polite interest.

As he spoke, I remembered feeling I had to date girls to fit in and convince 
my friends and myself that I wasn’t gay

I was also thinking of my 16-year-old self, and just how far we, as a society, 
have come. If someone had come out at my school I can’t imagine what hellish 
existence they would have endured. During my whole time there no one did, to my 
knowledge, which speaks for itself. More than that, due in part I suppose to
Section 28 <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Section_28>, which banned local 
authorities fromm “promoting” homosexuality, it was never spoken of. Any 
reference to homosexuality was airbrushed from the study of history, English 
literature, drama, the arts and even health education. So the only time the 
word “gay” was ever spoken in schools, was as an insult in the playground. I 
think it’s hard to overestimate just how much psychological damage that may 
have done to a whole generation of young LGBT people.

As he spoke, I remembered feeling I had to date girls to fit in and convince 
my friends and myself that I wasn’t gay. I remembered lying awake at night 
thinking that my only options were to remain single for the rest of my life, or 
live a lie and get married to someone I wasn’t attracted to. I remembered 
thinking how heart wrenchingly disappointed my parents would be with me. I 
remembered pleading with a God I passionately believed in to make me fancy 
girls. I even remembered having the conversation with friends and family about 
looking forward to a career in teaching, only being told “you’ll never teach at 
a boys’ school”.

Yes we’ve come a long way. My school has display boards, created by students, 
celebrating the contribution of LGBT people to all aspects of life. We have 
special assemblies focusing on homophobia in all its forms, including one 
recently led by two transexuals. Charities, such asJust Like Us 
<http://www.justlikeus.org/>, are sending trained school-leavers back into 
schools to give talks about their experience of growing up LGBT, and is running 
thefirst schools’ Diversity Week in June <http://www.diversityday.org/>.

The biggest scandal of all is the lack of gay sex education

Schools are transformed places, but that’s not to underestimate the difficulty 
some students still face. There are still plenty of examples of homophobic 
bullying, and not all families are supportive of schools’ drive to promote 
equality. I make a point of picking students up on their use of the word “gay” 
as a synonym for “bad” every single time, but I’m not sure all staff do. And 
the biggest scandal of all is the lack of gay sex education. In 2014 aMetro 
<https://www.metrocentreonline.org/> report, Youth Chances 
<http://www.youthchances.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/03/YouthChancesSurvey-16-25yearOlds_FirstReferenceReport.pdf>
, found that over three quarters of young people received no information about 
same-sex relationships and gay safer sex at school, and my experience is that 
not much has changed. That is nothing short of a national scandal.

As that boy gave his speech, he couldn’t have known the cocktail of emotions 
he was stirring in me. The contrast between the quiet confidence he exhibited, 
and the panicked fear I felt nearly 20 years previously was moving and 
fantastic. He, and the entirely accepting nature of the rest of the class, are 
cause to celebrate the distance we have travelled. This generation of students 
has more freedom than ever to be honest about their feelings, and receive the 
support they need. The improvement in the quality of life of thousands of young 
people is beyond measure. But let’s not rest until we can confidently say our 
schools are tolerant, diverse and safe places for all young people.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
