
The waters flowing through Estero Salado, a river delta in Ecuador’s largest 
city, Guayaquil, can be deceptive, even for those who have lived their entire 
lives alongside the filthy and meandering estuarine network.

“We know the water is not clean, but you build up a tolerance,” says 
21-year-old local activist Jasmanny Caicedo. Though he says he can take a dip 
without becoming ill most of the time, even Caicedo says he gets caught out on 
the “really bad pollution days”.

The temperature in Ecuador’s most populous city typically ranges from 21-31C 
(70-88F), meaning swimming is a welcome pastime for many of Guayaquil’s 2.3 
million inhabitants. But unsanitary water conditions can increase the risk of 
catching waterborne infections such ascholera 
<http://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/diseases/cholera/en/>, typhoid 
<http://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/diseases/typhoid/en/> and hepatitis 
<http://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/diseases/hepatitis/en/>.

Related: If we want drinking water for everyone, we're going to have to pay 
for it | Kevin Rudd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/22/water-for-everyone-pay-for-it-public-private-partnerships-kevin-rudd>

One day, Caicedo says he plunged into the water for “just a few minutes” but 
that was still enough to gave him a severe allergic skin reaction. On other 
occasions he reports that bathing in the estuary has resulted in stomach 
cramps, fever, vomiting and diarrhoea.

Water samples gathered from the estuary as part of a study this year for the 
environment ministry showed faecal coliforms – single-cell organisms that live 
in the intestines of humans and animals – in 81% of specimens. The worst 
samples had100 times more faecal material than the legal limit 
<http://www.eltelegrafo.com.ec/noticias/guayaquil/10/mae-el-estero-sigue-afectado-por-desechos>
.

Throughout May locals are demonstrating to raise awareness of pollution in the 
estuary. Activists havedelivered buckets of filthy water from the estuary to 
the mayor’s office <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o0Zy8OwANrc>.

The water and sanitation services in Guayaquil were privatised in 2001, backed 
by$18m (£27m) from the World Bank 
<http://www.cao-ombudsman.org/cases/document-links/documents/InteraguaFinalAssessmentReport.pdf>
 and$40m from the Inter-American Development Bank 
<http://www.iadb.org/en/projects/project-description-title,1303.html?id=EC0002>
. The contract was won by a consortium of international companies called
Interagua <https://www.interagua.com.ec/>. The privatisation – backed by Jaime 
Nebot, mayor of Guayaquil since 2000 – was meant to improve sewerage and clean 
water provision, in particular for the poor of the city.

The French giant Veolia brought a majority stake in Interagua in 2008 
<http://www.bnamericas.com/en/news/waterandwaste/Interagua_sells_90*_of_shares1>
. Veolia, which provides water, waste and energy services to councils across 
the globe, is responsible for providing drinking water and sewerage facilities 
across the city.

While this is a dispute over water, it is also a question of land rights. The 
difficulties centre around the fact that Veolia is not responsible for water 
and sanitation for Guayaquil’s many informal settlements, leaving some of the 
city’s poorest residents without coverage. The company said: “100% of the 
population holding legal titles to their property are receiving drinking water 
services [on tap] … Almost 100% are connected to the sewerage system but those 
that are not are included within a municipal programme that underwrites the 
cost of switching from septic wells to network sewage … Those without legal 
titles are not entitled to receive the services.”

Diego Armando Plua Perea, who lives a few blocks away from Caicedo, says there 
has been progress over the past 15 years, adding: “My house has a sewerage 
connection now and clean drinking water.”


But he says many of his neighbours in the houses along the Estero Salado still 
do not.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j5qv%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j5qv%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff566967f59ec12ae6cfb90310366dd22bb964d4c%2F0_123_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ecuadorians%20tired%20of%20waiting%20for%20a%20cleanup%20of%20Guayaquil%E2%80%99s%20filthy%20waters&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j5qv%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ecuadorians+tired+of+waiting+for+a+cleanup+of+Guayaquil%E2%80%99s+filthy+waters&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j5qv%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff566967f59ec12ae6cfb90310366dd22bb964d4c%2F0_123_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Swimming in the Guayas river, Guayaquil (image from 2005). Photograph: 
Majority World/UIG via Getty Images 
Caicedo says that progress has been too slow. “Nebot signed that contract but 
he has failed to hold the company to account,” he says.

“The water has too much sewage flowing into it. We are protesting because the 
local government is not doing enough to manage the private company that is 
operating the contract.”

Related: Water privatisation: a worldwide failure? | John Vidal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/30/water-privatisation-worldwide-failure-lagos-world-bank>

Last year, the World Bank and the European Investment Bank loaned a further 
$102.5m each 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2015/04/22/ecuador-banco-mundial-un-millon-de-residentes-de-guayaquil-se-beneficiaran-con-mejor-saneamiento>
 towardsa $247.8m project <http://www.worldbank.org/projects/P151439?lang=en> to
connect another 30,000 households in Guayaquil to the sewerage system and clean 
up the estuary.

But the president of Guayaquil’s Citizen Observatory of Public Services is not 
reassured. César Cárdenas is critical of the privatisation. He says the 
protests are necessary to make sure the loans are spent on the unglamorous work 
of improving the sewerage network in the poorest neighbourhoods.

He says: “This loan from the World Bank should be a lifeline for the people 
living around the estuary and for the fragile wildlife. But, without 
international pressure, it’s likely to end up being another PR show for Jaime 
Nebot, and a huge cost for the local people, with precious little to show for 
it.”

The residents of Estero Salado have the backing of Ecuador’s leftwing 
president, Rafael Correa.

In March, Correa called on 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xpCwjfOQJMo&amp;feature=youtu.be> the 
municipality and its contractors to fulfil their responsibilities. “They have 
to complete the sanitary sewerage network and connect the homes so that [they] 
don’t spill into the Estero,” he said.

Veolia says there are340,000 connections to the sewerage system, and yearly 
audits are publicly available showing the number of connections.

The environment ministry has launched an inquiry into whether Guayaquil’s 
local government had the authority to privatise water provision in the first 
place.
