
The claims

The Brexit camp are pulling out all the stops to shift the EU referendum 
debate on to migration and the NHS and away from the economy, which is the 
preferred ground for the remain side.Michael Gove has claimed 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/20/eu-immigrant-influx-michael-gove-nhs-unsustainable>
 that if Britain stays in then up to 5.2 million EU nationals – equivalent to 
the population of Scotland – could arrive by 2030, many from Turkey and four 
Balkan countries that hope to join the bloc, and warned that this could make 
the NHS financially unsustainable.

“Albania, Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Turkey, with a combined population 
of 88 million, are all in line to gain EU membership in the coming years,” the 
justice secretary said. “Citizens from these countries will inevitably be 
attracted to the UK, not just because of our free healthcare but also because 
of the additional pull factor that will result from the introduction of the 
national living wage.”

In a provocative report 
<https://d3n8a8pro7vhmx.cloudfront.net/voteleave/pages/24/attachments/original/1463745000/Vote_Leave_-_'Paving_the_road_from_Ankara'_the_EU__immigration_and_the_NHS.pdf?1463745000>
, Vote Leave estimates that by 2030 up to 430,000 people a year could be 
arriving in the UK from an enlarged EU. That compares with 257,000 arrivals 
from the EU in the year ending September 2015, according to thelatest official 
data 
<http://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/populationandmigration/internationalmigration/bulletins/migrationstatisticsquarterlyreport/february2016#main-points>
. The leave side also says the EU is creating “a visa-­free zone from the 
English Channel to the borders of Syria”.

Hasn’t the EU promised membership to Turkey and the Balkans?

In theory, yes, but they won’t join any time soon. Turkey, Albania, Macedonia, 
Montenegro and Serbia are candidates for EU membership. Bosnia and Kosovo have 
been told they can become candidates at some unspecified time in the future. 
But it is a heroic assumption to think any of them will be raising their flags 
at EU councils in the next few years. No country will join the EU in the next 
three years, as the European commission president, Jean-Claude Juncker, has 
announced a freeze on enlargement until 2018.

But won’t Turkey join the EU one day?

Discussions on bringing Turkey into Europe’s orbit have been going on for 
decades. The Turkish government made a bid for associate membership of the 
European Economic Community in 1959, four years before General Charles de 
Gaulle vetoed Harold Macmillan’s attempt to get Britain into the common market. 
Turkey applied for full membership in 1987. After almost two decades of 
prevarication, the EU launched official membership talks in 2005. Since then, 
negotiations have gone almost nowhere: Turkey has concluded only one out of 35
negotiating chapters 
<http://ec.europa.eu/enlargement/policy/glossary/terms/chapters_en.htm>, which 
relate to conditions for membership, and that was on science and research, 
arguably the easiest. Eight chapters are frozen because of a long-running 
dispute with Cyprus.

Even if Ankara and the EU could resolve the sticking points that have blocked 
talks for years, huge doubts remain about Turkey’s membership prospects. All 28 
EU member states would have to grant approval. Several countries would be 
likely to hold referendums, including Austria, where opposition to Turkish 
membership runs deep.

Even supporters of Turkish membership doubt whether it will ever join the EU. 
One senior European politician who supports Turkish accession told the Guardian 
recently that the EU should stop “permanent hypocrisy” on Turkish accession 
negotiations. “We should tell them there is no way to join theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>,” the source said.

Hasn’t the EU just offered 79 million Turks visa-free travel to Europe?

Ankara and Brussels are at odds over Turkey’s anti-terrorism laws, a key 
condition of agreeing the proposed visa deal. If a compromise is found, as 
expected, then in theory 79 million Turkish citizens would have access to 
Europe under the visa-free travel scheme. But Gove neglected to say that no 
Turkish citizen would have visa-free travel rights to the UK, because the UK is 
outside the EU’s passport-free Schengen zone. Moreover, Turks will only be able 
to travel toEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> if they have 
the latest up-to-date biometric passport. Today not a single Turkish citizen 
has such a passport, although the documents will go into production from June.

And what about the Balkans?

Balkan countries have better prospects of joining the EU than Turkey, but that 
is not saying much. Montenegro (population 620,000) is making the fastest 
progress: it has closed talks in two out of 35 policy chapters. With widespread 
concern about corruption, lack of media freedom and the rule of law, the Balkan 
EU candidates are years away from joining. Many EU officials regretted the 
decision to let Romania and Bulgaria join when they still faced serious 
problems with corruption. Countries behind them in the enlargement queue face 
much tougher tests.

But if these countries did eventually become EU members, wouldn’t people flock 
to the UK?

Recent history shows two things. First, the UK is very appealing place to live 
and work for other EU citizens. Second, making migration forecasts is risky 
game, as the British government found out after its notoriously low estimate 
that only 13,000 EU citizens would come to the UK after the big enlargement of 
2004 – the latest figures showthere are 2.15 million EU citizens in the UK. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/18/number-of-eu-migrants-working-in-uk-rises-to-record-level>

EU member stateswill be able to impose controls to keep people from new member 
states out of their labour markets. If the British government remains in the 
EU, it would have a say in deciding on how and when to extend free movement to 
new member states.

Verdict: will the UK gain a ‘Scotland-sized’ migrant population by 2030?

Highly unlikely. The leave campaign is assuming that five countries, including 
Turkey, will join the EU in the coming years. This is highly questionable. Some 
countries such as the Czech Republic spent five years or more negotiating 
accession, and they were much closer to EU legal standards. After decades of 
lofty talk, dashed expectations and bad faith about Turkey, anyone who thinks 
this enlargement will happen in the next decade is indulging in magical 
thinking. Today the only people who sound confident that Turkey will join the 
EU are Brexit campaigners.
