
A group pushing for a third runway at Heathrow 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/heathrow> has had an ad claiming the support 
of most local residents banned after the advertising watchdog found it had held 
back polling data.

Back Heathrow ran a regional press ad headlined “Rallying for the runway” with 
the line: “Don’t believe the hype. Most people living in communities near 
Heathrow Airport support its expansion.”

The Advertising Standards Authority <http://www.theguardian.com/media/asa> 
received five complaints that said the claim the group had widespread local 
support was misleading.

Back Heathrow said that in light of another ASA ruling against a similar 
campaign which was banned, the group had made sure the survey of residents had 
come from constituencies the watchdog deemed “local to Heathrow”. Within the 12 
constituencies polled, 50% supported the expansion compared to 33% who did not.

Back Heathrow also said that it added a footnote to the ad which stated that 
the latest independent polling showed 60% of local residents had “expressed an 
opinion in support of expansion”.

Related: Heathrow third runway decision put off until at least summer 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/10/heathrow-third-runway-decision-airport-expansion>

The ASA found that to get to the statement of 60% in support, the Back 
Heathrow campaign had excluded 15% of those surveyed on the grounds they had 
not expressed any opinion, creating their own analysis of just for/against.

“Given that a significant number of respondents, who had expressed an opinion 
albeit a neutral one, had been excluded from the sample, we considered that 
this was not a suitable methodology by which to draw such a conclusion,” ruled 
the ASA. “We considered that the evidence held back by Back Heathrow 
demonstrated that only 50% of all those polled were in support of expansion.”

The ASA said that therefore Back Heathrow did not substantiate its claim that 
“most” people living in communities nearHeathrow airport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/heathrow-airport> supported its expansion. 
“Consequently, the ad breached the [advertising] code,” the ASA ruled. “We told 
Back Heathrow not to repeat the claims … unless it held robust substantiation 
for them.”

After the ASA ruling, Back Heathrow tweeted:
— Back Heathrow (@BackHeathrow) April 20, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/BackHeathrow/status/722704124496723968> 
One of our adverts has been banned by the ASA. Apparently we believed 53% was 
a majority! Read the ruling against ushttps://t.co/luiMSLlfDc 
<https://t.co/luiMSLlfDc>
 <https://twitter.com/BackHeathrow/status/722704124496723968> 
Groups such as Back Heathrow <http://www.backheathrow.org/> say they represent 
local residents who support a third runway at the site. However anti-expansion 
campaigners and Gatwick, which is competing to get its own new runway, have
claimed the groups are a front 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/dec/03/gatwick-claims-heathrow-set-up-fake-runway-support-group>
 for the airport’s own campaigns.


The battle between Heathrow and Gatwick over where to build a new runway to 
meet rocketing demand in and around London has become politically toxic with 
many residents and local politicians near both sites opposed to expansion. The 
government has repeatedly put off making a decision, andnow says an answer 
won’t be given until this summer at the earliest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/10/heathrow-third-runway-decision-airport-expansion>
.


• This article was amended on 21 April 2016. An earlier version suggested 
incorrectly that a campaign the ASA had previously banned was run by Back 
Heathrow
