
If you thought there was nothing left to say about the lame duck white paper 
[pdf] 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/508447/Educational_Excellence_Everywhere.pdf>
, spare a thought for the school admissions system.

Admissions in England are a mess. There are too many schools with the power to 
decide which pupils they admit, too many socially selective admissions criteria 
permissible under thecode of practice 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/school-admissions-code--2>, and the 
system of “policing” admissions is too weak.

The plans to coerce thousands of schools to become academies may have been 
jettisoned 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/06/government-backs-down-over-plan-to-make-all-schools-academies>
 but the government isn’t giving up altogether in its goal of full 
academisation by 2022, which means the problem with admissions can only get 
worse. More academies means more schools with “freedom” in this area. It also 
means an even weaker role for local authorities, which are meant to oversee 
local arrangements and (wishful thinking) to take a progressive view of how 
school places might be allocated fairly in their patch.

The white paper is also a missed opportunity. Before it was published there 
were hints that councils would go back to managing admissions for all schools. 
In fact, the proposals are a damp squib. Requiring councils to coordinate 
in-year admissions (for pupils outside the usual admissions time) simply takes 
us back to where we were three years ago, before the coalition returned these 
powers to schools.

Related: The teacher standing as mayor to fight for fairer school admissions 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/19/mayor-school-admissions-bristol-christine-townsend>

Lifting the requirement for sixth forms to comply with the code will make the 
mix of covert and overt selection post-16 even worse. And the pledge to ensure 
parents can “easily understand how to get a place at their local school” 
betrays a thorough misunderstanding of how complex this process is, how 
cleverly it can be manipulated, and how much worse it will be in a fully 
academised system.

Don’t take my word for that. Read the respected head of Passmores academy in 
Essex,Vic Goddard, writing in Education Guardian earlier this year 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/29/academy-school-place-educating-essex-special-needs>
 about the gaming that already exists. “If someone is not given the job of 
overseeing academy admissions,” he wrote, “then we will not all be in this 
together. The young people who don’t help an academy with its league table 
position will be made to feel like second-class citizens.”

Or look at the recent report 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/academies-are-excluding-poor-quality-students-yet-more-social-cleansing-from-the-conservative-a6993401.html>
 from theCentre for High Performance (CHP) [pdf] 
<https://drive.google.com/a/guardian.co.uk/file/d/0B94qf2X3gHQfdjhaZXEyaUtLWjA/view?ts=5729b7f2>
, in which researchers from Kingston and Oxford Universities studied the 
methods used by 160 academies to improve their performance. Among the 
“learning” points in their conclusion was the revelation that schools could 
“change the type of pupils” they admit.

So great was the uproar about this unexpected honesty that the paper was 
removed <http://high-performance.org/> from the CHP website. This is 
regrettable. The researchers have nothing to be ashamed about as they were 
revealing only what many people know. Given the situation we are in, this 
evidence should be disseminated widely.

At the end of last week the London School of Economics also produced a report 
<http://www.lse.ac.uk/socialPolicy/pdf/AdmissionsResearchSummary2016.pdf>, 
looking at admissions in London over the past 15 years. Unsurprisingly it 
discovered that more schools than ever in the capital are responsible for their 
own admissions, up from 40% in 2001 to nearly 80% in 2015. This is, of course, 
owing to the rise of academies.

Case studies included councils in which every secondary school manages its own 
admissions and where some non-denominational schools admit pupils in up to nine 
“bands” of ability – ostensibly to achieve a balanced intake – and also by 
aptitude, catchment area, feeder school and distance. And those are schools 
without any faith criteria.

Some schools that use banding run their own tests at odd times, which means 
children sitting a plethora of different assessments in a way that might 
disadvantage certain types of family. Others arrange their bands to reflect the 
national spread of ability, or the ability range of the applicants, rather than 
the local context. If either of the former is above the local range of ability, 
the school magically guarantees itself an intake skewed towards the most able.

Related: Academies guilty of the most blatant gaming of all: a school place 
only for the brightest 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/29/academy-school-place-educating-essex-special-needs>

London has always been a highly charged quasi-market, but inevitably 
academisation is carrying these practices around the country, as the 
combination of parental choice, league table pressure and the sheer power to 
manipulate becomes more commonplace.

It is blindingly obvious which children will lose out, which is why radical 
action is needed now. The LSE researchers make sound suggestions, which the DfE 
should heed if we really are to have thousands more individual admissions 
authorities in England.

Each school’s admissions criteria should, by law, be simple and easy to 
understand. The local authority should be empowered to work with schools to 
maximise fair access. No school should manage its own admissions: this should 
be in the hands of an independent body, and banding assessments should be 
carried out in school time, preferably with one test used by all schools in an 
area-wide scheme.

We are still in the twilight zone between the publication of the white paper, 
the Queen’s speech and new legislation or regulation. Whatever further 
climbdowns, tweaks or amendments the government is considering, a tougher stand 
on admissions should be a priority.
