
Jeremy Corbyn <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> will 
mobilise Labour’s entire shadow cabinet and the leaders of 11 trade unions 
representing millions of workers, amid growing alarm among remain campaigners 
that Britain could be on the verge of voting to leave the EU.

David Cameron has stood aside from active campaigning in order to make way for 
a push by Labour 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/13/cameron-should-let-new-voices-make-case-for-remain-says-labour>
 , as the party’s MPs admit that the response on the doorstep in its heartlands 
suggests leave campaigners’ warnings about immigration are making significant 
inroads.

Speaking at an event in central London, Corbyn will issue “an appeal to the 
whole labour movement and Labour supporters across Britain to support a remain 
vote in next week’s referendum”. The leaders of 11 trade unions are expected to 
join Corbyn, including Len McCluskey from Unite, Tim Roache from GMB, and Dave 
Prentis from Unison. There are fears that voters do not realise that the vast 
majority ofLabour <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> MPs support 
staying in the EU.
Referendum explained: Guardian view 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/05/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=guardian_view>
The planned intervention comes after a pair of Guardian/ICM polls suggested 
that support for leaving the EU is strengthening, with phone and online surveys
showing a six-point lead for Brexit 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/13/eu-referendum-leave-campaign-takes-six-point-lead-in-guardianicm-polls>
. Leave now enjoys a 53%-47% advantage once “don’t knows” are excluded, 
according to research conducted over the weekend, compared with a 52%-48% split
reported by ICM a fortnight ago 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/31/uk-voters-leaning-towards-brexit-guardian-poll-reveals>
.

In other polling today, a YouGov poll for the Times puts leave on 49% and 
remain on 39%, while an ORB poll for the Telegraph found that among those 
certain to vote, support for the Brexit campaign is on 49%, compared with 48% 
for remain.

A source within the remain camp said Downing Street had shifted from being 
“utterly convinced” of victory in the referendum battle, to a “blind panic”. 
The source claimed that strategists had convened an emergency meeting on 
Friday, but a spokesman for Britain Stronger inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> denied the suggestion.

The spokesman added that the campaign was sticking to the same message it had 
always made but was simply using the penultimate week of campaigning to “widen 
out the people delivering the message”.

The sense of panic among remain campaigners has emerged since Labour MPs 
started reporting negative feedback from voters in their constituencies. One 
senior figure in the party claimed that politicians all over the country, and 
particularly in working-class heartlands, had said that they believed their own 
areas would swing towards Brexit.


Another MP who is active in the remain campaign said the response from some 
constituents had been alarming, with some accusing politicians of being 
traitors for campaigning to stay in. He said the most noticeable message was 
about the idea that Britain could control its borders if it left the EU.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yxyv%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yxyv%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1171709e08c245ec67c7895284fd429268d1afc%2F474_0_2929_1757%2F2929.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Corbyn%20to%20flex%20Labour%E2%80%99s%20muscles%20as%20alarm%20grows%20over%20EU%20referendum&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yxyv%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Corbyn+to+flex+Labour%E2%80%99s+muscles+as+alarm+grows+over+EU+referendum&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yxyv%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1171709e08c245ec67c7895284fd429268d1afc%2F474_0_2929_1757%2F2929.jpg>
 Gordon Brown has called on Labour supporters to get behind the in campaign. 
Photograph: Will Oliver/EPA 
 Tim Farron, the Liberal Democrat leader, said the referendum has turned into 
a game of “political Russian roulette”. He said he wanted campaigners to wake 
up to the fact that “there is a huge danger that we will lose this”.

He added: “We have less than 10 days to save Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/13/sterling-brexit-fears-investors-eu-referendum-vote>
 and make sure that we stay as an outward-looking nation, standing tall in the 
world. I fear Britain’s place at the heart of Europe is at serious risk.”

Prof John Curtice of Strathclyde University, who analyses available referendum 
polling data on his websitewhatukthinks.org <http://whatukthinks.org/eu/>, said 
that with the ICM data, the running average “poll of polls” would stand at 52% 
for leave and 48% for remain, the first time leave has been in such a strong 
position.


“These results are consistent with the generality of numbers over the last 
couple of weeks, in which there has been some weakening in the remain 
position,” he said. “It was already plain that this race was far closer than 
the prime minister intended and he must now be feeling discomfort at the 
thought that the outcome really could be in doubt.”

Labour grandees who have held cabinet and shadow cabinet positions, including 
Charles Clarke, Ed Balls, Charlie Falconer, Harriet Harman, Alan Johnson, 
Jacqui Smith, Alan Milburn and Jack Straw, also released a joint statement 
warning that leaving the EU would hit public services and frontline workers.

They said that 525,000 public sector employees would lose their jobs in the 
wake of a British exit from the EU, a figure strongly disputed by Vote Leave. 
“Leaving Europe is a leap into the dark and is a risk for Britain’s public 
services that we cannot afford to take,” they added.

The TUC general secretary, Frances O’Grady, will claim that Brexit will cost 
the public purse £30bn a year, which is enough to fund the whole of NHS England 
for three months. “Where would our NHS be without the 50,000 dedicated health 
staff from the EU? If we leave the EU, it could unleash an NHS staffing crisis 
and the longest waiting lists we’ve ever known,” she will say.

But a spokesman for Vote Leave said the figures from Labour and the TUC were 
predicated on economic analysis based on “highly negative assumptions”, which 
still showed that the economy would grow after a British vote to leave.

“By taking back control we can invest £100m extra a week for our hospitals, 
cut VAT and restore control of both immigration and trade deals creating jobs 
and increasing wages,” he claimed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yxyv%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yxyv%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1694450c0ef16ed04cbebaa720995bf214b5de6a%2F0_279_3142_1886%2F3142.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Corbyn%20to%20flex%20Labour%E2%80%99s%20muscles%20as%20alarm%20grows%20over%20EU%20referendum&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yxyv%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Corbyn+to+flex+Labour%E2%80%99s+muscles+as+alarm+grows+over+EU+referendum&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yxyv%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1694450c0ef16ed04cbebaa720995bf214b5de6a%2F0_279_3142_1886%2F3142.jpg>
 David Cameron has taken a back seat on the campaign front recently, as Labour 
seeks to appeal to its members. Photograph: Handout/Facebook via Getty Images 
Angela Eagle <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/angela-eagle>, the shadow 
business secretary, said she felt the campaign was “on a knife edge” and agreed 
that Cameron’s TV appearances “do not help with the Labour vote”.

“We are trying to get our messages heard above the general psychodrama of the 
blue-on-blue attack,” she said. “This whole thing is about Tory big beasts 
having a battle like rutting stags, but it’s far more important, this vote, 
than any of that.”

Related: Cameron should let new voices make case for remain, says Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/13/cameron-should-let-new-voices-make-case-for-remain-says-labour>

In his speech on Monday, Gordon Brown argued that a campaign that was bringing 
together Corbyn, John McDonnell and “my old friend Peter Mandelson” showedthe 
breadth of Labour support 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/12/lead-the-eu-dont-leave-gordon-brown-launches-labour-push-for-remain>
 for staying in the EU.

“What sort of message can we send to the world on 23 June if we, Britain, who 
consider ourselves one of the most internationally minded, who consider 
ourselves outward-looking and engaged, decide to walk away from our nearest 
neighbours?” he asked.

He admitted that globalisation had left people behind, including in Labour 
constituencies, but he refused to tackle specific questions about immigration, 
instead accusing media outlets including the Sun and BBC of having “an agenda”. 
Brown was heckled by one journalist calling on him to answer the question.

The former shadow chancellor Ed Balls warned that remain cannot afford to be 
seen as the party of the status quo on migration, or risk losing key swing 
Labour voters in the referendum. He said there needed to be direct controls on 
migration and new border controls that went beyond the deal sealed by Cameron 
in February.

Balls said: “It is not good enough to says controls on benefits reached by 
David Cameron is as good as it gets. Most people do not think that goes far 
enough, and we cannot look like supporters of the status quo. Europe still 
doesn’t work well enough for Britain.

“There’s still too much waste and bureaucracy from Brussels, and while a limit 
has been secured on the benefits paid to migrant workers I don’t think that can 
be the end of the story. We need to press Europe to restore proper borders, and 
put new controls on economic migration.”

Meanwhile, Conservative out campaigners expressed frustration with their party 
leader and the chancellor, George Osborne, for suggesting that Brexit could hit 
pensioners and disabled benefits.

Andrew Percy MP said: “This stumbling campaign seems to have been reduced to a 
series of threats. With no positive message to tell, they are reduced to scare 
tactics – doing their best to frighten the most vulnerable people in our 
country into voting to remain in the EU.”

His intervention comes as the Sun newspaper publishes a major front page 
editorial today calling on British people to vote to leave the EU. The tabloid 
claims: “To remain means being powerless to cut mass immigration which keeps 
wages low and puts catastrophic pressure on our schools, hospitals, roads and 
housing stock.”
