
Driving towards Amarillo, crossing a level plain under an enormous dome of 
sky, you see many cowboy-themed signs for a restaurant calledThe Big Texan 
Steak Ranch <http://bigtexan.com>. It has been a roadside attraction since 
Route 66 brought travellers to Amarillo, and it thrives to this day on one 
outrageous gimmick. The Big Texan offers a 72oz steak – that's four-and-a-half 
pounds, or two kilos of meat – and it's free of charge if you can eat the thing 
in an hour. What the signs don't tell you is that the steak comes with a shrimp 
cocktail, bread roll, baked potato and salad, and you have to eat all of that 
too.

Seeing a gargantuan truck driver or oilfield worker attempting this feat is a 
hard thing to forget, especially if he succeeds, but there's a lot more to 
Amarillo than its most famous landmark. 'Rilla, as some call it, is never going 
to be a travel destination in its own right, but it's an enjoyable place to 
break a long road trip and spend a day or two. Visitors are encouraged to bring 
a can of spray-paint to the much-photographedCadillac Ranch, a graffiti-covered 
art installation consisting of 10 old Cadillacs buried nose-first in the 
ground, a few miles west of town on Interstate 40. Its creator is a local 
millionaire and art-prankster calledStanley Marsh 3 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stanley_Marsh_3>, and he's also put up thousands 
of mock road signs all over Amarillo, which add a surreal flavour to this 
prosaic oil, cattle and banking town on the plains. From a distance, they look 
like normal American traffic signs, but they carry images of strange creatures 
and provocative slogans: "I love the touch of silken flesh", "The body of a 
dead enemy always smells sweet", "Madness singing".
 Feeling hungry? The Big Texan Steak Ranch should fill you up. Photograph: 
Christa Cameron/Reuters/Corbis 
The best place to stay is probably the Marriott Courtyard Downtown 
<http://www.marriott.com/hotels/travel/amadt-courtyard-amarillo-downtown/>, a 
nicely done chain hotel in a historic building. You can walk toOhms Cafe 
<http://ohmscafe.com/> for a cocktail and a sophisticated meal, and it's a 
short hop to the bars, cafes, galleries and antique stores on SW 6th Avenue, 
also known, confusingly, as Sixth Street. It's a preserved and renovated 
section of the old Route 66, with plenty of original 1950s Americana still in 
evidence.

Local hipsters get their organic coffee and craft beer at the 806 
<http://the806.com/>, and the Golden Light <http://goldenlightcafe.com/> is a 
classic old bar and diner with live music.

As you would expect, Amarillo has good barbecue (Doug's Hickory Pit, 3313 
South Georgia Street) and Mexican food (Jorge's Tacos Garcia 
<http://www.tacosgarcia.com>, 1100 South Ross Street), but it comes as a 
surprise to most visitors to see Thai, Laotian, Vietnamese and Colombian 
restaurants on East Amarillo Boulevard.

In recent years, Amarillo has taken in immigrants and refugees from far-flung 
countries, and they have broadened its culinary palate exponentially. At a 
restaurant called African Safari (5945 East Amarillo Boulevard), you can eat 
goat meat and chapatis alongside Somalis and Sudanese who look thoroughly at 
home in what was once a quintessential Texas cow town.
 Lighthouse Rock in Palo Duro Canyon. Photograph: David Muench/Corbis 
The plains around Amarillo are so vast, featureless, mirage-prone and 
disorientating that early Spanish explorers, borrowing a technique from native 
guides, would shoot arrows in the intended direction of travel to keep 
themselves on course. Immense herds of bison roamed these tablelands, and after 
the Spanish inadvertently introduced the horse to North America, Comanche 
Indians learned to hunt them on horseback, and lived as mounted nomadic 
warrior. Their military prowess and sheer ferocity brought the white frontier 
to a halt for 200 years, until European diseases, to which they had no 
immunity, defeated the Comanches and ushered in the era of the cattleman and 
cowboy. Anyone with an interest in this extraordinary saga, or the old west in 
general, should not miss thePanhandle Plains Historical Museum 
<http://www.panhandleplains.org> in Canyon, Texas, a short drive south of 
Amarillo.

The last stronghold of the free Comanches was a giant canyon called Palo Duro 
<http://www.tpwd.state.tx.us/state-parks/palo-duro-canyon>, which very few 
whites knew about, or even suspected existed in such a horizontal landscape. 
It's now a state park. Only one chasm in North America is deeper and wider – 
the Grand Canyon – and Palo Duro looks similar, with multi-coloured layers and 
spectacular eroded rock formations. The cliffs and spires turn a deep red at 
sunset, and then you can watch that huge Texas sky fill up with stars.

Richard Grant, author of Ghost Riders: Travels with American Nomads. His books 
include Bandit Roads, and Ghost Riders

• For more information on holidays in the USA, visit DiscoverAmerica.com 
<http://www.discoveramerica.com/>
