
When Jemma Coe was a schoolgirl in Great Yarmouth, she was in no state of mind 
to learn. She describes her younger self as “troubled” – a child who teachers 
were not able to reach and who crashed out of school at 15 without any 
qualifications. “I was in chaos,” she says.

But Coe, now 24 and a single mother to a three-year-old daughter, is back in 
the classroom and wants to learn. She was finally beginning to find her feet – 
only to discover that her course is to be closed because of government-imposed 
funding cuts.


This is my chance to better myself, after all the mistakes I’ve made
Jemma Coe, FE student 
Coe is one of 2.7 million people who benefit each year, full-time or 
part-time, fromfurther education 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/further-education> (FE). Many, like her, 
weren’t able to succeed first time round often because of life circumstances 
beyond their control. FE has given them a second chance at a time when they are 
better equipped to make the most of it.


On Wednesday, as part of his spending review 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2015/nov/06/2015-comprehensive-spending-review-public-services>
, the chancellor is expected to announce further drastic cuts toFE budgets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/10/tories-further-education-cuts-david-cameron>
, which were already reduced by 14% in the last parliament.


Last week, the skills minister Nick Boles warned that FE would not be 
insulated from further cuts. More than 125 FE college principals, many of whom 
already contending with tightening budgets, wrote to the prime minister warning 
that further cuts would tip them “over the precipice”.


Coe, who is studying functional skills in maths and English at Great Yarmouth 
College (GYC) in the hope of getting an apprenticeship and finding work in an 
office, has been told that because of the cuts, her course is likely to end in 
February.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ef7y%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ef7y%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff56eb825659230e566e84f9d48c10d9c51ce78af%2F0_385_5758_3455%2F5758.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=More%20cuts%20to%20further%20education%20will%20push%20colleges%20'over%20the%20precipice'&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ef7y%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=More+cuts+to+further+education+will+push+colleges+%27over+the+precipice%27&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ef7y%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff56eb825659230e566e84f9d48c10d9c51ce78af%2F0_385_5758_3455%2F5758.jpg>
 Great Yarmouth College’s principal, Stuart Rimmer, says colleges ‘promote 
social cohesion’. Photograph: Graham Turner for the Guardian 
The same goes for Amy Kelly, a serious-minded 30-year-old with two children. 
She failed at school after her world was turned upside down by her parents’ 
separation. Since then she’s had two daughters and worked in McDonald’s and as 
a croupier in a casino. Now she’s starting her studies again and hopes to 
become a nurse. Like Coe, however, her route out of her current predicament may 
well be blocked off if her course is cut.

“I never got the education I would have liked,” she says, close to tears. “I 
don’t feel I had the opportunity in school or the encouragement from my mum who 
was on her own.”

She wants things to be different for her children. “I want to be an 
inspiration. You want to make a difference for them. You want to give them 
opportunities. It means everything to me. I can’t even talk about it because it 
upsets me.

“I need this. I don’t want my children to fall into this cycle. I need to 
break the cycle. If the course closes in February, I would be devastated.”


FE does not have the protection that school budgets  
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/nov/20/budget-pressures-forcing-schools-in-england-to-cut-staff-survey-finds>
(at least for five- to 16-year-olds) have been given by the Conservative 
government; it does not benefit from the power of the parental lobby, like 
schools; neither does it have the powerful supporters and high-level lobbyists 
who speak up for higher education. It is the poor cousin of the education 
world, but does a complicated and remarkable job.

Sixth form colleges  
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/feb/13/sixth-form-colleges-we-are-an-endangered-species>
– as opposed to school sixth forms – are similarly vulnerable in Wednesday’s 
spending review. Like FE, they too have faced substantial cuts and there are 
fears that many could be forced to close or merge if they lose more funding in 
the review.

Their role is easy to understand – they specialise in teaching A-levels 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/alevels> to 16- to 18- year-olds. The 
story of FE is much harder to tell. Its mix of academic and vocational teaching 
– the apprenticeships on offer, basic skills courses, BTecs and higher 
education courses, teaching both young and older adults – can be confusing.

During a visit to GYC this week, the Guardian met not only Coe and Kelly, but 
also ESOL students (English for speakers of other languages). They are recent 
arrivals in the Norfolk coastal town of Great Yarmouth, studying to improve 
their English in order to find work. Their course too is likely to be cut.


Denissa Marquina, 18, from Ecuador, and Fatumata Bangura, a 19-year-old 
Portuguese student, both of whom want to become nurses, speak up about the 
importance of English. “I like to help people,” says Denissa. “I would like 
improve my English first. Speaking English better, I can be a nurse.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ef7y%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ef7y%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15c4745ab1b5e9f4e5855ec0b7147911c3c4d7d8%2F0_602_5397_3238%2F5397.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=More%20cuts%20to%20further%20education%20will%20push%20colleges%20'over%20the%20precipice'&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ef7y%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=More+cuts+to+further+education+will+push+colleges+%27over+the+precipice%27&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ef7y%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15c4745ab1b5e9f4e5855ec0b7147911c3c4d7d8%2F0_602_5397_3238%2F5397.jpg>
 Creative media production students Harry Mitchell and Richard Berry. 
Photograph: Graham Turner for the Guardian 
GYC students are a fascinating mix. In the queue at the canteen there are 
people training to be hairdressers, engineers, welders; students of animal 
care, catering, hospitality and tourism. And there’s Richard Berry and Harry 
Mitchell, both 18, who are studying creative media production and hope to go to 
university. “The college is very different from high school. It’s completely 
changed my attitude to education,” says Harry.


Stuart Rimmer, GYC’s ambitious young principal, quietly brims with anger as he 
contemplates the prospect of more cuts. For many young people, he says, 
particularly those from deprived and challenging backgrounds, life does not 
always work in a neat linear progression from school to university to job. 
“They need more support; they need more teaching.

“Just because you’ve not had a good school experience does not mean you won’t 
be outstanding in your career,” says Rimmer. “Colleges are the engines of local 
economy and promote social cohesion. Where else can you acquire the foundation, 
professional and technical skills required for communities to thrive?

“I believe people grossly underestimate the impact of colleges. The new 
government was keen to stress how education budgets would be protected but it 
seems only if you are under 16.”

One of FE’s key future responsibilities will be helping to deliver the 
government’s target of 3m apprenticeships by 2020. In addition, colleges are 
picking up an enormous additional workload with thousands of students who did 
not gain A*-C at GCSE English and maths at school facing resits.

At GYC just 25% of new students have both English and maths at the required 
level. The back pages of the newspaper FE Week are full of adverts for maths 
and English teachers. “You’ll miss FE if it’s gone,” says Rimmer grimly.


Coe, meanwhile, is working hard. She wants to be a good role model for her 
daughter; she wants to be able to help her with her homework, so she doesn’t 
miss out on school in the way her mother did. “This is my chance to better 
myself, after all the mistakes I’ve made.”
