
Speculation is growing that the bursaries available to support student social 
workers on traditional undergraduate and postgraduate courses inEngland 
<http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/england> may go the same way as 
nurse bursaries, which are due to be abolished next year.

Related: Scrap the social work bursary, and lose students like us 
<http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog/2016/feb/17/social-work-bursary-students>

The government’s recent announcement 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/nicky-morgan-unveils-plans-to-transform-childrens-social-work>
 that it plans to make the Frontline graduate development programme a national 
scheme – where trainees receive a salary instead of a bursary – has only 
increased suspicion among those delivering the courses.

John Cater, vice-chancellor of Edge Hill University, Lancashire, which offers 
both undergraduate and postgraduate courses, admits: “I think it’s quite likely 
that bursaries could go.”

Cater says the current system in England is confusing and complex, with 
students often unclear whether they qualify for financial support. But, he 
adds: “The issue will be where this money goes instead – whether it goes into a 
hardship fund or disappears.”

Under the existing scheme in England, a bursary is available only to 
undergraduates in their second and third years. In 2015-16, it was worth £4,862 
outside London, rising to £5,262 in the capital. Students have to pay tuition 
fees.

The postgraduate bursary was £3,362 (£3,762 in London) for first and second 
years, with an additional £4,052 contribution towards tuition fees.

In 2015, the Department of Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> 
made 2,600 undergraduate bursaries available in England and individual 
universities were allocated a quota. The same principle applied to the 1,500 
postgraduate bursaries.

In Wales <http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/wales>, the 
undergraduate bursary is worth £2,500 a year for up to three years. 
Postgraduate students receive £6,640 a year for up to two years. Again, tuition 
fees have to be paid.

In Scotland <http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/scotland>, a 
bursary will cover the tuition fees of postgraduate students; a means-tested 
maintenance grant is available, too. Tuition fees are also paid for Scottish 
undergraduate students studying the social work degree course. A means-tested 
bursary, not exclusive to social work, is another option.

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
