
The other day, after resetting my online banking password, I received a 
message in all caps: “CONGRATULATIONS!” I like to imagine the ripple of 
applause spreading from desk to desk as news of my triumph arrived at the 
bank’s headquarters. Meanwhile, Facebook has started sporadically thanking me 
“for being here”, as if I were Mark Zuckerberg’s most dependable friend. This 
is the “new intimacy economy”, according to tech journalist Leigh Alexander, 
who wrote aboutit 
<https://medium.com/thoughts-on-media/the-new-intimacy-economy-51c87dc4a4d6> 
recently at Medium. Despite Facebook’s many annoyances, she said, “All this 
time it never occurred to me to delete my account, until it began doing this: 
trying to act like a person.” In Britain, we’re already familiar with“wackaging”
 <http://wackaging.tumblr.com>, that infuriatingly chummy tone adopted on 
product labels. But the New Intimacy, Alexander predicts, is going to 
intensify. As other tricks for grabbing people’s attention on the internet 
falter, these pseudo-human appeals to our emotions may prove Silicon Valley’s 
last hope.

The obvious worry is that this might devalue the currency of sentiment: if I’m 
congratulated for changing my password, does it mean anything when I 
congratulate you on your new baby, or your Nobel prize for chemistry? But 
actually, it’s worse than that: the statements in question are usually outright 
lies. There simply is no human being at Facebook who feels grateful, even 
fleetingly, when I log in. The radical economistCharles Eisenstein 
<http://charleseisenstein.net/> noticed something similar about a beer ad. 
“Every day, I drive past a billboard for Coors Light with the slogan ‘Coors 
Rocks Harrisburg’,” he wrote, in a brilliant essay entitledThe Ubiquitous 
Matrix of Lies 
<http://truthseekers.cultureunplugged.com/truth_seekers/2011/01/the-ubiquitous-matrix-of-lies-1.html>
. “Now, does anybody actually believe that Coors does in fact ‘rock 
Harrisburg’? No. Does the Coors corporation itself believe it? No. Does anyone 
believe that Coors believes it? No. It is a lie, everyone knows it is a lie, 
and no one cares.”

It’s tempting to dismiss this as an overreaction to a harmless ad (or as old 
hat, since Orwell said somethingsimilar <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Newspeak>
 before). But Eisenstein makes a convincing case that it matters. When daily 
life requires turning a blind eye to the falsity of countless things we’re 
told, it weakens the power of language to sort truth from fiction. 
“Increasingly, words don’t mean anything any more,” he writes. “Because we are 
lied to all the time, in ways so routine they are beneath conscious notice, 
even the most direct lies are losing their power to shock.” Unwittingly, we 
grow more tolerant of untruths and semi-truths, making it easier (among other 
things) for our political leaders’ dubious schemes to pass without serious 
challenge.

Related: Do you overfunction or underfunction in a relationship? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/13/oliver-burkeman-overfunction-underfunction-relationship>

Dishonest claims about a corporation’s emotions – that Facebook’s happy to see 
you; that “we love our customers” – seem especially insidious, because emotions 
operate so instinctively. On one level, I know it’s just marketing; on a less 
conscious level, I can’t help responding to fake friendliness from a company as 
if it’s real friendliness from a friend. So we’d do well to keep Eisenstein’s 
point in mind: it’s all lies. Your call just isn’t very “important to us”. If 
it were, you wouldn’t be listening to that recorded message in the first place.

oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com <mailto:oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com>.
