
An extraordinary insight into a furious disagreement between a school 
governing body, a Department for Education inspector and one of England’s 
largest academy chains has been provided to Education Guardian.

Almost the entire governing “council” of Oasis Academy Wintringham, in 
Grimsby, resigned in October, and the unpublished minutes of its recent 
meetings supply the background.

The school, one of England’s first academies, was visited by Ofsted 
<http://reports.ofsted.gov.uk/inspection-reports/find-inspection-report/provider/ELS/135209>
 in October 2014 and given a reasonable bill of health. Although the verdict 
was that the school required improvement, the headteacher was said to have 
“clear vision and high expectations which are communicated to staff and 
students”. But on 17 March, an inspector working for the local regional schools 
commissioner (RSC), part of the DfE, turned up and offered a different view. 
Minutes of a governing body meeting on 19 March say this second inspection was 
a “dreadful experience for the school”.

The inspector is reported as having questioned why a bad set of results in 
2014 had not led to “retribution” among staff. “You should be coming down hard 
[sic] no one seems worried that their job is on the line,” he is quoted as 
saying.

According to the minutes, one governor said: “To talk about retribution is a 
disgrace.” Chris Rolph, principal at the time, reportedly said it “didn’t feel 
we were treated as professionals”, and questions were raised about the 
inspection’s methodology.

Yet this contributed to the RSC issuing a “pre-termination warning notice” 
[pdf] 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/446488/Oasis_Academy_Wintringham_PWN.pdf>
to Oasis in March, threatening it with the loss of the school. A governor, Ray 
Sutton, said he and colleagues learned of this only when they read it in the 
press in July, and were also kept out of the loop when Rolph subsequently 
resigned in August.

Six out of seven governors, including Sutton, then resigned on 1 October with 
a statement saying “the Oasis governance model used across its [49] academies 
is flawed,” and “against its founding principles” as it was trying to run 
schools from London without involving local representatives.

The dispute sheds some light on the shadow system of inspections being run by 
regional schools commissioners, and also on the level of autonomy given to 
governing bodies by academy chains.

Oasis says that “errors in communication” – as governors were not told of the 
warning notice – contributed to the resignations but that one former governor 
is now back on the interim board, and another is considering joining. “We now 
look forward to devoting all our efforts to giving our young people the best 
possible start in life,” added a spokesperson. The DfE had not responded by the 
time Education Guardian went to press.

RSCs struggle to keep eye on 5,000 academies


This new cadre of super-officials, the regional schools commissioners, are 
widely thought to have rather a lot on their plate. There are only eight of 
them, yet they are expected to supervise more than 5,000 academies across 
England, while also eyeing up schools for possible conversion.

A claim by the minister Lord Nash, then, to MPs last week 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/education-committee/news-parliament-2015/lord-nash-school-commissioners-evidence-15-16/>
 that the RSCs had the capacity to do their jobs without too much trouble will 
have seemed surprising to many observers.

One is David Simmonds, Conservative chair of the Local Government 
Association’s improvement and innovation board. Simmonds tells us an RSC told 
him he and his small secretariat were so overwhelmed with work they were 
receiving help from DfE civil servants.

Simmonds said: “The RSC told me: ‘I do not have the capacity to deal with the 
number of schools in my patch, so I’m getting help from the Department for 
Education and Education Funding Agency’ with issues that might once have been 
covered by local authorities.”

Issues coming across this RSC’s desk included safeguarding, radicalisation, 
finance and the operation of unregulated schools. He had only six full-time 
staff, but was now getting access to about 50 from the DfE, Simmonds says.

Simmonds may not be neutral, speaking on behalf of local authorities whose 
functions have in some cases been taken over by RSCs. But it sounds like a 
system under pressure.

Teachers vote for strike at London free school


Staff at a troubled sixth-form free school in Islington, north London, are 
expected to begin a five-day strike today. One teacher told thelocal paper 
<http://www.islingtontribune.com/news/2015/dec/free-school-teachers-who-say-they-are-suffering-%E2%80%98severe-stress%E2%80%99-plan-stage-strike-acti>
 that staff were enduring “psychological warfare” because they were under 
“constant observation”. National Union of Teachers members, who the union says 
voted unanimously in favour of the action at the former Stem 6 college, now 
known as Tech City college, want teachers to be given a week’s notice of lesson 
observations by senior management.

An NUT statement also said teachers were being blamed for leadership failings. 
One source is quoted as saying a lesson plan had been emailed to staff with 
instructions on how to teach it after the lesson had started.

The college changed hands in September after a damning Ofsted report 
<https://www.dropbox.com/s/nsvw2gbawtm98ks/stem6jan2015ofsted.PDF?dl=0> [pdf] 
into the previous academy trust, Stem Academy Education Trust. Its new 
managers, the Aspirations Academies Trust, said anOfsted visit 
<http://reports.ofsted.gov.uk/inspection-reports/find-inspection-report/provider/ELS/139793>
 in October had highlighted rapid improvements. Talks last week had resolved 
two of three sticking points with the union, it added, but the issue of lesson 
observation warnings remained unsettled, because Aspirations was concerned that 
Ofsted did not warn teachers about inspection visits.

Ofsted reveals thin skin after head’s blogpost


Finally, a headteacher who served as an Ofsted inspector for eight years has 
written <http://standoutlearning.me/2015/12/01/blog-1-v-0-ofsted/> about how he 
resigned from the inspectorate after being asked to remove sections of a 
blogpost that had been taken as criticising it.

Andrew Morrish, executive head of two West Midlands primary schools, writes of 
receiving a call from a “senior national director at Ofsted” saying that a
blogpost <http://standoutlearning.me/2015/09/14/doing-good-as-we-go/> in which 
he said “the process of inspection is flawed” was “not befitting of an 
inspector”.

Morris was told that the post “had to be cropped”. He refused. “I was being 
censored, gagged, call it what you like. However much I value the experience of 
inspecting schools … I would much rather retain my right to write freely. So I 
resigned,” he says. Morrish also says anyone reading his blog in full would see 
that it was pro-Ofsted. He may well have a point.

An Ofsted <http://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> spokesperson said: “We 
do not believe in censorship”, but that inspectors must not “undermine 
confidence in the inspection system”. Morrish’s resignation, while 
disappointing, was “entirely his own decision”.

The chief inspector, Sir Michael Wilshaw, has in the past 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-26677651> encouraged successful heads such as 
Morrish to be inspectors, so we wonder if Ofsted can afford to lose such people 
in circumstances that some may take as having an authoritarian whiff about them.
