
She can’t quite explain it, but for the best part of five decades, since she 
was a very young schoolgirl growing up in the Gambia,Fatou Bensouda 
<https://www.icc-cpi.int/about/otp> says she has felt powerfully driven by a 
sense of right and wrong. “The issue of justice and accountability seems to be 
... in my DNA.” She wiggles her fingertips as if they tingle. “I just feel I 
have this [sense] – and I’m sure many people do, huh? – but there must be 
justice. There must be fairness. As soon as I was able to know and analyse 
certain injustices in society around me, I wanted to do something about it.”

As a high school student, Bensouda used to sneak into the nearby courts in her 
school uniform, until chased out by the court officials. She watched women, in 
particular, “and I did not seem to feel that they were receiving the protective 
embrace of the law. For me that is one of the things that informed my decision 
to say, ‘This is what I want to do.’”

That young schoolgirl, one of more than a dozen siblings born to a polygamous 
Muslim family in the smallest country in mainland Africa, is now the chief 
prosecutor of theinternational criminal court 
<https://www.icc-cpi.int/Pages/Home.aspx> in the Hague. The institution was 
established with the intention of ending impunity for war criminals and 
genocidal tyrants across the world who might otherwise have considered 
themselves above the law; Bensouda, as such, might be described as the person 
from whom they have most to fear. From that small schoolgirl, to this: “It’s 
been a journey,” she says with a smile.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k62c%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k62c%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc29f69a244b5dac2b5fba4c8462666073ae073d%2F0_0_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fatou%20Bensouda%2C%20the%20woman%20who%20hunts%20tyrants&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k62c%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fatou+Bensouda%2C+the+woman+who+hunts+tyrants&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k62c%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc29f69a244b5dac2b5fba4c8462666073ae073d%2F0_0_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 She became, at a stroke, one of the most powerful African women in the world 
... Fatou Bensouda in Conakry, Guinea. Photograph: Cellou Binani/AFP/Getty 
Images 
Bensouda is now 55, and has been the ICC’s most senior prosecutor since 2012, 
a decade after the court was established, when she was elected to replace the 
post’s inaugural holder,Luis Moreno Ocampo 
<https://next.ft.com/content/8dce2894-e4fc-11e0-9aa8-00144feabdc0>. She became, 
at a stroke, one of the most powerful African (or Muslim) women in the world.

But to understand what Bensouda can do, it is important first to clarify what 
she has not done. It was not, for instance, the international criminal court 
that put theformer Serbian president Slobodan Milosevic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/milosevictrial> and more than 100 others on 
trial for crimes in the former Yugoslavia, and earlier this yearconvicted 
Radovan Karadzic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/24/radovan-karadzic-criminally-responsible-for-genocide-at-srebenica>
 of war crimes and genocide.

I have sent loud and clear messages that we will do whatever is in our power 
to address sexual violence in conflict

That was the international criminal tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) 
<http://www.icty.org/>, an ad hoc body established in 1991 that to date has 
seen more than 80 of that conflict’s bloodiest criminals convicted and 
sentenced. A similar international tribunal for Rwanda(ICTR) 
<http://unictr.unmict.org/>, set up three years later, convicted 61 people 
<http://unictr.unmict.org/en/tribunal> of war crimes, genocide and crimes 
against humanity.

The ICC, by contrast, has had a much bumpier beginning. Though the court has 
issued nine summonses and 29 arrest warrants, including for theUgandan warlord 
Joseph Kony <https://www.theguardian.com/world/joseph-kony> and, before his 
death,Muammar Gaddafi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/muammar-gaddafi> of 
Libya, in the 14 years since its existence it has convicted only two people, 
both Congoleserebel leaders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/23/congo-warlord-germain-katanga-jailed-massacre>
 foundguilty of war crimes 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2012/jul/10/icc-sentences-thomas-lubanga-14-years>
.

More than 120 countries have ratified the court’s founding statute, but 
equally important isthe list of those that have not 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_Criminal_Court#/media/File:ICC_member_states.svg>
 – including around half of the nations in Africa, almost all the Middle East 
and most of central and far-east Asia. Most critically, three of the five 
permanent members of the UN security council, which have the power to veto the 
court’s investigations, are not party to it: the US, Russia and China.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k62c%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k62c%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cc6172cd87dce108c3e38941afe68932e74a5d6%2F0_160_1784_2000%2F1784.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fatou%20Bensouda%2C%20the%20woman%20who%20hunts%20tyrants&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k62c%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fatou+Bensouda%2C+the+woman+who+hunts+tyrants&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k62c%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cc6172cd87dce108c3e38941afe68932e74a5d6%2F0_160_1784_2000%2F1784.jpg>
 Ugandan warlord Joseph Kony ... one of 39 individuals charged by the ICC, 
though only two have been convicted. Photograph: AP 
And so, though the Palestinian Authority joined the court last year 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/apr/01/palestinian-authority-becomes-member-of-international-criminal-court>
 and the prosecutor is currentlyexamining <https://www.icc-cpi.int/palestine> 
alleged crimes committed in the occupied territories, few expect any potential 
ICC action against Israel to get past a US veto. When 65 nations called in 2014 
for the Syrian conflict to be referred to the court, meanwhile – a context for 
which one might think a criminal court to challenge war crimes and genocide was 
invented – it wasvetoed by China and Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/22/russia-china-veto-un-draft-resolution-refer-syria-international-criminal-court>
.

Partly in consequence, the court has focused to date predominantly on African 
conflicts, irritating and increasingly enraging the continent’s leaders, who 
accuse the court of first world bias. In February, the African Union backeda 
proposal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/01/african-union-kenyan-plan-leave-international-criminal-court>
 by the Kenyan president Uhuru Kenyatta “to develop a road map for the 
withdrawal of African nations” from the court. Kenyatta, it should be noted, is 
not a disinterested party, having been the subject of afailed attempt 
<https://www.icc-cpi.int/kenya/kenyatta> by the ICC to prosecute him for crimes 
against humanity.

However powerful her commitment to justice, in other words, that all amounts 
to a to-do list of bewildering legal complexity and political sensitivity. Or 
as Bensouda puts it with no little understatement: “The challenges are there.”

Just because a job is perplexingly difficult doesn’t mean you should give up, 
however. It is a grey afternoon in the Hague, but in marked contrast to the 
austere surroundings of the court’s new, heavily fortified home close to the 
Dutch coast, Bensouda is wearing a long, brightly coloured African-print dress 
with a modest frill at its hem. Having lived in the Hague with her husband, a 
Gambian businessman, and two children for more than a decade (she was 
previously head of the legal advisory unit at the Rwanda tribunal), she is used 
to northern European weather, though she admits she still feels the chill.

Her decisions as chief prosecutor are first and foremost driven by the law, 
she stresses, and by the complex tangle of lines defining where her 
jurisdiction begins and ends. But her own position as a woman from westAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> has also informed the character of 
Bensouda’s ICC. As well as prioritising efficiency measures (wrangling for 
enough resources from member states is another constant headache), Bensouda has 
made it an explicit strategic goal of the court to challenge rape and 
exploitation of women and children in war.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2012%2Fsep%2F28%2Ffatou-bensouda-1bn-rising-video&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2012%2Fsep%2F28%2Ffatou-bensouda-1bn-rising-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fatou%20Bensouda%3A%20'There%20are%20too%20many%20victims%20of%20violence'%20%E2%80%93%201bn%20Rising%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2012%2Fsep%2F28%2Ffatou-bensouda-1bn-rising-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fatou+Bensouda%3A+%27There+are+too+many+victims+of+violence%27+%E2%80%93+1bn+Rising+video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2012%2Fsep%2F28%2Ffatou-bensouda-1bn-rising-video&media=>
Fatou Bensouda: ‘There are too many victims of violence’ – 1bn Rising video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/video/2012/sep/28/fatou-bensouda-1bn-rising-video>
“I have sent very loud and clear messages that we will do whatever is in our 
power and in our mandate to address sexual violence in conflict. Because as you 
know, in these conflicts, unfortunately the most vulnerable groups are women 
and children. Whether they are taken as sexual slaves, or forced labour, or the 
children are recruited to fight wars that they shouldn’t be fighting – this 
happens.”

Her own background has shaped her view, “of course”. “I believe that looking 
at these crimes through the lens of a woman is unique to women ... And as an 
African, I know the different cultures, I know the diversity of the continent.” 
As a result, she says, she stresses the importance of training her 
investigators – who must gather evidence of atrocities from traumatised 
victims, often in situations of ongoing terrible conflict.

A few days after we meet, Bensouda emails to express her regret that she 
hadn’t mentioned the situation in her home country of the Gambia, where there 
have beenviolent crackdowns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/04/gambia-yahya-jammeh-protests-uprising-solo-sandeng>
 on civilians protesting at the regime of president Yahya Jammeh. Bensouda was 
formerly the country’s attorney general and minister of justice under Jammeh 
until he fired her in 2000. She has asked her team to assess the situation, she 
writes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k62c%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k62c%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d6162d72c0c82b544b35a16feb31e1b91599d86%2F0_259_1226_1690%2F1226.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fatou%20Bensouda%2C%20the%20woman%20who%20hunts%20tyrants&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k62c%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fatou+Bensouda%2C+the+woman+who+hunts+tyrants&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k62c%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d6162d72c0c82b544b35a16feb31e1b91599d86%2F0_259_1226_1690%2F1226.jpg>
 Jean-Pierre Bemba ... the Congolese rebel leader is one of only two war 
criminals convicted by the ICC. Photograph: AP/Chris Tomlinson 
As for the accusations of anti-African bias, Bensouda insists they are easily 
rebutted. Of the 10 conflicts currentlybeing investigated 
<https://www.icc-cpi.int/pages/situations.aspx> by the ICC, nine are in African 
countries (the last is in Georgia), but in six instances, she says, the court 
got involved at the request of the countries themselves. In two other cases, 
those of Libya and Darfur in Sudan, the ICC got involved at the request of the 
UN security council, leaving only one – in Kenya – undertaken at the discretion 
of her predecessor as chief prosecutor.

“So I wouldn’t say that I regret that we are working in Africa, because of the 
fact that the victims also are African victims. If certain people are looking 
to shield the alleged perpetrators of those crimes, of course they will say we 
are targeting [African nations]. But ... the victims deserve justice, the 
victims are Africans, and in the absence of the ICC nobody else is giving them 
justice.”

They are far from the ICC’s only controversial cases, however. The ICC is also 
conducting “preliminary examinations” into eight further conflicts, including 
in Afghanistan, Colombia and Burundi. Only one major western nation is under 
examination – the UK, over allegations that British soldiers committed war 
crimes, including murder and torture, while occupying Iraq.

The court has been fiercely criticised by some in Britain for examining the 
allegations despite a five-year public inquiry (which concluded the most 
serious allegations against British troops were“deliberate lies” 
<http://www.theguardian.com/news/defence-and-security-blog/2016/jan/13/how-many-iraqis-were-killed-or-abused-by-british-soldiers-we-may-never-know>
) as well as an ongoing judicial investigation intoIraq fatalities 
<http://www.iraq-judicial-investigations.org/> and a government review 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/groups/iraq-historic-allegations-team-ihat> 
headed by a former senior police officer. Why is the ICC intervening now?

First of all, says Bensouda, the court is not yet investigating, but is 
examining a dossier of information – “a lot of information, actually” – 
submitted by British lawyers for alleged Iraqi victims in 2014. The court must 
first determine whether the crimes were committed, whether they fall into ICC 
jurisdiction (as systematic war crimes rather than individual outrages, for 
instance), and whether they have been properly investigated in Britain, before 
deciding whether to investigate further.

The big question for many may be how high up the command chain such an 
investigation might go. It is likely, I tell Bensouda, that the context in 
which her court is mentioned most frequently in conversation in the UK is by 
those who wouldwish to see Tony Blair prosecuted 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/sep/02/tony-blair-iraq-war-desmond-tutu>
 for what they regard as an illegal invasion of Iraq in 2003.The Chilcot inquiry
 <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/iraq-war-inquiry> into Britain’s role in the 
Iraq war is finally due to report in July – depending on what evidence it 
uncovers, might that be a possibility?

What I have put at the forefront, always, are the victims of these atrocity 
crimes

“I want to make it clear that when we look into any situation, beginning with 
the preliminary examinations and going forward, nobody is targeted. Nobody. We 
do not say, ‘We are going out to investigate, in this case, Tony Blair.’ Or any 
other person.” Rather, she says, if a case passes the criteria to become a 
formal investigation, they consider all its circumstances.

“How did the crimes start, how were [they] committed? ... But we also look at 
who bears the greatest responsibility for those crimes. Who, in our assessment, 
is the person without whom the crime would not have been committed?... We 
cannot say now that if we were to start investigations, we are going to charge 
Mr X or Mr Y. It’s not responsible to even say that.”

On the question or otherwise of the war’s legality, however, she is able to be 
more clear. The ICC signatories are soon likely to add the“crime of aggression” 
<http://www.iccnow.org/?mod=aggression> (meaning an unjustified or illegal war) 
to the three other crimes in their jurisdiction – genocide, war crimes and 
crimes against humanity. Bensouda hopes it may deter other illegitimate 
conflicts in future – but it will not be retrospective.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k62c%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k62c%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff505b2569169423bb35eb313138f87ab556db09%2F0_209_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fatou%20Bensouda%2C%20the%20woman%20who%20hunts%20tyrants&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k62c%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fatou+Bensouda%2C+the+woman+who+hunts+tyrants&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k62c%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff505b2569169423bb35eb313138f87ab556db09%2F0_209_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 British troops south of Basra ... the UK is the only major western nation 
under examination by the ICC, for alleged war crimes in Iraq. Photograph: David 
Cheskin/PA Wire 
We are running out of time, and Bensouda must prepare for an executive 
committee meeting with her senior staff, then head to a reception for 
Cameroon’s national day, before returning to the office early in the evening 
for more paperwork. In a few days she will be heading to New York to the UN 
security council for her biannual briefing on the situation in Libya. “It’s 
back to back, every day.”

The job does take its toll, she says, not least in the horrifying details of 
the allegations that she deals with, day after day. How does she cope? “What I 
have put at the forefront, always, are the victims of these atrocity crimes. I 
have been placed in a position where I can at least do something. You have that 
at the back of your mind that theremust be justice, there must be 
accountability for these crimes. I mean ... that drives me. That drives me.”

She tells me a story of when she was accompanying investigators on the Rwanda 
tribunal in visiting a woman who had never previously been interviewed. “This 
is a woman who was held as a sex slave almost throughout the conflict. She was 
crying, so I said: ‘I am so sorry, it’s just that we have to ask these 
questions ...’ She said, ‘No, no no. I am not crying because you are asking 
these questions. I am crying because somebody is listening. Finally someone is 
listening to me.’

“We perhaps take it for granted, but these victims deserve to talk about their 
experiences. They deserve to see that those who have made them suffer are held 
accountable. I cannot see it any other way.”

 * This article was corrected on 6 June 2016. An editing error meant it was 
stated that 39 individuals had been charged by the ICC. In fact, it has issued 
nine summonses and 29 arrest warrants.
