
Is that a tall, dark, and handsome man standing over there? Or a tall, dark 
and handsome man? The vexed question of commas, where to use them and where not 
to, was raised atHay festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/guardian-hay-festival> by the linguistics 
academicDavid Crystal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/sep/30/punctuation-commas-apostrophes-wordsworth>
.

Both of the above are correct, he said, but he criticised the Department for 
Education for not realising that, and for allowing exam boards to wrongly 
penalise children. He said the current guidance for schools “leaves a huge 
amount to be desired, especially in areas of punctuation.

 “There is a tendency in the question setters of linguistic naivety; they are 
simply not aware of the complexity of some of the decisions they are asking the 
kids to make.”

Related: Six-year-olds need delight, not drilling – this grammar regime is a 
farce | Angela Moore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/26/six-year-olds-teacher-spelling-punctuation-grammar-test-system>

The comma and where to use it is a case in point. The debate over whether to 
put a comma before the “and” in a list has been around since the 18th century, 
Crystal said. In the 19th century “publishing houses decided they were going to 
sort it out and … made different decisions”.

Oxford University Press decided it should be in, and in such cases it is now 
called the Oxford comma or serial comma. They reasoned that each adjective 
before the noun was of equal importance, so should all have a comma. Cambridge 
University Press, however, decided it should be left out. This raises fierce 
debates, Crystal said, but both examples of usage were correct.

He said the Oxford comma had been banned in the latest guidance to teachers, 
so any child writing “tall, dark, and handsome” had to be marked incorrect. 
That meant Oxford comma fans (Crystal counted himself as one) were now using 
the wrong punctuation.

Related: Dear Ms Morgan: Sats tests are putting young children through hell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/03/morgan-sats-test-children-primary-school-pupils>

Crystal, honorary professor of linguistics at University of Wales, Bangor, was 
giving a talk about his latest bookMaking a Point: The Pernickety Story of 
English Punctuation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/17/making-a-point-pernickety-story-english-punctuation-david-crystal-review>
. He admitted he rarely gets worked up about the things which infuriate lots of 
people – even the multiple use of exclamation marks!!!

He is professionally interested in the changing use of punctuation, including 
how full stops are not used anywhere near as many times as they were in the 
19th century.

What really irritates him, he told the Hay audience, was what he called Radio 
3 syndrome, when after a piece of music the presenter drops his or her voice at 
the end of a sentence. “That was Symphony No 3 in D major by [inaudible]. What?”

Or perhaps that should be: “What!”
