
A Brexit vote would trigger an exodus of UK expatriates from Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, according to a column in the 
Times. Fear, says the newspaper, is pushing thousands to return home to Britain.
— Neil Henderson (@hendopolis) March 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/hendopolis/status/714560444401365001> 
THE TIMES: Expats quit Europe #tomorrowspaperstoday 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/tomorrowspaperstoday?src=hash> #bbcpapers 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/bbcpapers?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/s7hQcg8XWN 
<https://t.co/s7hQcg8XWN>
 <https://twitter.com/hendopolis/status/714560444401365001> 
The Times quotes UN population estimates for 2015 
<http://www.un.org/en/development/desa/population/migration/data/estimates2/data/UN_MigrantStockByOriginAndDestination_2015.xlsx>
 which say that 1.22 million Britons are living in other EU countries at 
present. The same source shows that in 2010 the figure was 1.18 million. The 
estimated number of British migrants in the EU has therefore slightly increased 
during the six years to 2015.
Brits abroad 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/03/british-expatsineu/giv-271675YEPM3FezcQt/>
The article states that, daily, about 100 Britons have been leaving Spain over 
the past two years. According to UN data slightly fewer than 309,000 UK 
nationals were living in Spain during the period, compared to381,025 
<https://www.statslife.org.uk/social-sciences/1910-how-many-british-immigrants-are-there-in-other-people-s-countries>
 in 2013. The 2010 level was 319,144 people.

However, the article’s claim that the drop in the number living in Spain is 
driven by Brexit fears has not been substantiated. Data published by Spain’s 
national statistics office reveal thatoutward migration from Spain has 
increased substantially since 2009 
<http://politica.elpais.com/politica/2016/03/16/actualidad/1458145510_786597.html>
due to the country’s economic woes, which have affected both Spanish nationals 
and foreign-born residents.

According to the same UN data, the number of EU citizens living in the UK was 
2.9 million in 2015, up from 2.6 in 2010, and in line withONS estimates 
<http://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/populationandmigration/internationalmigration/articles/populationbycountryofbirthandnationalityreport/2015-09-27>
.


However, it is quite likely that the UN data underestimates 
<https://www.statslife.org.uk/social-sciences/1910-how-many-british-immigrants-are-there-in-other-people-s-countries>
 the number of Britons living abroad and the number of EU nationals in the UK, 
because EU citizens living in other member states do not have to register their 
arrival. For example,in 2010 the Institute for Public Policy Research estimated 
<http://votes-for-expat-brits.com/documents/ippr_GlobalBrittextforprint.pdf> 
that 808,000 UK nationals were living in Spain permanently.

Moreover as the piece itself states, there is no indication to suggest a spike 
in Britons returning home. According tothe latest migration estimates from the 
Office for National Statistics 
<http://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/populationandmigration/internationalmigration/bulletins/migrationstatisticsquarterlyreport/february2016#immigration-to-the-uk>
87,000 British citizens returned to the UK in the year ending September 2015. 
This is similar to the previous year when 81,000 citizens did so, and it is 
lower than the equivalent period in 2010 when 92,000 went back to Britain.

Britain’s relationship with the EU, following any vote to leave the union, 
seems unclear. But it is fair to say that a potential Brexit could lead to 
uncertainty and concern for those living abroad or planning to depart. But that 
factor would apply to both British migrants abroad and European expats in the 
UK.
