
Drug companies pay around £40m a year 
<http://www.abpi.org.uk/our-work/disclosure/Pages/relationships.aspx> to 
healthcare professionals in payments, gifts and hospitality. Payments are made 
for a number of reasons, including sponsorship of medical education, attendance 
at medical events or acting as advisers.

Doctors <https://www.theguardian.com/society/doctors> have always denied that 
taking drug company money influences their judgment in any way about a 
medicine, but suspicions have lingered.

The Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry (ABPI) says the 
relationship it has with healthcare professionals “has long been a positive 
driver for advancements in patient care and the progression of research”.

This year, for the first time, details of payments to UK healthcare 
professionals are to be published. From June, patients will be able to use a 
publicly searchable database to find out if a healthcare professional has 
received any payments from a pharmaceutical company.

This seems to be a popular move among those in the sector; a poll conducted by 
the Guardian’sHealthcare Professionals Network 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network> revealed that 94% of the 247 
people who took part agreed that payments by pharmaceutical companies to 
healthcare professionals should be published.

Jeremy Hunt, the health secretary, plans to introduce a UK “sunshine rule” 
<http://www.pharmatimes.com/Article/15-08-24/Hunt_brings_in_Sunshine_rule_to_stamp_out_NHS_bribery.aspx>
 (named after thePhysician Payment Sunshine Act 
<http://www.ama-assn.org/ama/pub/advocacy/topics/sunshine-act-and-physician-financial-transparency-reports.page?>
 in the US) on dealings between NHS staff and pharmaceutical firms.

How and why does the pharmaceutical industry work with healthcare 
professionals? What are the pros and cons of disclosing payments to healthcare 
professionals? Do the new measures go far enough? What role do healthcare 
professionals have in improving understanding and openness? What does all of 
this mean for patients?

Join us from 1.45 to 3.45pm on Monday 6 June to discuss these questions and 
more.

The panel 

Virginia Acha, executive director, research, medical and innovation, ABPI 
<http://www.abpi.org.uk/Pages/default.aspx>

Dr Peter Gordon, campaigner for transparency in medicine

Dr David Strain, Medical Academics Staff Committee, BMA 
<https://www.bma.org.uk/>

Dr Naeem Nazem, medical advisor, MDDUS <http://www.mddus.com/>

David Eves, head of compliance, Chugai Pharma Marketing Ltd 
<http://www.chugai.co.uk/>

Dr Waheed Jamal, vice president – medical, Europe, GlaxoSmithKline plc 
<http://www.gsk.com/>

Jeremy Taylor, chief executive, National Voices 
<http://www.nationalvoices.org.uk/>

Christine Cameron, Compliance and ethics lead for UK and Ireland, Bristol 
Myers Squibb <http://www.bms.com/ourcompany/mission/pages/default.aspx>

The live chat is not video or audio-enabled but will take place in the 
comments section (below). You may also get in touch via
sarah.johnson@theguardian.com <mailto:sarah.johnson@theguardian.com> or 
@GdnHealthcare <https://twitter.com/gdnhealthcare> on Twitter.


Discussion commissioned and controlled by the Guardian, funded by ABPI

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
