
Gemma Justo, general secretary of Lebanon’s first domestic workers union, has 
a big problem. How can she start mobilising and organising the country’s 
250,000 migrant domestic workers when so few are able to leave their employers’ 
homes and show up for a meeting?

In front of her sit a small group of Ethiopian women, speaking among 
themselves. Another problem: Justo, a Filipina, speaks English, the other women 
Amharic. There is a flurry of activity as someone tries and fails to find a 
translator so that the women can discuss an upcoming protest march.

“Tea, Nescafé?” Justo asks, trying to get the meeting started. “Whiskey?” she 
finally says as the women laugh. The meeting finishes early and the women hurry 
back to their domestic duties, promising to return to try again.

Related: 'My employer hit me in the face and pushed me down the stairs' | 
Rebecca Falconer 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/17/my-employer-hit-face-pushed-down-stairs-filipina-migrant-maids>

Justo is undaunted. She knows this is going to be an uphill struggle. The 
fledgling union is yet to be recognised by the government and is operating in a 
difficult and hostile environment. Lebanon is a dangerous place to be a 
domestic worker. Human rights groups havedocumented the widespread abuse of 
domestic workers 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2012/03/23/lebanon-stop-abuse-domestic-workers>. This 
makes Justo determined to succeed.

“The more the fight, the more she is harmed and bruised, the more courageous 
she is,” says Justo, a domestic worker who has lived in Beirut for 22 years. 
“The day I will say it’s a hopeless case, then I will pack my bag and go back 
home to thePhilippines <https://www.theguardian.com/world/philippines>.”

Lebanon’s nascent domestic workers union 
<http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_protect/---protrav/---migrant/documents/event/wcms_383813.pdf>
 (pdf) is the first of its kind in the Arab world. Formed with the support of 
the International Labour Organisation (ILO) and the International Trade Union 
Federation (ITUC), it has about 400 members. The union has started to organise 
demonstrations, lobby the labour ministry for more rights for domestic workers, 
and provided moral support for hundreds of women working as maids, cooks, 
cleaners and nannies, many far away from their homes and families.

While many women who migrate to Lebanon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/lebanon> to be domestic workers find good 
families and safe, stable employment, others are not so fortunate.

According to the ILO, domestic workers are among the global workforces  
<http://www.ilo.org/global/docs/WCMS_209773/lang--en/index.htm>most vulnerable  
<http://www.ilo.org/global/docs/WCMS_209773/lang--en/index.htm>to violence and 
abuse <http://www.ilo.org/global/docs/WCMS_209773/lang--en/index.htm>, partly 
because of their physical isolation, hidden behind the closed doors of private 
residences.

The nature of the work leaves women open to exploitation. Wages are routinely 
low, with an Ethiopian maid costing families $150 (£104) a month.

A 2014 study by a Lebanese feminist organisation, Kafa, into the treatment of 
Nepalese domestic workers in the country 
<http://www.kafa.org.lb/StudiesPublicationPDF/PRpdf-62-635354925312585776.pdf>
(pdf) documented widespread non-payment of wages. It also found that 77% of 
women surveyed were forced to work more than 14 hours a day, half weren’t 
allowed outside the home, and 8% said they were sexually abused by their 
employer.

Domestic workers in Lebanon are employed under the restrictive kafala  
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/feb/26/time-to-end-kafala>
sponsorship system 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/feb/26/time-to-end-kafala>, 
which ties workers to one employer and doesn’t allow them to leave their 
employment or the country without their permission, so increasing the risk of 
exploitation.

Justo says the union is working with NGOs and the labour ministry to find an 
alternative to kafala, but its ability to lobby for legislative change is 
stymied by the government’s refusal to acknowledge its existence.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gxvt%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gxvt%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0c3a2f6556b5587eee0b666be1fe5bac1c92e7a%2F0_258_3888_2334%2F3888.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Behind%20closed%20doors%3A%20mobilising%20Lebanon's%20migrant%20maids&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gxvt%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Behind+closed+doors%3A+mobilising+Lebanon%27s+migrant+maids&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gxvt%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0c3a2f6556b5587eee0b666be1fe5bac1c92e7a%2F0_258_3888_2334%2F3888.jpg>
 A Filipina maid washes dishes at her employers’ apartment in Beirut. 
Photograph: Joseph Eid/AFP/Getty Images 
The minister for labour, Sejaan Azzi, says he considers the organisation 
illegal and potentially dangerous as Lebanese law prohibits foreign workers 
from unionising. “If I allow the domestic workers to have a syndicate, after a 
month, the Filipino women will want a Filipino syndicate, and the Ethiopian 
woman will want an Ethiopian syndicate. It will be a war between them,” he says.

“Before we cancel the kafala system we need to have a strong state that is 
capable of controlling and implementing laws, and that’s not possible.” He says 
that without kafala, recruitment agencies will flood the market with foreign 
women, “and we don’t know where they might make them work. They might be sent 
to nightclubs, prostitution or massage spas.”

Related: The vanished: the Filipino domestic workers who disappear behind 
closed doors 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/oct/24/the-vanished-filipino-domestic-workers-working-abroad>

The lack of government endorsement makes it harder for the union to reach 
those domestic workers most at risk of abuse. Union members are spreading news 
of their organisation through churches and word-of-mouth, but their reach is 
limited. Those they do manage to reach are receiving legal aid and financial 
support. They are also starting to document deaths and reported suicides of 
domestic workers, which happen frequently but are rarely investigated.

“If it’s a case of suicide, OK, what’s the reason the domestic worker goes to 
commit suicide?” asks Justo. “We will review it and we will follow up with the 
media.”

Although the union faces enormous challenges, it is part of a wider movement 
to organisethe world’s nearly 53 million domestic workers 
<http://www.ilo.org/global/about-the-ilo/newsroom/news/WCMS_200937/lang--en/index.htm>
 that has already taken significant strides towards securing better rights and 
working conditions. There are now domestic worker unions in Mexico, South 
Africa, Hong Kong, Cambodia and India, among others. In New York, a union of 
domestic workers successfully lobbied for a bill of rights. Domestic worker 
unions were also instrumental in getting theILO’s domestic worker convention 
passed in 2011 
<http://www.domesticworkers.org/news/2011/new-york-domestic-workers-celebrate-historic-vote-united-nations>
.


Justo says that without taking collective action, Lebanon’s domestic workers 
will never receive the protection they need to stay safe. “We witness a lot of 
maltreatment. Is there any way we can stop this? This is our fight,” she says.


