
George Osborne <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> has accused 
Boris Johnson of playing “political games” over Britain’s future membership of 
the EU, while admitting the London mayor has ambitions to rise through 
government.

The chancellor criticised his Conservative colleague for claiming that Britain 
should model itself on Canada, which has negotiated free trade with the EU but 
does not accept freedom of movement.

“Let’s take the Canadian deal. It took seven years to negotiate, there are 
tariffs on everything from cars to beef, and three-quarters of our economy is 
in services and they don’t have a services deal,” Osborne told the BBC’sAndrew 
Marr <http://www.theguardian.com/media/andrewmarr>.

“I don’t want us to be Canada. I want us to be Great Britain. In the end this 
is not some political game. This is the biggest decision facing this country 
for 50 years. And the people that are going to be affected by that decision are 
not you and me – we’ll be long gone from the political stage – it will be the 
car worker in Sunderland, the hill farmer in Wales, the bank call centre worker 
in Bournemouth. Their future depends on an open and engaged Britain.”

Related: George Osborne says he needs to cut spending by 0.5% 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/13/george-osborne-cut-spending-by-05-budget>

The comments come as bitterness between Conservatives 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> on either side of the 
referendum debate heighten – with both Osborne and Johnson nervous about what 
the impact may be on their own hopes to lead their party.

Asked about the memoirs of former the Lib Dem minister David Laws, who claimed 
Osborne and David Cameron had discussed Johnson’s leadership hopes, he said: “I 
don’t think it is the greatest revelation in human history to discover that
Boris Johnson <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> is interested in a 
job in government.”

Pushed on whether he thought Johnson wanted to be prime minister, Osborne 
said: “You’d have to ask him.”

He also talked about his own position in the party, insisting he wanted to 
take “big radical reforming steps” despite obstacles in Westminster including 
his own backbenches. The chancellor recently lost a battle to liberalise Sunday 
trading laws when the SNP sided with Tory rebels.

 “We’ve got a small majority. So do we win every vote? No we don’t,” he said. 
Osborne argued that an option was to “shut up shop and do nothing”. But he 
added: “That is not me as a politician. If people want a politician who is just 
going to sit here and blather away and do nothing they can get someone else.”

The chancellor said he was determined to stick to the promises of the 
Conservative manifesto, including raising the 40p tax threshold. But changes 
would be difficult as he also admitted that worsening economic factors meant 
the government would have to save 50p in every £100 by 2020.
