
Even by the standards of student politics, it was a mess. Comedian Kate 
Smurthwaite was booked to do a gig at Goldsmiths, University of London on 
Monday evening when she noticed online reports of a picket by members of the 
feminist society. Their objections were not to her show, but her politics. 
Smurthwaite is a proponent ofthe Nordic model of sex work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/apr/21/outlaw-buying-sex-caroline-spelman-nordic-model-prostitution>
, a legal approach that criminalises punters but not sex workers themselves. 
For some students, that made her “whorephobic” and unfit to do a gig on campus.

“I told the society there might be a protest,” Smurthwaite says. “The first 
thing they said was: ‘Oh yeah, we knew.’ The feminist society had held a debate 
about whether or not I should be able to perform.”

The society voted 70-30 to allow it, but a minority decided to picket the 
event anyway. “I should have been happy it was won, but I was just shocked and 
upset,” she says. “There’s nothing I’ve said which is worthy of a debate on 
that sort of thing.” Then the organisers liaised with security anddecided the 
event should be cancelled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/feb/02/goldsmiths-comedian-kate-smurthwaite-free-speech-show-feminist-campaigners>
.

Molly Coddle, a sex worker and campaigner who supported the picket, suggests 
there is a sense of entitlement in the anger of Smurthwaite’s supporters. “They 
want really controversial speakers to come to campuses, over the heads of 
students who are hurt by that or disagree with their politics,” she says. “It’s 
students who aren’t allowed to hold alternate events, or picket, or protest, or 
ask their university to disinvite the speaker.”

Once you dig past the insults and accusations, the Smurthwaite story reveals 
something troubling about the culture on Britain’s campuses. Whatever the 
precise reasons for the cancellation, the feminist society took a vote to 
picket someone because of a policy position unrelated to the content of the 
show itself. This is not like the antifascist “no platform” campaign of the 
1980s and 90s. It is much broader and more nebulous. The potential for offence 
is trumping the right to free speech.

The row comes amid a growing sense of crisis around debate in British 
universities. In recent months,Oxford University cancelled a debate on abortion 
<http://oxfordstudent.com/2014/11/17/christ-church-cancels-abortion-debate> 
because protesters objected to the fact it was being held between two men; the 
Cambridge Union was asked (but refused)to withdraw its speaking invitation to 
Germaine Greer 
<http://www.tcs.cam.ac.uk/news/0033654-i-don-t-believe-in-transphobia-germaine-greer-speaks-out-at-the-union.html>
 because of her views on transgender issues; officials at London Southbanktook 
down a “flying spaghetti monster” 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2014/02/10/atheist-poster-removed-london-university_n_4759711.html>
 poster because it might cause religious offence;UCL banned the Nietzsche Club 
<https://www.insidehighered.com/quicktakes/2014/06/06/%E2%80%98nietzsche-club%E2%80%99-banned-british-university>
 after it put up posters saying “equality is a false God”, andDundee banned the 
Society for the Protection of Unborn Children 
<http://www.catholicherald.co.uk/news/2014/09/10/pro-life-group-banned-from-scottish-university-freshers-fair>
 from their freshers’ fair. The Sun is banned on dozens of campuses because of 
Page 3. Robin Thicke’sBlurred Lines song has also been banned 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/sep/20/robin-thicke-blurred-lines-ban>
 by many student unions.

“There are two ways of looking at the challenges to free speech on college 
campuses – quantitative and qualitative – and it’s getting worse on both 
counts,” says Joanna Williams of Kent University’s Enhancement of Learning and 
Teaching unit, who has written extensively about politics on campus. 
“Censorship powers are being used more often and against a wider variety of 
targets.”

Whether they meant to or not, those who cancelled Smurthwaite’s gig at 
Goldsmiths have waded into a row that speaks to a radically changing view of 
what student life should be about. The show-that-wasn’t, by the way, was themed 
around freedom of speech.

At the heart of the new wave of censorship on British campuses is the “safe 
space” policy. Its origin can be traced back to US protests against military 
recruiters on campus in the 70s. From there sprungthe no-platform agenda 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/sarah-ditum/2014/03/when-did-no-platform-become-about-attacking-individuals-deemed-disagreeable>
, which then morphed over the last few years into this latest incarnation. The 
idea behind safe space is that people of all identities are entitled to a 
tolerant environment to express who they are. It sounds commendable, but the 
implications are startling.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F45t5a%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F45t5a%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F6%2F1423239673733%2Fdadcd433-ef4e-42fe-8a46-c3082e76cf9c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Safe%20space%20or%20free%20speech%3F%20The%20crisis%20around%20debate%20at%20UK%20universities&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F45t5a%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Safe+space+or+free+speech%3F+The+crisis+around+debate+at+UK+universities&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F45t5a%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F6%2F1423239673733%2Fdadcd433-ef4e-42fe-8a46-c3082e76cf9c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Those who cancelled Kate Smurthwaite’s gig at Goldsmiths have waded into a row 
that speaks to a radically changing view of what student life should be about. 
Photograph: Elliott Franks/eyevine 
“No platform for fascists was clear-cut in terms of which groups were being 
targeted,” Williams explains. “It was a particular political persuasion and a 
clear demand of what they weren’t allowed to do. But in recent years, bans have 
extended out to cover more things – not just fascist groups, but also Ukip. And 
the nature of what is being banned has also been extended – to certain 
newspapers, or lads’ mags, or student societies. Safe space is open to 
interpretation. It’s all-encompassing.”

Smurthwaite, for instance, was told that sex workers were included in the 
college’s safe spaces policy and might be hurt by her presence.An organiser 
wrote <http://cruellablog.blogspot.co.uk/>: “I have to send you a passage about 
our ‘safe space’ policy outlining kinda what you can or can’t say. Because our 
union is ‘for’ sex working … it would probably be best to avoid that area of 
conversation.”

It is hard to find someone who will defend safe spaces on the record. No one 
from theGoldsmiths feminist society <https://twitter.com/femsocgold> would 
speak about it, nor would their student union. The president of the National 
Union of Students –a strong proponent of the policy 
<http://www.nusconnect.org.uk/blogs/blog/tonipearce/2014/09/15/Our-unqualified-opposition-to-anti-Semitism/>
 – would not respond to calls. The best defence of the policy comes from Tim 
Squirrell, former president of the Cambridge Union.

“Safe space gets a bit of a bad rap,” he says. “Most of the people involved in 
advocating these types of policies don’t mind debate; they just they don’t want 
to do so in their homes with strangers.

“Every time you invite someone like Germaine Greer on to campus, or someone 
who disagrees with the rights of sex workers to do their work, or a racist or a 
homophobe, you’re not endorsing their views, but you’re legitimating their 
views as something that’s up for discussion. There’s a place for that 
discussion, but the question of whether it should happen in people’s homes is a 
difficult one. Greer doesn’t think trans women are real women. These are not 
abstract issues. They affect real people.

“I know someone in the debating circuit who used to say to teams: ‘If you 
think your case is offensive, you haven’t found the right case to make. You 
should go back and find another one which doesn’t appearprima facie to be 
offensive. There are ways of debating these things which aren’t hurtful.”

But according to many of those who work on campus or attend debates in them, 
safe space has become a direct threat to freedom of speech.

As the sun went down in Oxford on Thursday, balaclava-clad anti-fascist 
campaigners were attempting to scale the walls of the unionto prevent a speech 
by the French far-right leader Marine Le Pen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/05/marine-le-pen-front-national-oxford-union-university-speech-delayed-protesters>
. Pointing out the gulf between their position and hers, they chanted: “This is 
free speech - that is a platform!”

It’s nothing new, this: the Oxford and Cambridge Union have long been accused 
of provocation for their choices of speakers. Le Pen herself has spoken at the 
Cambridge Union as well. And the protesters were distinctly unimpressed. “I 
think it’s bizarre, or just incredibly naive,” said second-year student Will 
Searby, one of those to brave the freezing temperatures to express their anger. 
“Having one’s views broadcast from a platform is not some kind of inalienable 
right.”

Those attending the debate disagreed, putting the blame for any benefit to Le 
Pen squarely at the feet of those chanting outside. Said Henrique Laitenberger, 
a history student: “Instead of the Front National leader’s views being laid 
bare, and their dissection at the union being prioritised, Le Pen will return 
to France yet again vindicated as a martyr of free speech, challenged by an 
illiberal mob.”

Of course, Marine le Pen is a very long way indeed from Kate Smurthwaite. And 
even for those organising the protest against Le Pen, there is a sense that 
what was once a no-platform policy limited to fascists is now being used more 
widely.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F45t5a%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F45t5a%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F6%2F1423239102480%2F9dc7f0db-4a08-4c09-98b8-12c58e549e41-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Safe%20space%20or%20free%20speech%3F%20The%20crisis%20around%20debate%20at%20UK%20universities&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F45t5a%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Safe+space+or+free+speech%3F+The+crisis+around+debate+at+UK+universities&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F45t5a%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F6%2F1423239102480%2F9dc7f0db-4a08-4c09-98b8-12c58e549e41-1360x2040.jpeg>
 A proctor talking to a student protesting about Marine Le Pen’s appearance at 
Cambridge University Student’s Union in 2013. Photograph: Oli Scarff/Getty 
“Generally I’m for a very narrow definition of no-platform,” Weyman Bennett, 
joint secretary of Unite Against Fascism, says. “At the moment there’s a danger 
of it being used against people you just don’t like. There’s a very serious 
argument that what people are doing now is banning people.”

Julie Bindel knows the implications of safe spaces better than most. Her views 
on transgenderism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2004/jan/31/gender.weekend7>, sex work and 
the Muslim veil have led to her being called transphobic, whorephobic and 
Islamophobic. She now finds it increasingly difficult to get on to college 
campuses at all.

“I’ve a quite high public profile in this world, so when I’m invited to an 
event, it’ll draw interest in the crowd,” she says. “The organiser or the board 
of the university or the venue will be lobbied until they can take no more of 
it. These idiots sit there behind their keyboards and do this.”

She adds: “I was born into a very impoverished, working-class background. I 
never had a safe space in which to air my views. Before this whole lunacy 
started, I was constantly shouted at if I talked about violence against women 
or prostitution. We live in a toxic anti-feminist world. There’s no such thing 
as a safe space. This is the work of privileged, moneyed, over-educated, 
pampered, middle-class liberal idiots.”

Safe spaces is a direct corollary of the rise of identity politics. As the 
essentially economic argument between right and left died down, it was replaced 
by a culture war in which gender, sexuality and race were at the heart of the 
discussion. This was a much more personal form of politics. Suddenly, arguments 
on issues such as prostitution and transgenderism were being branded hate 
speech, and the identity of the person speaking became as important as the 
words they were saying. This was why the Oxford debate on abortion was 
cancelled – because both participants were men. It is also why Coddle objects 
so strongly to the way Smurthwaite and others debate sex work – because sex 
workers themselves are often not represented in the discussion.

Why were universities so ready to give in to demands for a restricted right of 
debate? The reasons are economic as well as political. Pickets and online 
campaigns often lead to the cancellation of events because of universities’ 
fears of litigation, even on the basis of emotional harm. And where litigation 
is not a concern, there is a fear that protests might create a reputational 
risk.

Related: Free speech? Not at four in five UK universities 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/feb/02/free-speech-universities-spiked-ban-sombreros>

“Universities don’t want to be associated with views which aren’t part of the 
moral consensus,” Dennis Hayes, professor of education at the University of 
Derby and founder ofAcademics for Academic Freedom <http://www.afaf.org.uk/>, 
says. “It’s a very conservative climate. Universities used to be very 
conservative and now they’ve gone back to being conservative.”

And then there’s the cost. “When the union had a controversial speaker who was 
going to spark a protest, we had to spend between £3,000 and £5,000,” Squirrell 
says. “You have to secure the building, get the requisite number of security 
guards and do bag searches.” Controversy may be good publicity, but it isn’t 
cheap.

This institutional caution is being reinforced by the new commercial 
relationship between students and universities. The introduction of tuition 
fees has meant that students increasingly see themselves as customers who are 
entitled to comfort while on campus.

“You develop a cosy relationship with the students,” Hayes says. “You don’t 
say anything controversial. They don’t say anything controversial. And that’s 
very nice. Everyone seems very concerned by safe space, so it’s presented in a 
positive way. It’s not presented as censorship. It’s done compassionately. That 
broadly is the ethos.”

For Hayes, the new culture is part of a therapeutic worldview that sees 
students as vulnerable young people.

“It’s a far cry from the 60s, when students challenged lecturers for being 
bourgeois,” he says. “When students used to first come to university for 
freshers’ week, the first thing they saw were people arguing and debating. Now 
freshers’ fairs have been stripped of politics. They’re mostly about 
volunteering. When first-years come in, they’re still quite feisty. But by the 
time they get to third year they’ve absorbed the culture.”

Safe space is not all bad. It stands as a forceful counterpoint to another 
troubling trend in student life, in which jokes about rape and racist 
fancy-dress costumes are almost a badge of honour. To its credit, it is 
concerned with taking care of the most vulnerable people in a community. As 
Coddle puts it, they are “interrogating codes of conduct” and asking searching 
questions about who has a right to speak. Once that conversation is out in the 
open, it is easier to see how white, male voices are given precedence over 
everyone else.

But the policy is also dangerously vague, and speaks to a sense of emotional 
entitlement that is at odds with the reality of democratic society. The only 
way to properly abide by it would be to strip universities of all potentially 
offensive debate. There is a danger it will create a generation of university 
students who are unable to have their ideas challenged without invoking 
“offence”.

There are already signs of it seeping into national political debate. Last 
Augusta debate on transgender identity on Newsnight fell apart 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/2014/08/kellie-maloney-newsnight-and-debate-transgender-community-refused-have>
 when the programme was accused of questioning “whether or not trans people 
have a right to exist”, something it plainly was not doing. Last September, 
activists blocked the road to the Barbicanto protest about Exhibit B 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/sep/24/barbican-criticise-protesters-who-forced-exhibit-b-cancellation>
, a theatre-performance-come-art-installation featuring black actors in chains. 
The Barbican cancelled the event.

For Smurthwaite, the next obstacle is the Leicester comedy festival, where 
online campaigners are already trying to have her banned. For the rest of us, 
the danger is more distant, but just as troubling.

Additional reporting by Areeb Ullah
