
I’m 40 and my boyfriend is 50. He has given me an ultimatum: have a baby or 
he’s gone. He has a teenager from a previous marriage and I have no children 
and have never wanted them, though I’ve never totally ruled it out. I am very 
fit and career-driven, and would want a surrogate. We both have good jobs and 
he says he would hire someone to take care of the baby. Is it possible (with a 
surrogate) to have our biological baby and expect that I can keep working after 
delivery, and have a nanny to take care of the baby (and rely on my partner)? 
Can I be the “traditional man” in this scheme, the partner who sees the baby 
after work but isn’t the primary carer. Has anyone out there made this fly? I 
should add that while I abhor the thought of having a toddler, the thought of 
an adult child to share life with is very appealing. I’d like to have that kind 
of relationship.

• When leaving a message on this page, please be sensitive to the fact that 
you are responding to a real person in the grip of a real-life dilemma, who 
wrote to Private Lives asking for help, and may well view your comments here. 
Please consider especially how your words or the tone of your message could be 
perceived by someone in this situation, and be aware that comments that appear 
to be disruptive or disrespectful to the individual concerned will be removed.


• If you would like fellow readers to respond to a dilemma of yours, send us 
an outline of the situation of about 150 words. For advice from Pamela 
Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your 
concerns.

• All correspondence should reach us by Wednesday morning. Email:
private.lives@theguardian.com <mailto:private.lives@theguardian.com> (please 
don’t send attachments).
