
The US supreme court <http://www.theguardian.com/law/us-supreme-court> ruled 
on Thursday that a state judge had an unconstitutional bias when he took part 
in the case of a death row inmate whose prosecution he personally approved 
almost 30 years ago.

Voting 5-3, the justices found that Ronald Castille, the former chief justice 
of Pennsylvania’s supreme court, should have recused himself from the case of 
Terrance Williams, a Philadelphia man who was convicted in 1986 of murder.

Castille was the Philadelphia district attorney who approved a death penalty 
prosecution of Williams, and refused to recuse himself when the inmate’s case 
reached the state high court in 2014. In 2012 a lower court had thrown out the 
death sentence on the grounds of evidence withheld by the prosecution, five 
days before Williams’ scheduled execution.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kp4g%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kp4g%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F696c78d56d36fa45091ccf7bdd07c0bf1bb81aad%2F0_0_1680_2000%2F1680.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Supreme%20court%20rules%20in%20favor%20of%20death%20row%20inmate%20in%20judge's%20recusal%20case&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kp4g%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Supreme+court+rules+in+favor+of+death+row+inmate+in+judge%27s+recusal+case&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kp4g%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F696c78d56d36fa45091ccf7bdd07c0bf1bb81aad%2F0_0_1680_2000%2F1680.jpg>
 Terrance Williams. Photograph: Uncredited/AP 
Two years later, Castille and the high court voted unanimously to reinstate 
the death sentence.

Castille’s participation in the case violated the right to due process, the 
justices ruled. “There is an impermissible risk of actual bias when a judge 
earlier had significant, personal involvement as a prosecutor in a critical 
decision regarding the defendant’s case,” Justice Anthony Kennedy wrote in the 
US supreme court’s ruling.

“Whether to ask a jury to end the defendant’s life is one of the most serious 
discretionary decisions a prosecutor can be called upon to make,” he added.

Kennedy and the court’s four liberal justices ordered a new sentencing hearing 
for Williams, even though the Pennsylvania court had voted unanimously.

He cited the principle that “no man can be a judge in his own case”.

“A multimember court must not have its guarantee of neutrality undermined,” 
Kennedy wrote, “for the appearance of bias demeans the reputation and integrity 
not just of one jurist, but of the larger institution of which he or she is a 
part.”

Castille’s participation affected the whole court, he argued, and their 
unanimous decision “does not lessen the unfairness to the affected party”.

Chief Justice John Roberts, and justices Samuel Alito and Clarence Thomas 
dissented, representing the conservative wing of the court, diminishedsince the 
death of Antonin Scalia 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/feb/14/antonin-scalia-man-of-his-word-who-shaped-america-in-life-and-in-death>
 in February.

In the dissent Roberts argued that his colleagues made a decision “on proverb 
rather than precedent”, and that Castille’s original role in the case was 
“unconnected” to the new claims brought by Williams about evidence.

“Williams does not allege that chief justice Castille had any previous 
knowledge of the contested facts at issue,” Roberts wrote, “or that he had 
previously made any decision on the questions raised by that petition.”

But Roberts was careful not to say whether he thought Castille should have 
recused himself anyway, noting “a number of state court decisions and ethics 
opinions that prohibit a prosecutor from later serving as judge in a case that 
he has prosecuted.”

Still, he argued: “it is up to state authorities – not this court – to 
determine whether recusal should be required.”

Williams was convicted of the 1984 murder of Amos Norwood, a 56-year-old 
deacon, when Williams was 18 and already had been convicted of another murder. 
At trial, a co-defendant suggested robbery was a motive for the crime, but 
years later Williams appealed, alleging prosecutors had withheld evidence that 
Norwood was sexually abusing teenagers. Williams claimed to be one of the 
victims, though he said at the original trial that he did not know Norwood, who 
was beaten to death with a tire iron in a cemetery.

Pennsylvania last executed a death row inmate in 1999, and last year Governor 
Tom Wolf announced a moratorium on executions.

“Williams sends a message that if state courts and state judges fail to police 
themselves with regard to fundamental conflicts of interest, the supreme court 
will step in to ensure that the guarantee of due process is not an impotent 
one,” Hofstra law professor James Sample told the Guardian.

Sample and legal experts from Yale and Fordham universities filed an amicus 
brief 
<https://www.brennancenter.org/analysis/ethics-101-same-person-cannot-serve-prosecutor-and-judge-same-case-supreme-court-needs-say>
to the court in support of Williams’ case.

The decision, Sample said, “reinforces the principle that the core of due 
process, especially but not exclusively in a capital case, is an objectively 
impartial arbiter”.
