 So much of what we think we know about history is actually false. Consider the 
following: Charlie Chaplin was not a chaplain. That was just his last name!
Winston Churchill is often depicted smoking a cigar. But in reality this was a 
growth on his lip. Like his American counterpart Franklin Roosevelt, Churchill 
enjoyed the complicity of the media in hiding his handicap. Roosevelt, for his 
part, had endured polio as a child and consequently his chin jutted out and his 
cigarette holder was simply huge.

It is often rumoured that Hitler was part Jewish and secretly ashamed of his 
heritage, hence the Holocaust. What is not commonly known is that Hitler was 
also part Gypsy, part gay and part Polish. Also, his moustache was fake, and at 
staff meetings it would sometimes fall off, and only Goebbels could be trusted 
to hand it back without cracking up. He would solemnly affix a piece of tape to 
it, as the other officers turned red in the face and kicked one another under 
the table. (This is the origin of the German word derholditinorelsenfreud, 
meaning "the practice of picturing a sad puppy while trying not to laugh at the 
FÃ¼hrer".)

First world war soldiers did not really wear those flat-looking doughboy 
helmets. This was just a visual distortion caused by the era's cameras, which 
flattened anything occurring three-quarters of the way up the frame. This 
effect is also noticeable in photos of men wearing top hats, which were 
actually up to 15ft tall, but appear much smaller.

American lore has it that George Washington once threw a dollar across the 
Delaware river. It was, in fact, Abraham Lincoln who threw not a dollar but 
George Washington across the Delaware river. But the river at that time was 
about six inches across. And Washington was just a baby. Why did Lincoln do it? 
Scholars disagree. Some say it was to preserve the Union. Others say it was to 
prove he was honest. I doubt the latter interpretation: why would someone named 
"Honest Abe" have to prove his honesty? All he would have to do is say his name.

Cavemen did not live in caves but in huts. Paradoxically, it was hut men who 
lived in caves. This caused great confusion at mail time - especially since 
mail had not yet been invented. During this period, people were considered 
"hunter-gatherers"- they would go out and gather hunters. They would get all 
the hunters together in one hut, and then the hunter-gatherers would look at 
one another, a little confused, a little embarrassed, as in: Now what do we do? 
Which is how, eventually, agriculture erupted.
