
My mother, Margaret Joseph, who has died aged 91, was a member of what she 
would call “the stage army of the good”, one of those people who are the 
backbone of organisations without ever seeking the limelight.

A lifelong socialist, for her, membership meant action: stuffing envelopes, 
manning stalls, turning out for marches – and in one case having to be the 
“pensioner” for a Friends of the Earth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/friends-of-the-earth> protest about 
fuel poverty, which involved sitting outside Parliament in a dressing gown by a 
bar fire trying to look cold.

She was born Margaret Johnstone, to Frank, a manager at Smithfield meat 
market, London, and Alice (nee Phillips), also a campaigner, who before her 
marriage had been active in the birth control movement. Margaret attended the 
Friends’ school in Saffron Walden, Essex, followed by Wycombe high school in 
Buckinghamshire. Moving to London, she studied history at King’s College, and 
joined the Fabian Society, where she met our father, Peter, a solicitor from a 
large London Jewish family. They were married in 1955, and settled happily in 
Highgate, north London.

She worked at the Whittington hospital 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/apr/29/whittington-hospital-closure-halted>
 as an administrator, and continued her various memberships: the Labour party 
(she was a member for more than 60 years),the Fabians 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2001/aug/13/thinktanks.uk>, the Shaw 
Society <http://www.shawsociety.org.uk/>, Hornsey Historical Society, Friends 
of the Earth and a local art group.

Peter died when Margaret was still in her 60s. With her characteristic 
sanguine temperament she threw herself back into her life; she travelled 
frequently, rekindling a passion that had started years before as a volunteer 
on theYouth Railway programme in Yugoslavia 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/nov/12/readers-favourite-photographs-songs-recipes>
 in 1947, as part of the effort to rebuild the country after the war, and a dam 
project in Bulgaria in 1948. In her retirement she booked railway journeys to 
Istanbul, to China, to San Francisco. A loyal Guardian reader, she once phoned 
me on someone’s mobile from a train somewhere in Mongolia asking if I’d keep 
the crossword for her. When not abroad, she helped to run a pensioners’ lunch 
club at Jacksons Lane Community Centre in Highgate – although some of the 
pensioners were younger than she was.

Margaret was principled and very rarely spoke ill of anyone, although she was 
not afraid to make her views known. Her funeral was packed with people of all 
ages. She was inspirational in her loyalty, her steadfastness, her quiet faith 
in humanity. She leaves my brother, Stephen, my sister, Marian, myself and 
eight grandchildren.
