
Next to the lovely Old City, Jaffa’s flea market has become a centre of 
vibrant nightlife over recent years. After the cafes and shabby-chic secondhand 
and antique stalls close, the bar and live music scene begins. Shaffa 
bar-restaurant (which is also open during the day) was one of the first to 
start the trend, organising massive all-night street parties with local bands, 
includingSystem Ali  <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N94SThV4E90>(a half-Arab, 
half-Jewish rock band), and French Moroccan/Israeli singerRiff Cohen 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CeMtEa5QhcA>. Belgian singer Natacha Atlas 
<http://www.natacha-atlas.com/>, known for her Arabic-western electro-hip hop, 
has performed here, too.

The bar’s fusion menu is great and the waiting staff are a bunch of real 
characters. Waitress Yuli took one breakfast dish, called oligarch’s autumn 
(buckwheat, scrambled eggs, yogurt, cream, fennel and a hot Yemenite dip), 
revamped it with tahini and nuts and renamed it Yuli’s Spring. Or try Shaffa 
and the King of Siam, a fresh Thai salad with peanuts and coriander. On 
Sundays, a completely vegan menu is served.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4eypt%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4eypt%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f87e3b8d8345f490964d0b45aad7a59ed84055e%2F0_0_5184_3109%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jaffa's%20old%20town%20is%20home%20to%20Tel%20Aviv's%20new%20music%20scene&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4eypt%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jaffa%27s+old+town+is+home+to+Tel+Aviv%27s+new+music+scene&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4eypt%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f87e3b8d8345f490964d0b45aad7a59ed84055e%2F0_0_5184_3109%2F5184.jpg>
There’s a diverse musical offering here. Every Monday, The Ottomans Ensemble 
play Turkish jazz, which often turns into a party with people belly dancing. 
DJs play every night – a mix of electronica, urban, funk and Oriental sets. 
There’s a “chilled hour”, too, every Friday at 6pm, with a live pianist playing 
European classical music.

With its simple design, and indoor and outdoor seating, Shaffa is effortlessly 
cool without being self-consciously trendy. My friends DJ there regularly and I 
join them whenever I’m in town, to plan our Middle Eastern ensemble sets. It’s 
the place to be.

• 2-3 Nahman Street, Jaffa, facebook.com/shaffabar 
<https://www.facebook.com/shaffabar>

Spiritwo <http://spiritwo.com/>’s new single, Mesumamim 
<https://www.youtube.com/user/spiritwo>, is out now
