
Paul Merton’s Secret Stations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/02/paul-mertons-secret-stations-review-out-of-the-ordinary-out-of-the-way>
 has well and truly put railway request stops on the map. In the Channel 4 
series, inspired by my book Tiny Stations, the comedian roams the country in 
search of the stories and people behind these curious anomalies of the railway 
network.

Existing in a state of almost perpetual slumber, a request stop is woken only 
occasionally, when a passenger asks a guard for the train to stop there or when 
someone stands on the platform and puts their hand out to stop it as the train 
approaches. So suddenly appearing on Sunday night television –tonight’s episode 
wraps up the series 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/paul-mertons-secret-stations> – is a real 
moment in the sun for these obscure stations.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j7x4%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j7x4%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32fe148d9f01a75f48a66b09ca77b69aa85bf5b1%2F0_445_4000_2510%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alight%20here%3F%20Britain's%20railway%20request%20stops&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j7x4%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alight+here%3F+Britain%27s+railway+request+stops&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j7x4%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32fe148d9f01a75f48a66b09ca77b69aa85bf5b1%2F0_445_4000_2510%2F4000.jpg>
 Dunrobin Castle station. Photograph: Dixe Wills 
Although Merton visits around 20 stations, he has by no means exhausted the 
nation’s stock of fascinating request stops. Indeed, from the far north of 
Scotland to the tip of Cornwall, the nation is sprinkled with around 150 
request stops.

Take Dunrobin Castle station: it serves one of the oldest inhabited houses in 
Scotland, which also happens to be the seat of the Earls and Dukes of 
Sutherland. This is the sort of fairytale castle you might expect to find 
adorning a mountainside in Germany, yet it was designed by the Englishman Sir 
Charles Barry, the architect of the Houses of Parliament in London. The station 
began life as the personal halt of the Duke of Sutherland who, quite naturally, 
kept his own train there. Today, its platform hosts a rather astonishing 
black-and-whiteArts and Crafts building 
<http://www.scotlandrailholiday.com/dunrobin/> containing a bijou railway 
memorabilia museum.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j7x4%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j7x4%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33a03235ee07a6fe52511199a11c526f64e2a29e%2F0_0_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alight%20here%3F%20Britain's%20railway%20request%20stops&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j7x4%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alight+here%3F+Britain%27s+railway+request+stops&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j7x4%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33a03235ee07a6fe52511199a11c526f64e2a29e%2F0_0_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 Conwy station. Photograph: Dixe Wills 
Conwy station, by contrast, is arguably right in the middle of a museum, for 
Unesco has declared the small north Wales towna world heritage site 
<http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/374>. For those unacquainted with Conwy, 
information boards in the town cite it as being “amongst the planet’s greatest 
built structures, equal to Stonehenge and the Pyramids as an example of 
mankind’s most inspired creativity”. Given that, we should perhaps draw a veil 
over the fact that the engineer Robert Stephenson hacked a huge hole in its 
glorious medieval town wall to push a railway line through it.

It’s probably just as well that you don’t need to ask the commander of an 
elite military training camp for permission to alight at every station, but 
that’s just what I had to do when visiting Lympstone Commando in Devon (you 
will too if you want to go – and give at least a fortnight’s notice). Perched 
prettily on the eastern shore of the Exe estuary, the station was created for 
the soldiers who train there. From the platform you can peer through the high 
fences at what looks like an impossibly difficult assault course. When I asked 
the guard to stop the train there, Iwas thrilled by her reply: “I knew there’d 
be one of you on here somewhere.” Being mistaken for a commando when you look 
like I do (a bit urban and weedy) is a boost to the self-esteem that money 
simply can’t buy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j7x4%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j7x4%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd22378862c50e9a27ad532e5e82766d8a4c7f44%2F0_221_4000_2646%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alight%20here%3F%20Britain's%20railway%20request%20stops&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j7x4%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alight+here%3F+Britain%27s+railway+request+stops&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j7x4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd22378862c50e9a27ad532e5e82766d8a4c7f44%2F0_221_4000_2646%2F4000.jpg>
 Lympstone Commando station. Photograph: Dixe Wills 
For a rather wilder, less regimented experience, head for Buckenham in 
Norfolk. This is the stop forBuckenham Marshes 
<http://www.rspb.org.uk/discoverandenjoynature/seenature/reserves/guide/b/buckenham/>
, the scene of Mark Cocker’s epic tale of corvid-obsessionCrow Country 
<http://www.markcocker.com/crow-country/4577039857>. In autumn and winter, tens 
of thousands of rooks and jackdaws flock here and turn the sky black. It’s by 
no means just corvids on the wetlands though. When I dropped by I was treated 
to the spectacle of a heron with a headless rat in its mouth being repeatedly 
dive-bombed by a pair of lapwings. Nature is wonderful.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j7x4%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j7x4%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F793fa67538a7b4c96e06d22f5c4d5f54dc08a1f3%2F3_529_3161_1896%2F3161.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alight%20here%3F%20Britain's%20railway%20request%20stops&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j7x4%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alight+here%3F+Britain%27s+railway+request+stops&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j7x4%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F793fa67538a7b4c96e06d22f5c4d5f54dc08a1f3%2F3_529_3161_1896%2F3161.jpg>
 A train speeds through Buckenham station, just visible through trees. 
Photograph: Dixe Wills 
Once in a blue moon, you’ll even find events overtaking a request stop, making 
it popular once more. Such is the case with Dolgarrog in north Wales, which 
once served a huge aluminium works. Last summer, the defunct siteopened as Surf 
Snowdonia 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/aug/01/surfsnowdonia-surfing-lake-wales-snowdonia>
, the world’s first inland surf lagoon. The venue had 14,000 visitors in the 
first two weeks, so there’s a good chance you won’t need to to ask the guard to 
stop.

And we’ve not even started on the station created back in 1935 for a 
day-tripping attraction so popular it was known as the Scarborough of the 
Midlands (The Lakes, Warwickshire); the station where one of the bravest 
civilian acts of the second world war took place (Bootle, Cumbria); the station 
dedicated to a holiday camp where for two long summers a young Ringo Starr hit 
the skins (Penychain, Gwynedd); or, famously, the station with the longest name 
in Europe (Llanfair PG, Anglesey). So, I confess, I won’t betoo surprised if a 
second series beckons …

 * The final episode of Secret Stations is on Channel 4 on Sunday 15 May at 8pm
Dixe Wills is the author of Tiny Stations (AA Publishing 
<http://shop.theaa.com/store/home/tiny-stations>, £12)
