
See update at end: The Irish Times 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/irish-times> has launched a legal action 
against Times Newspapers over the intention by Rupert Murdoch’s UK company to 
publish an online newspaper called The Times Ireland.

The Irish Times says the use of the title, which it claims is due to be 
launched “imminently”, amounts to a breach of its trademark and therefore 
infringes its copyright.

Senior Counsel Jonathan Newman told the Dublin high court that the Irish Times 
had instituted proceedings because the “potential for confusion is enormous”. 
The proposed use of the nameThe Times 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/thetimes> Ireland was, he said, “a very 
serious violation” of its copyright.

It is evidently intended that the digital edition of the Times would be part 
of a seven-day subscription package offered to Irish readers along with the
Sunday Times <http://www.theguardian.com/media/sundaytimes>.

The Irish Times wants to prevent Times Newspapers 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/newspapers> from using any name similar to 
the Irish Times and is seeking an order prohibiting Murdoch’s London-based News 
UK from using the domain names www.thetimesireland.ie, www.timesireland.ie, and 
also from using the description The Times Ireland on Twitter accounts, using 
the T logo on its Twitter account, or any other logo confusingly similar to the 
IT logo.

Newman said the Irish Times has been aware for some months that the defendants 
intended to publish an Irish edition e-paper and had no issue with that.

However, the paper does have a complaint about the use of titles such as The 
Times Ireland or TimesIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>.

Newman said the Irish Times only became aware over the last week, following 
posts on social media, that the proposed publication by the defendants would be 
called The Times Ireland.

He claimed the use of the name will cause the Irish Times, whose own online 
publication has six million views per month, “enormous problems”.

He said undertakings had been sought from the defendants not to use those 
titles and that no such undertakings have been given.

Newman said lawyers acting for Times Newspapers said, by correspondence, that 
there was no basis for asking the high court to impose the injunctions it was 
seeking.

The correspondence also revealed that the Irish Times knew since last February 
that it had intended to launch The Times Ireland. There were no imminent plans 
for the proposed publication to be launched prior to 5 June.

The judge, Mr Justice Paul Gilligan, agreed to hear the case later this month.

Updated 5.45pm: A spokesman for News UK 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/newsinternational> & Ireland said: “Ireland 
has a rich tradition of strong and respected journalism and we are very excited 
and proud to be bringing our proposition to market.

“We have hired some of Ireland’s most renowned journalists in the new team and 
it will build on the rich heritage we have already established in the Irish 
market.

“We will be launching our new offering for our Irish audience in due course 
and in the meantime we will seek to address any concerns the Irish Times has.”

Sources: RTE <http://www.rte.ie/news/2015/0520/702605-irish-times-high-court/>/
Irish Times 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/business/media-and-marketing/irish-times-takes-proceedings-over-possible-use-of-title-the-times-ireland-1.2220025>
/News UK email

