
We need to challenge the concept of the superstar researcher whose 
groundbreaking discovery will help beat global poverty. Instead, we must 
support whole communities where knowledge emerging from different places can be 
combined, reframed and repackaged to respond to the most urgent humanitarian 
and development challenges.

Evidence matters, but not as much as we’d like

Anyone listening to policy debates in the media and parliament can see that 
the use of research in public policy is only one part of a complicated process 
that mainly relates to political expediency, vested interest, ideology, social 
technologies and judgment. Despite this, funding for universities and 
thinktanks to promote research uptake often relates to specific projects, as do 
the methods for evaluating success and value for money.

This is arguably how the research excellence framework <http://www.ref.ac.uk/> 
for UK universities has been designed, encouraging academics to try and 
identify how their research has impacted policy, practice and how key people 
have understood the issues. Given the spectacular challenges in attributing 
changes in policy or practice to specific research studies we should not be too 
surprised that researchers and their donorscontinue to struggle 
<http://www.theimpactinitiative.net/blog/blog-can-research-speak-policy> to 
turn research into action.

Research makes a difference by strengthen​ing​ relationships between 
researchers and local government officials

With this and the squeeze on research funding the temptation for development 
agencies may be to commission research narrowly focused on practical issues and 
technical solutions. A new vaccine, a new water purification technology or a 
better system for distributing bed nets may look like the best value for money, 
but where does this leave rigorous academic studies that seek to explore 
emerging development challenges, the underlying causes of poverty or 
ineffective humanitarian response? If we want to secure sustained investment in 
social science research designed to improve poor people’s lives we need to 
consider some other approaches.


A better response to development challenges

Earlier this month, almost 200 social scientists, research donors and NGOs met 
in South Africa 
<http://www.theimpactinitiative.net/blog/conference-lessons-decade%E2%80%99s-research-poverty-innovation-engagement-and-impact>
 to explore how evidence, and particularly local knowledge, can influence the 
implementation of the sustainable development goals (SDGs). What isemerging 
from some of these discussions 
<https://storify.com/The_Impact_Init/10-years-of-research-to-impact> is that 
research on development often makes a real difference by helping to strengthen 
relationships between different researchers, development agencies and local 
government officials. By working together, new collaborations and ways of 
understanding the world emerge and lay the groundwork for future successes in 
improving lives. This particularly relates to the crucial role of local 
researchers, communities and policy actors in the global south in the 
production and use of new evidence for the most urgent challenges in their 
countries.

Just consider how researchers from the Institute of Development Studies 
<http://www.ids.ac.uk/>, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine 
<http://www.lshtm.ac.uk/>, and the universities of Sussex, Exeter, and Njala in 
Sierra Leone, collaborated around the Ebola crisis.The Ebola response 
anthropology platform <http://www.ebola-anthropology.net/> (Erap) was set up in 
just a few weeks to provide valuable insight into the social dimensions of the 
emergency response, such as taking into account local burial practices. This 
resource and the subsequent meetings and briefings influenced the UK 
government’s strategy in west Africa helping to shape humanitarian action 
locally.

Erap is also seen as a model for future research-based engagement in epidemics 
and emergencies. This is where it may achieve longer-term impact on the types 
of cross-sector collaboration we’ll see in the future, that could save many 
more lives in indirect ways.

Creating networks not prize winners

There is nothing wrong with Nobel prize-winning scientists grabbing the 
headlines, as long as we accept that often it is the critical bodies of 
knowledge, mobilised via networks and across sectors, that provide scalable 
solutions to health, education, environmental and socio-economic dilemmas. With 
this in mind, we designed theImpact Initiative for International Development 
Research <http://www.theimpactinitiative.net/>, which supports a diverse 
community of social scientists.


Our approach reflects the view emerging from a number of key development 
research funders, including the UK’sEconomic and Science Research Council 
<http://www.esrc.ac.uk/>, that researchers need to be supported to become 
better connected, and operate in more enabling environments for research 
impact. Rather than focus on the uptake of a single study, the initiative 
identifies synergies between the experts it supports and seeks out ways to help 
them exploit opportunities to engage key audiences with their groundbreaking 
work.

The goal is to support this rich portfolio of research to add up to more than 
the sum of its parts. Will this enable us to turn research into action? If it 
results in new ways of thinking and collaborating on urgent development 
challenges, then at the very least it may remove some of the key barriers to 
research that helps to transform the lives of the most vulnerable.

James Georgalakis is director of communications and impact at the Institute of 
Development Studies <http://www.ids.ac.uk/>. 


Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
