
Q I have five suits in my wardrobe. All the jackets still fit, but all the 
trousers are too tight. They're expensive suits and I would hate to have to 
throw them out. Is there anything I can do?

Simon

A There is something you can do - aside from the obvious diet. Most men's 
trousers are made with a generous seam allowance and a good tailor can let them 
out for you. Designer Alterations in Battersea (designeralterations.com 
<http://www.designeralterations.com>) can take fabric from elsewhere on the 
trousers, a small section from the pocket or hem, and make a gusset which can 
be inserted and hidden. They can also restyle your trousers if you wish to 
change the shape. So you will now have five suits you can continue to enjoy. 
Just go easy on the Christmas dinner!

Q I have been told I need to start wearing glasses at work. I really want to 
buy a great pair of frames that will make me feel confident about wearing specs 
(I work in PR and have to make a good impression). Where do you recommend I go?

Bea

A You will need to have a good look around before you buy. Personally, I would 
spend a fair amount of money to make sure I got the right pair, as you'll be 
wearing them every day. The great thing about glasses is that they can give you 
a whole new image. Look at Lindsay Lohan in last season's Miu Miu advertising 
campaign - they even made her look intelligent. Just make sure you choose a 
frame that complements your face rather than dominating it, and take along an 
honest and opinionated friend to help with tough decisions. Try your local 
optician's, and I'd also recommend finding a local branch of David Clulow (
davidclulow.com <http://www.davidclulow.com>) as this specialist optician 
stocks a great designer range. If you want to make a fashion statement, Italian 
label Marni (well known for clothing in modern, bold shapes and bright prints) 
has recently branched out into frames. The same designs have been translated 
into their spectacles, with great colours and shapes. My favourites are the 
two-tone brown-red frames. You'll certainly be in sharp focus if you wear 
something like this.

Â·If you have a wardrobe question for Jo Jones, email her at 
ask.jo@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.jo@observer.co.uk>
