
How should research travel from the notebooks, hard drives and laboratories of 
researchers to the desks of their peers? Who should get access? And who should 
pay?

Related: Boycotting academic publishers is a career risk for young scientists 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2014/jan/29/boycott-academic-journals-early-career-researchers>

Over the past few years, these deceptively simple questions have been beset 
with controversy. Librarians at some of the world’s wealthiest institutions have
announced that they can no longer afford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2012/apr/24/harvard-university-journal-publishers-prices>
 to purchase the materials their researchers need. Leading academics have 
organisedboycotts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2012/apr/09/frustrated-blogpost-boycott-scientific-journals>
,petitions <http://thecostofknowledge.com/> and mass resignations 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/europe/lingua-entire-editorial-team-of-respected-linguistics-journal-resign-en-mass-in-turf-war-over-a6723036.html>
 to protest the combination of prohibitively high prices and profit margins 
that rival those of the big oil, pharmaceutical and technology firms. A recent 
paper found that just five multinational publishing conglomeratesaccounted for 
50% of all papers 
<http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0127502> 
published in 2013.

It may seem like an administrative afterthought, but the issue of how research 
is communicated in society raises questions that cut to the heart of what 
academics do, and what academia is about. The scale of the entanglement between 
academic research and big publishers may well lead us to ask: who is serving 
whom? Does our scholarly communication system put the needs of researchers 
first? Or does it prioritise the uninterrupted profitability of a handful of 
publishers?


In response to this dilemma, researchers, institutions and policymakers have 
been exploring different ways of making research available, and different ways 
of paying for publishing. In the UK, new policies fromHefce 
<http://www.hefce.ac.uk/rsrch/oa/Policy/> and Research Councils UK 
<http://www.rcuk.ac.uk/research/openaccess/> have sought to widen access to the 
public as well as to encourage a shift from paying at the point of access to 
paying at the point of publishing – through so-called article processing 
charges (or APCs). In principle, this would mean that rather than many 
institutions repeatedly buying access to the same material, publishing is paid 
for “up front” by the research community and thereafter free for all forever.


But will these changes amount to a step towards a better deal, a fairer 
system? To advance understanding of the effects of these changes, we have just 
published apaper in the Open Library of Humanities 
<http://doi.org/10.16995/olh.72> to begin to piece together financial flows 
around academic publishing. However, the picture that we have been able to 
obtain so far based on publicly available data is still woefully inadequate to 
the task of being able to assess who pays for what, whether this is fair, and 
what resources might potentially be available for financing alternative 
arrangements (such as university-based presses or non-profit consortia).


Related: How to get published in an academic journal: top tips from editors 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jan/03/how-to-get-published-in-an-academic-journal-top-tips-from-editors>

What do we know so far? Thanks to hundreds of freedom of information requests 
<http://f1000research.com/articles/3-274/v3>, we have a window into how higher 
educational institutions spend more than £180m every year on journal 
subscriptions. The lion’s share of this (just over 42%) goes tofour of the 
largest publishers <https://dx.doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.1186832.v23>. Data 
about article processing charges is much more difficult to get hold of. Thanks 
to the valiant efforts of a few librarians and institutions we now havepartial 
information 
<https://figshare.com/collections/Open_financial_data_on_article_processing_charges_APCs_/2860717>
 for a selection of institutions, but this is still only a very small part of 
the picture. From what we can tell so far, the same big publishers who receive 
most money from subscriptions also take home the most money from article 
processing charges.

Yet despite these fleeting glimpses we are still a long way from a useful 
picture of how money flows through the academic publishing system, which could 
be used to see the effects of recent policies, and fuel our collective 
imagination about other ways in which scholarly communication could be 
organised. We still can’t account for half of the £180m a year spent on journal 
subscriptions. With respect to article processing charges, despite some 
important steps, we are still largely in the dark. As institutions derive their 
income from many different sources it is also hard to trace where this money 
comes from.

To address this, we need a public database of spending on academic publishing. 
Having this information would not only help us to understand the current 
system, but also to change it. Collective negotiation bodieshave been shown to 
lead to better deals <http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01462679.2014.935903> for 
universities with publishers (though this is not always smooth going, as 
evidenced by the recentnationally coordinated boycott of Elsevier 
<https://universonline.nl/2015/07/02/dutch-universities-start-their-elsevier-boycott-plan>
 by Dutch universities).

Related: Twitter journal: would you share your original research on social 
media? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2014/jan/27/twitter-only-journal-academic-research>

As well as providing evidence to inform such negotiation processes, a more 
joined-up picture of how money is spent would give institutions a better sense 
of the resources available to invest in publishing initiatives and 
infrastructures which prioritise the interests of researchers and their 
publics, rather than the returns of shareholders.


Hence we call on researchers, universities and public institutions to publish 
what they pay and rethink what they are investing in, in order to expedite 
progress towards a scholarly communication system that is fit for purpose in 
the 21st century.

Jonathan Gray is director of policy and research at Open Knowledge, and a 
researcher at the University of London and the University of Amsterdam. Stuart 
Lawson is a doctoral researcher at Birkbeck, University of London undertaking a 
PhD in the politics of open access

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
