
Small charities should form strategic alliances in order to survive closure, a 
charity umbrella body has urged.

One in 10 small UK charities described their chances of closure as “likely” in 
the next year, the Foundation for Social Improvement (FSI) found. Declining 
funds, reported by 26% of respondents combined with a rise in workload (32%) 
mean small charities lack the resources to stay open and operating.

Related: Small charities miss out on donations because public unaware of them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/jun/13/small-charities-miss-donations-public-unaware>

However, through collaboration, small charities can deliver more services 
while spending less time delivering them. The report, Collaboration: more than 
the sum of the parts, found that 89% of those in a strategic partnership spend 
less or an equal amount of time to deliver the same proportion of services.

Despite the benefits of collaboration and joint ventures the FSI, who are the 
charity behindSmall Charity Week <http://smallcharityweek.com/>, found only 10% 
of small charities are collaborating with other charities to any significant 
degree.

Of the 708 charities who participated, 90% refer purely to networking rather 
than a meaningful partnerships, such as a merger (3%) or joint ventures (6%). 
The majority may be meeting with other charities but they are not converting 
discussion into action.


Pauline Broomhead, founder of Small Charity Week and chief executive at the 
FSI warned this could mean that small charities are missing out. She said: “The 
results from the research indicate, quite strongly, that small charities don’t 
collaborate enough in any meaningful way.

Broomhead added that vital opportunities could be missed by wasting time with 
“superficial partnerships that don’t add any real and lasting value” to the 
services that small charities deliver.

Recent months have seen a series of mergers take place in the charity sector. 
In April, Medway Crossroadscompleted a merger 
<http://carersfirst.org.uk/?Carers_FIRST_and_Crossroads_Medway_to_merge> into 
Carers First. They had previously worked together as Carers Trust network 
partners. Medway Crossroads had been struggling prior to the announcement after 
losing a lost a key contract in July 2014.

Peter Turner, chief executive feels strongly that mergers and partnerships are 
the best way for small charities to compete for commissions and funding. “We’re 
very glad we did it. The other organisation was in trouble but still had assets 
and was looking for another organisation in the sector to best make the most of 
their reserves and expertise.

Related: Why I believe small charities are better than big ones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/mar/15/why-i-believe-small-charities-are-better-than-big-ones>

“Charities that come together are stronger in an ever more diverse and 
difficult sector. We are up against larger charities and private sector 
companies and we have to convince commissioners that we have the systems in 
place, the professionalism and the business acumen to deliver.

“We have to compete to survive and I believe that small charities can do that 
best by sharing expertise and experience.”

Meanwhile, other mergers have seen smaller charities, such as innovative 
user-led homelessness charity Lift, becoming part of national ones, in this 
case Crisis. Lift’s former chief executive Atara Fridler wrote ina blog 
<http://blog.crisis.org.uk/joining-forces-with-crisis-was-not-a-necessary-step-but-it-was-the-right-step/>
 at the time that the decision was “neither an easy nor an obvious one but it 
was the right decision” and cited that local authority cuts had impacted Lift’s 
income.

There are also strong examples of how partnership building can help small 
charities survive. One organisation reaping the benefits of collaboration is 
LGBT Consortium, a 275 strong national membership organisation which pools 
resources and enhances the development and support of LGBT groups, projects and 
organisations.

Paul Roberts, chief executive of LGBT Consortium said: “By sharing resources 
and combining efforts when applying for funding, we are able to pool best 
practice and coordinate shared learning. Small charities are expected to know a 
lot of things on a lot of topics, but we can’t be experts in everything.”

For more news, opinions and ideas about the voluntary sector, join our 
community <https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/>.
