
Three days after she gave birth to a healthy baby girl, Susheela* is in the 
operating theatre. Her procedure will take only 10 minutes. A small scar below 
her bellybutton, hardly visible, is the only mark the doctors will leave behind.


At 27, the mother of two is getting permanently sterilised.

After the operation, Susheela calls her husband and says she’ll be home in 
time for dinner.

Up to 20 women will undergo the same operation each day at the family planning 
clinic in Ellis Nagar, in the south Indian city of Madurai.

Susheela chose to be sterilised. The same goes for other women in the waiting 
room, with some of the clinic’s patients as young as 20.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ye9x%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ye9x%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc99e9e8844c1e178e5bed78d7ede390105118fe4%2F645_217_5283_3170%2F5283.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sterilised%20at%2020%3A%20the%20Indian%20women%20seeking%20permanent%20contraceptive%20solutions&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ye9x%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sterilised+at+20%3A+the+Indian+women+seeking+permanent+contraceptive+solutions&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ye9x%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc99e9e8844c1e178e5bed78d7ede390105118fe4%2F645_217_5283_3170%2F5283.jpg>
 Susheela is getting sterilised at a family planning clinic in Ellis Nagar, 
Madurai, only days after giving birth 
Sterilisation for these women has almost become a rite of passage. Mothers 
bring their daughters, and women who have recently had babies come straight 
from the delivery room. Outside the clinic, women loop cloth around metal bars 
to make hammocks for the newborns that they bring with them.

The clinic offers vasectomies too, a quicker and simpler sterilisation 
procedure for men, but men rarely come, often because their wives don’t want 
them to. “Men are the workers in the family. They need to go and work. It’s 
better for us to do the operation,” says Chitra, a woman outside the clinic. 
“We believe that men lose their strength by having it done.”

More than 4 million women were permanently sterilised in 2014-15 
<http://www.mohfw.nic.in/WriteReadData/l892s/5632145789632456.pdf> (pdf). In 
contrast, only about 90,000 men had vasectomies. The government says 1,434 
peopledied from the procedures 
<http://www.hindustantimes.com/ht-view/the-chhattisgarh-lesson-cash-for-sterilisation-drive-maybe-masking-grave-tragedy/story-Wa3X6BAoHhO0c2S6spObgP.html>
 between 2003 and 2012, almost all of them women.

Related: India's sterilisation camps must give way to proper family planning | 
Shree Venkatram 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2014/nov/22/india-sterilisation-camps-family-planning-tragedy>

Social stigma, and the legacy of India’s forced family planning programmes, 
has kept men away from clinics.


However, a new government policy could see the decades-long female-centred 
family planning initiatives shift their focus to men.

According to figures from the Ministry of Women and Child Development, only 5% 
of sterilisations are performed on men. The government wants that figure to 
rise to 30% under a draft national health policy. “The idea is that men and 
women must equitably share the responsibility of planning or spacing the birth 
of children,” a ministry spokesperson says.

India’s population of 1.3 billion <http://data.worldbank.org/country/india> is 
now the second largest in the world, after China. The policy is an attempt to 
stem population growth.

But previous family planning programmes involving sterilisation have proved 
controversial.

Donors including the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/15/uk-aid-forced-sterilisation-india>
 and theUS <https://www.pop.org/content/usaid-funding-sterilization-camps-india>
 were criticised for supporting recent sterilisation drives following 
complaints that people were coerced into surgery.

In 2014, sterilisation became an international scandal after 12 women died in 
botched surgeries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/12/india-sterilisation-deaths-women-forced-camps-relatives>
 in the state of Chhattisgarh. Some critics labelled the programme anti-women 
and called on donors to stop their funding. Poor hygiene and unskilled doctors 
in some clinics put women in serious danger.

India was the first country to launch a family planning programme, in 1952. In 
the 1970s, prime minister Indira Gandhi launched mass forced sterilisation 
programmes, with money fromthe World Bank, the UN population fund and the 
Swedish international development authority 
<http://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-30040790>. Estimates of the number of 
deaths from the programme range from 300 to thousands.

In 1976, 8 million people were sterilised 
<http://www.jstor.org/stable/1972317?Search=yes&seq=6#page_scan_tab_contents> 
under the programme, which was targeted at poor people, including ethnic 
minorities and lower castes.

Related: India’s population policies, including female sterilisation, beset by 
problems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/13/india-population-growth-policy-problems-sterilisation-incentives-coercion>

Government employees 
<http://www.jstor.org/stable/2757117?Search=yes&resultItemClick=true&searchText=india&searchText=sterilisation&searchText=gunpoint&searchUri=%2Faction%2FdoBasicSearch%3FQuery%3Dindia%2Bsterilisation%2Bgunpoint%26amp%3Bacc%3Don%26amp%3Bwc%3Don%26amp%3Bfc%3D#page_scan_tab_contents>
 from railway ticket collectors to schoolteachers were asked to participate and 
help meet sterilisation quotas. State governments competed to beat targets.
Villagers recall being forced to mobile sterilisation camps 
<http://www.livemint.com/Politics/VPJHHyhQm3t8Rd1YcOfeRO/When-sterlization-wasnt-a-matter-of-choice.html>
 by armed police.

For men, the vasectomy camps were a symbol of emasculation and humiliation. 
Many remember the horror of those years and refuse to participate. Others can’t 
bear the social stigma that vasectomies carry.

As a result, family planning campaigns target poor women. The top 10 states 
prioritised by government plans 
<http://www.mohfw.nic.in/WriteReadData/l892s/5632145789632456.pdf> (pdf) 
include Odisha, Bihar and Uttar Pradesh, home to some of India’s poorest 
communities.

In the southern state of Tamil Nadu, years of counselling programmes in 
villages, schools and workplaces, coupled with the rising cost of living, 
prompts dozens of women to visit the clinic in Ellis Nagar every day.

“We do it by our own will – the government doesn’t force us,” says one woman, 
Muneshwari. “Mostly I did it because it is so expensive to have children. The 
cost of educating them, looking after them – everything is expensive.”

Many of the women who come to the clinic are young. “They get married around 
18. Within two years they are giving birth to their second babies. At the age 
of 20, 21, they come for sterilisation,” says B Ashifa, a family planning 
programme officer at the clinic.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ye9x%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ye9x%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f6055698a6b47f02b5bd251cf9cfa56d714e77f%2F0_400_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sterilised%20at%2020%3A%20the%20Indian%20women%20seeking%20permanent%20contraceptive%20solutions&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ye9x%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sterilised+at+20%3A+the+Indian+women+seeking+permanent+contraceptive+solutions&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ye9x%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f6055698a6b47f02b5bd251cf9cfa56d714e77f%2F0_400_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
 B Ashifa, a family planning programme officer, highlights the financial 
incentive for sterilisation 
The clinic offers other family planning: condoms, the pill, a copper coil, all 
free in government centres.

But many women choose sterilisation because temporary alternatives are taboo. 
The pill is considered promiscuous, and many men refuse to wear condoms.
Increasing numbers of women are choosing a coil 
<http://www.mohfw.nic.in/WriteReadData/l892s/5632145789632456.pdf> (pdf), and 
the government is attempting to make injectable contraceptives more widely 
available.

But there’s another reason. “Women get 500 rupees [£5] if they are sterilised, 
men get 1,300. They get nothing if they opt for another method,” says Ashifa. 

“We do tubectomies every single day, but there are very few men who come here, 
so we do vasectomies only one day a month.”

Dipak Joshi, of the Men’s Rights Association 
<http://mensrightsassociation.org/>, says raising awareness about the procedure 
and debunking myths that sterilisation affects masculinity will be needed to 
change minds. “If there is a common understanding between a man and his wife, 
that they don’t want to have more children, then there’s nothing that is 
stopping men from [having] a vasectomy. The problem at the moment is that there 
is a lack of awareness about it.

“In a relationship between a man and a woman, men should also take some of the 
responsibility. But we also have to think about the problems that men face. 
There is an overemphasis on women’s problems in society and many men are 
unwilling to speak about problems that they have. If we can address those 
problems, and assure them that the operation is safe, then men will come 
forward themselves.”

*Surname not used to protect identity
