
Welcome to OFM’s special 15th birthday issue and, immediately, let me say a 
huge thank you for coming along with us.

So much has happened in the food world in the last 15 years, it is difficult 
to know where to start. We have seen chefs and restaurants come and go, big 
names virtually disappear and little ones turn into multimillion-pound 
industries. We have been shocked by nutritionists, delighted (endlessly) by 
talented cooks and witnessed more dodgy diets than you can shake a spiralizer 
at.

What remains steadfast is our interest in what we eat. Yes, we are concerned 
about the daily food on our plates, but also about the way it is produced and 
the effect that has on both our wellbeing and the planet.

All of which has kept us here at the magazine very busy. We have proved time 
and again thatyou don’t need lots of money to eat well 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/feb/16/jack-monroe-10-recipes>, 
or to be an experienced cook to make yourself something nice to eat. We have 
shone a light on the country’s rich network ofhardworking farmers, food 
producers, cooks and campaigners 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/21/foods-special-relationship-five-chefs-and-their-suppliers>
. And, as much as we adore our chefs and restaurants, I should point out that 
this magazine’s most popular story ever was Jay Rayner’s piece on howan 
inspirational rethink of school diet 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jul/19/lunchtime-revolution-school-children-autism>
 is massively improving some of our kids’ wellbeing.

We continue to devote a generous amount of space to recipes, both classic and 
contemporary, professional and amateur. To celebrate that, we have 15 of my 
recipes this month that include updated favourites and new ones alike. We also 
have gorgeous, romantic Roman cooking from Eleonora Galasso. Oh, and we have 
the fabulous Mary Portas and Chris Packham joining in the celebrations.

We also introduce this year’s OFM Awards, and invite you to send in 
nominations for the markets, cheap restaurants and Sunday lunches you would 
like to see receive one of our coveted awards. Do please send us your thoughts 
on who and what deserves recognition.

So thank you again from all of us at the magazine to our readers old and new. 
Here’s to the next 15 years.
