
The BBC <http://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> has lost one of its strongest 
champions for women and ethnic minorities with the departure of Liliane Landor 
as head of languages for the World Service.

Landor’s departure after 26 years with the BBC was described in an email to 
staff fromJames Harding <http://www.theguardian.com/media/jamesharding>, 
director of BBC News and Current Affairs, as her decision.

“Liliane Landor has been a defining figure in shaping the World Service over 
the course of her 26 years at the BBC,” he said.

“At Liliane’s behest, the language services transformed the BBC’s ability to 
make sense of the world, bringing its expertise, first-hand knowledge and 
courageous on-the-ground reporting to all parts of the BBC’s global coverage.”

Hundreds of BBC staff members are understood to have attended an internal 
meeting on Wednesday to discuss Landor’sdeparture .

Although the departure was mutually agreed, there are understood to have been 
differences between her and the senior management of the World Service, which 
is led by Fran Unsworth, over its future direction. Landor could not be reached 
for comment.

The daughter of an Arab father and Cuban mother who partly grew up in Lebanon, 
she was instrumental in launching theBBC’s 100 Women  
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/oct/20/bbc-liliane-landor-women-world-service>
season in 2014. The inaugural season included an interview with Malala 
Yusufzai, the Pakistani schoolgirl shot by the Taliban, maternal health in 
Uganda and the rise of female breadwinners in the US.

As the controller of the BBC’s 28 language services across radio, TV and 
online, Landor described the special season as “a pledge, on my part and the 
part of the editors, to say this is what we are committed to – I do want to 
hear more women’s voices on air, and read on our websites issues that we don’t 
generally talk about”.

The World Service was awarded an extra £85m a year  
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-34902244>by the government last 
November to invest in BBC services around the world including in Russia, North 
Korea, the Middle East and Africa.

Landor joined the BBC in 1989, first as a presenter on the French service 
before eventually becoming responsible for all theBBC World Service 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc-world-service> news and current affairs 
programmes in English ten years ago. She has also been the head of the World 
Service’s middle east region.

Her departure comes a month after new research suggested that female experts 
were still outnumbered by men by three to one on the major news networks 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/05/18/noreena-hertz-set-to-be-unveiled-as-economics-editor-of-itv-news/>
, which also have only half as many female reporters and presenters as they do 
men.

Although women make up almost half of all BBC jobs, that percentage falls in 
senior roles.

Jonathan Munro, the BBC’s head of newsgathering, said earlier this month that 
women sometimes lacked confidence in applying for top jobs. “If you walk around 
the BBC newsroom it’s a really diverse place, but you find some very capable 
women don’t feel confident enough to pitch for stuff that we’d really like them 
to apply for.”

He pointed out however that women now held six of the BBC’s top 15 reporting 
posts, all of which were occupied by men three years ago.
