 When President Nixon stepped up to the microphone in the White House this week 
to make his electrifying 'major developments' statement about the Watergate 
scandal he wore a small American flag in his button-hole, his tie was in a 
Windsor knot, and his sideboards came down to the midpoint of his ear - the 
very length, as it happens, permitted by the police department of Oakland, 
California.
Norman Mailer once described Nixon as looking like an undertaker; but as he 
took to the rostrum to make his historic announcement, it seemed to me that he 
resembled the manager of a medium-price motel who had emerged from his office 
to quieten complaints from the guests. The President almost entirely lacks 
presence; he is the most powerful man in the world, but the power does not 
show. By comparison with his predecessor, President Johnson, whose slow, 
watchful entrance into a room instantly heightened the tension of everyone in 
it, Nixon seemed quite ingratiating and nervous.

He was not assisted, it seemed to me, by the nature of the environment that 
his aides have arranged for him. In the old days, Presidents called reporters 
round their desk when they had something to say. When Nixon came to office, the 
White House Press room was simply the lobby of the west wing, which is where 
the action is. Now, however, consistent with this administration's concern for 
orderliness, a special Press room containing decorous high-backed chairs and 
prints of riverboats has been built over the old White House swimming pool, 
where President Johnson used to invite visitors to swim with him naked. 
President Nixon spoke for eight minutes, reading every word from a text, and 
then left. Some newspapers referred to the event as a Press conference.

The facilities in this refined motel lobby are a great improvement on the 
facilities in the old lobby with the battered green armchairs. There is even a 
candy-dispensing machine, which modern White House correspondents have been 
known to use. But the place is antiseptic and separate.

Perhaps the formal centre of power, the Oval Office, has more of the reek of 
politics? The answer is: not under President Nixon. It is hard to imagine that 
anyone ever works in the Oval Office now; the desk top, when the President is 
elsewhere, is entirely empty, its surface polished like glass. There is no sign 
of books or papers. The Oval Office used to be a beautiful room; Mr Nixon's 
preferred d√©cor features a royal blue carpet, with large gold stars around the 
edge, and sofas and chairs of a violent canary yellow. The room dazzles, but 
shows no trace of the only man who uses it.

The President sometimes works in another office in an adjacent building and 
does his thinking still further away, out of Washington altogether, at Camp 
David. His strength as an administrator is the speed with which he absorbs 
information: 'It may sound a bit uncomplimentary,' says an old associate, 'but 
he is a blotter. I've never seen anyone who can absorb information as fast as 
he can.' He likes the information to be written down, and to be full of facts. 
He has built his method of government on this strength. He runs the country 
very privately, seeing few people, except on ceremonial occasions, and relying 
on a tight circle of advisers.

The system, one is told, makes for orderliness: early morning meetings, 
agendas, regular channels, memos, action. No disruptive private lines out from 
the President to private sources of information, as under Roosevelt. No 
idleness and golf show stud-marks on the White House floors, as under 
Eisenhower. No telephone calls direct from the Oval Office to humble members of 
the bureaucracy, as under Kennedy. No interminable sessions with barbecue 
cronies, while the President drank root beer and scratched his crotch, as under 
Johnson. It is an odd fact that Nixon, alone among recent Presidents, has no 
political cronies; though not himself abnormally interested in money, he 
admires rich men, and his only associate who might be called a crony is the 
rich and discreet bachelor Bebe Rebozo, who is not political.

After the much talked-about orderliness and privacy, the characteristic of 
this administration that even the politest visitor cannot help noticing is the 
strong smell of corruption, which goes far beyond the Watergate scandal and 
seems to be an important part of its hinterland.

The character of the White House staff has been determined by the 
peculiarities of life on the West Coast, and it is in Southern California that 
the roots of this Administration may be found. Perhaps one may look there for a 
generalised explanation of the Watergate conspiracy.

Californians are often thought of as open-minded, relaxed experimental people, 
but these White House Californians belong to a different strain. They exemplify 
instead the spirit of Orange County, Los Angeles, which is one of the most 
conservative regions of the US: suburban, prosperous, new, fast-growing, white, 
intensely orthodox, patriotic, church-going, often puritanical, often rootless, 
often heavily mortgaged, and often fearful that something unpredictable may 
happen - factory closures, space agency cutback, tax increases - to put the 
citizens on a slide that will put them back into the ranks of the poor from 
which many of their parents escaped.

The White House staff do not all come from Orange County in fact, but they do 
so in spirit. A new generic term is needed to describe them, as 'Ivy League' is 
applied to well-off privately educated, Europeanised products of the East 
Coast. These Orange County Boys are proud of being Californian, yet they also 
often feel inferior to and suspicious of eastern Americans, especially Ivy 
Leaguers.

Nixon, in his youth, used to stand on the railway line at home in Whittier, 
outside Los Angeles, and gaze longingly down the tracks towards the east; 
Californians often feel that they need to go east to prove themselves. The 
White House staff had their first political experiences as part of the swing to 
the hard right in California - provoked by black riots, student rebelliousness, 
and high taxes - that made Ronald Reagan Governor. 'It is time to get big 
government off your back and out of your pocket,' said Nixon in his budget 
address last January. Here is a theme of the Administration that might have 
come straight out of Reagan's 1966 Campaign Handbook. Caspar Weinberger, a 
principal architect of Nixon's new budget, which cuts social welfare provision, 
used to be budget director for Reagan. Nixon has always liked fresh blood. His 
present aids joined him some 10 years ago and have come up with him very fast, 
recruiting friends on the way.

'Their view is professional, managerial. California is the first suburban 
State and I don't think Haldeman and Co are aware of what real social problems 
are,' a Southern Californian Congressman told me. 'They still have a kind of 
Puritan ethic - my father made it, I made it, so if I can do it why can't 
others? They have a very tough ideological approach. They have preconceptions. 
And they are defensive. They don't trust the people in government, the Civil 
Service, and they're filling more and more slots with people in their own 
mould.'

They move around little in Washington. 'You never see them at private 
functions,' a girl who moves around a great deal told me. 'If there's not a 
head table, there won't be any Administration people. They don't like it. Nixon 
doesn't like it. They socialise only in the way of business. They are not good 
at small talk.' A sociable politician remarked: 'It's the damnedest thing. 
They're all cut from the same cookie-cutter, there's not a laugh in a car-load.'
