
What does my Swegway say about me?

“I like to embrace technology and test new things out before other people. The 
flashing lights make the board seem otherworldly – I’m not walking, I’m 
hovering along.”

What this Swegway says about Jay

Ooh, Jay’s got a Swegway <http://www.swegway.net/>. I am proper jealous. 
Swegways are quite the thing around south London and, well, everywhere. They 
light up as you go along, and at night I have seen several cool mofos appear to 
be levitating, their feet resting on fallen stars, as they zoom gently along 
the pavement to their Sainsbury’s Local. I’ve seen all of them fall off, of 
course – that’s half the joy – but as they’re only a few inches off the ground, 
there are no major injuries involved. And even when falling, they still look 
great.

Jay’s Swegway shows he’s into music, or gaming, or football, or all three. I’d 
say music is his first love.Grime <https://www.theguardian.com/music/grime> 
artist Jme, aka The Coolest Man in Britain, was the first person I saw going on 
about Swegways, and his track“Test Me” 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U3-dMZd-36g> has him and various YouTubers 
like Miniminter and Tobjizzle (they play Fifa online and have millions of fans) 
zooming around a warehouse on customised Swegways and other wheeled vehicles 
such as go-karts and office chairs. Fun!

Jay’s Swegway also shows he’s confident in himself and where he lives. Many 
people would be worried about using one around town in case they’re mugged for 
what is essentially a £350 skateboard. Not Jay. It’s revealing that Jay 
combines his Swegway with his T-shirt. That’s a promo shirt forTiny Moving Parts
 <https://tinymovingparts.bandcamp.com/>, who make music very far from grime: 
they’re an American indie band from Minnesota. You can just make out some 
sketchy, almost home-drawn tattoos on Jay’s arm. He is clearly into offbeat 
culture. He’s not fully grime, he’s not all-the-way alternative. He’s certainly 
not mainstream. He goes his own way. Watch him go! On his Swegway, looking like 
a don.

Since this article was published, the law has been changed and it is now 
illegal to ride a “hoverboard” on pavements and walkways, as explainedhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/12/hoverboards-illegal-pavements-roads-scooters>
.

If you would like Miranda to cast an eye over your favourite possession, email 
a photograph tomagazine@observer.co.uk <mailto:magazine@observer.co.uk>
