
Everyone supports good teaching in our universities. How could we not? UK 
universities have a global reputation for the high quality of learning offered 
here – and they attractgreater numbers of overseas students (14%) than any 
other country in the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development 
<http://www.keepeek.com/Digital-Asset-Management/oecd/education/education-at-a-glance-2015/united-kingdom_eag-2015-85-en#page7>
, except the US (which hosts 21%).

Teaching is, at its core, a human endeavour and the fact that so many people 
want to study in this country is a tribute to the 200,000 staff who teach in 
our universities, as well as the thousands more who support them. Yet 
successive initiatives from the government seem to ignore the impact of this 
critical group, choosing instead to focus upon structures. Sadly, the proposed 
Teaching Excellence Framework (Tef), continues this pattern.

If the absence of the academic is striking in the Tef proposals, so too is the 
failure to appreciate how important the underlying employment model pursued by 
universities is in relation to quality.

Related: Reform could force universities to choose between teaching and 
research 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/nov/24/the-tef-is-call-to-action-for-leaders-but-it-could-unite-or-divide>

More than 100,000 teaching staff <https://www.hesa.ac.uk/sfr209> (more than 
half of the total), are in insecure employment. The lucky ones have one-year 
contracts, tens of thousands more are on hourly paid contractsand 20,000 on 
some form of zero-hours contract 
<http://www.ucu.org.uk/index.cfm?articleid=6749&from=6747&start=11>. This 
endemic casualisation 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/nov/17/university-lecturers-uk-us-casual-posts-food-stamps>
, is, in the words of one lecturer I met last week, “higher education’s dirty 
secret”.

Does it matter that those who teach our children at university are likely to 
be employed on a term-by-term basis, often living from hand-to-mouth and with 
little access to facilities or training and professional development?

The truth is that although there are many, many great teachers within the 
casualised workforce, their achievements are in spite of, rather than because 
of, the system that employs them. As one lecturer puts it: “The temporary 
nature of my work means that I lack the time not just to fulfil my academic and 
pastoral duties with students, but also to develop my own ideas or teaching 
style.”

The Tef is being consulted on until 15 January, but the outline for it 
provided in the green paper 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/higher-education-teaching-excellence-social-mobility-and-student-choice>
 proposesusing student satisfaction, student retention rates and graduate job 
prospects to measure teaching quality. Those that score highly in these 
measures will be allowed to raise tuition fees in line with inflation (which 
will eventually rise).

There’s a continuing lack of consensus about what constitutes sensible 
evidence for measuring teaching excellence butthe student satisfaction survey 
is definitely not seen as a 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/aug/13/the-national-student-survey-should-be-abolished-before-it-does-any-more-harm>
 credible tool for the job.

There are methodological and pedagogical deficiencies with student 
satisfaction surveys. A UCU member who is an education lecturer in London told 
me that she has yet to find anyone who views the NSS as a valid measure of 
teacher effectiveness.

Related: University reform is coming – get ready for another numbers game 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/nov/05/the-green-paper-is-coming-get-ready-for-another-numbers-game>

She pointed out that satisfaction is influenced by a whole host of factors, 
many of which are wider processes beyond their control, such as funding. Her 
department is struggling with a much-reduced budget after government reforms 
shifted teacher training to schools.

The marketisation of higher education has, of course, brought graduate 
prospects into sharp focus for students – now thought of as consumers. But 
making a direct link between post-study work and teaching is disingenuous. 
Choice of course, institution, and sadly, prior schooling and social 
background, are equally big predictors of job prospects for students.In 
addition, as an economics lecturer at a south coast university, said, the state 
of the economy has the biggest bearing on job prospects for her students.

The University College Union has long argued that the conditions teachers work 
in are effectively the conditions that students learn in. So although it is 
hidden away on page 33 of the green paper, the suggestion that universities 
should be held to account for career, staff training and engagement and the 
numbers of staff in permanent employment is one that we welcome.

As a union, we have made the case for the introduction of clear agreed 
promotion criteria for teaching staff, based on the national academic role 
profiles or locally agreed variants of them. Good teaching needs to be 
recognised in a clear career structure for university staff. I repeatedly hear 
from members that this is the obvious incentive to improve teaching, supported 
by appropriate training, support and professional development.

Related: Don't let social mobility fade out in the noise of university reform 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/nov/16/dont-let-social-mobility-fade-out-in-the-noise-of-university-reform>

In the longer term, the link between the Tef and tuition fees risks creating a 
high-stakes assessment regime which will increase the likelihood of 
institutional game-playingat the expense of students themselves. This kind of 
behaviour has already been illustrated through the Research Excellence 
Framework, where the goal of publishing on specific subjects in specific 
journals has become all-encompassing for some. Teaching-focused staff have 
expressed concern that pay will become more arbitrary, undermining our national 
pay scales as managers look for the “right” to improve their Tef score.

Everyone recognises the importance of high-quality teaching, but the Tef will 
fare far better in the long run if government and institutions place staff at 
the centre of the process and finally address underlying issues such as 
casualisation, the lack of a defined career progression and inadequate funding.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
