
Ziani's

45 Radnor Walk, London SW3, 020-7351 5297

My boyfriend, Charlie, took me here on our first date - it's a long-time 
favourite of his family's. The food is Italian with a Venetian influence, like 
the calves' liver with onions and red wine vinegar. But my favourite order is 
the chicken breast stuffed with mozzarella, salami and mushrooms.

Ma Bo

16 Nelson Street, Liverpool, 0151-709 4551

I grew up eating at this family-run Chinese - my mum and dad used to take us 
here when we were kids. It's a no-frills kind of place, with duck and pork 
hanging in the window, and a small, open kitchen at the front. The food's 
phenomenal - my usual order's the wonton char siu noodle soup. I've been to 
Beijing many times, but I have to say I think the food here is better.

Taman Gang

Park Lane, London W1, 020-7518 3160

I'd have anything off Taman Gang's menu, but I particularly love the small 
dishes, such as the beef and foie gras gyoza. Good celeb-spotting, too - the 
last time I was there, so were Kylie and Dannii Minogue, and Naomi Campbell. 
And the decor is super-cool - I was in the toilets for half an hour because I 
couldn't work out how to open the door. Even if you don't plan on eating, it's 
worth dropping by just to have a cocktail and check out the toilets.

St John

Sir Thomas Hotel, 24 Sir Thomas Street, Liverpool, 0151-236 1366

St John does the best chateaubriand - the beef is grass fed and hung for 40 
days. And they serve a great Eton Mess, my favourite ever dessert.

Hamilton's

The Met Quarter, Whitechapel, Liverpool, 0151-236 7727

I'm happy to admit this is co-owned by my friend and fellow Atomic Kitten 
Natasha Hamilton. It's an all-day dining venue, very stylish, with good, 
informal food. I love the steak with red onions, or the baked potatoes, and 
they've a fabulous rosé cava.

Hotel du Vin & Bistro

One Devonshire Gardens, Glasgow, 0141-339 2001

Whenever I'm in Glasgow, I always try to eat here. The last time I went, my 
boyfriend and I loved each other's starters so much that, at the end of the 
meal, instead of pudding, we swapped our starter orders and had them again - 
his scallops for me, my game terrine for him. They were beautiful.

· Liz McClarnon is the winner of the BBC's Celebrity MasterChef 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/celebrity-masterchef> 2008
