
I lost Augusta a year ago. I used to say to her: no matter how much you think 
I love you, I love you more. So much more.

I met Augusta on 10 September 2003 at the city pound in Harlem. I ended up 
there after searching for a dog at the Humane Society and the ASPCA, which are 
all more pleasant. I wanted to love and be loved, so I was looking for any 
great dog whatever the age. I was thinking some variation on a labrador 
retriever, because I was told they were sweet. But really, I supposed I would 
figure it out.

I knew nothing about breeds. I knew nothing about dogs. I was guided by love. 
Love is my compass.

I fell for many dogs and puppies I met along the way, but for one reason or 
another, none of them worked out. Some were already adopted, and just waiting 
to be spayed. They would not let me take a too-strong Akita mix as my first dog 
because he would end up dragging me down the street by his tether. They 
wouldn’t allow me have a dalmatian with a chronic intestine condition that 
would be too much for someone with no experience.

I walked by many desperate cages; it was frustrating and upsetting. We put 
people behind bars for murder and mayhem. We do this to dogs for no reason at 
all.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jvke%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jvke%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85691d21787f2b3ee47c1b9f24635292ff3182a1%2F0_80_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=You%20changed%20me%3A%20I%20rescued%20my%20dog%20Augusta%2C%20but%20really%20she%20rescued%20me&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jvke%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=You+changed+me%3A+I+rescued+my+dog+Augusta%2C+but+really+she+rescued+me&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jvke%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85691d21787f2b3ee47c1b9f24635292ff3182a1%2F0_80_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
 Augusta at one year old. Photograph: David Lipsky 
If you want a dog, you have to go through this. Of course, now you can do it 
all online. But you have to rescue, even if you want a pure-breed puppy. Only 
bad people buy dogs.

Because I could not find my dog at any of the no-kill shelters, I ended up at 
the pound. It offers a vast choice, because so many wonderful dogs are 
abandoned for whatever reason. But it is not for the faint of heart.

Big dogs in small cages. Pit bulls that are going to be put down. Pure-breed 
cocker spaniels and basset hounds whose owners lost interest. Victims of 
evictions and foreclosures. There is a whole section of nothing but toy dogs – 
yorkies, teacup poodles, pomeranians – that were unwanted gifts. And then there 
are all the inexplicable strays, dogs of every breed and mix, found on the 
shoulder of the highway because someone decided: I don’t want you any more.

It is the museum of human error. The dogs are excellent; it is the people who 
have failed.

As I was walking through, I saw Augusta out of the corner of my left eye. She 
pulled my eyeball her way, up to her top-row cage. She looked at me, chin down, 
eyes up, lids fluttering: she was flirting with me. Her eyes were huge almonds 
against her black plush fur. She was lovely. She looked like Audrey Hepburn.

I heard her say: this is a terrible mistake. I don’t belong here. Take me home.

I could tell that she knew I have a dark heart. I am not for everybody. But 
Augusta got me. She understood about sorrow, and all the things no one can 
explain. It was magic. There is no substitute for magic.

She was mine.

I was hers.

I took her out of the cage, and she rolled over for a tummy rub.

Hers. Mine. Ours.

She had already been spayed, and the attendant thought that it might mean that 
someone else had adopted her and was coming to get her. I sought out the 
nearest exit while he went to check.

She was my dog. I was her person. If need be, I would make a run for it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jvke%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jvke%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94a96e33706de164cf9b4954c755862192492003%2F0_68_1351_1602%2F1351.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=You%20changed%20me%3A%20I%20rescued%20my%20dog%20Augusta%2C%20but%20really%20she%20rescued%20me&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jvke%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=You+changed+me%3A+I+rescued+my+dog+Augusta%2C+but+really+she+rescued+me&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jvke%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94a96e33706de164cf9b4954c755862192492003%2F0_68_1351_1602%2F1351.jpg>
 Augusta lying on her stoop in Greenwich Village. Photograph: Elizabeth Wurtzel 
It turned out, no one else had adopted Augusta. Of course not: she was waiting 
for me. She was two months old when I brought her home, and she needed me the 
way blood needs veins. She was wild. She was impossible.

I am impossible. Augusta rescued me.

Before I met her, I did not know I could love that much. I did not know I 
could love at all.

I was 36 and a diurnal wanderer. As a professional writer, I mostly had 
nothing to do but avoid what I was supposed to be doing. Writers are like 
everyone else: we work with our hands. By putting fingers to keyboard, we 
create, with or without inspiration, because those of us who are any good know 
it is a job.

But it is hard and daunting, and so I was peripatetic within a diameter of a 
few miles. I loved walking downtown Manhattan and stopping for coffee and 
buying ridiculous things I did not need or even want. If it is possible to 
spend $200 on a tin of tea, I am sure I did it. I was in a trance.

I lived alone in Greenwich Village and had many friends, but was a million 
light years away from marriage and whatever happens next. I thought about these 
things all the time, because of course I wondered what was wrong with me that I 
was not close to being serious about relationships. If you aren’t wondering 
these things in a world obsessed with love and marriage, that is the only thing 
that is wrong with you. The rest you will work out when you are ready.

And maybe you will meet Augusta.

She was consuming. She wanted to do everything. I was afraid she was going to 
want a subscription to the ballet at Lincoln Center. She was busy. She wanted 
to walk all the time, and once we started, she did not want to stop.

She made me cry. Early one morning, I broke down. Work with me, Augusta, I 
pleaded. She did not care. She wanted to walk more.

I discovered dogwalkers and dog daycare. I made friends with other dog owners. 
We worked it out. I cannot believe we worked it out. It is because I love her 
so much.

It is lucky puppies are cute, because they are awful. They eat shoes. They eat 
Prada shoes. You cannot get angry at them for doing that: it is your fault for 
not putting your shoes in the closet.

And puppies decorate with toilet paper.

And they need to go out every couple of hours.

So much for sleep.

So much for being a thirtysomething teenager.

I changed my life.

There are things that you can only explain by love. If it does not make you a 
better person, it is not love. And so we grew up together. She became a lady. 
My best friend. I took her everywhere. If I could not take her, I did not go.

In the time Augusta was alive the world changed. Everybody came to believe 
that their dog was a member of the family. People became better pet owners. But 
I was still the only one bringing Augusta to dinner parties and to tea at Yale. 
I know everyone thinks that of course animals are the greatest thing ever, but 
they also believe that you have to work it out with people.

I am not like that.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jvke%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jvke%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb33871c30a12279f337e300eccf205faf7ae75fd%2F0_0_1323_1323%2F1323.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=You%20changed%20me%3A%20I%20rescued%20my%20dog%20Augusta%2C%20but%20really%20she%20rescued%20me&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jvke%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=You+changed+me%3A+I+rescued+my+dog+Augusta%2C+but+really+she+rescued+me&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jvke%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb33871c30a12279f337e300eccf205faf7ae75fd%2F0_0_1323_1323%2F1323.jpg>
 ‘I was afraid Augusta was going to want a subscription to the ballet at 
Lincoln Center.’ Photograph: Lynne Winters 
What is so great about people anyway? We mostly forget to say please and thank 
you, and that is the easiest part of being decent. We lose track of friends we 
love, friends we completely adore, because they move and not far away, but to 
the next borough, and we are creatures of convenience aren’t we?

Oh yes we are.

With all the technological means to communicate in so many ways, we settle for 
whoever is nearby. But we still mostly email with the people we work with, 
because even walking down the hall to see them in person is too much. And then 
we complain about social media, which was only invented because we suck.

Yes, people are lousy. I learned a lot about human nature, because I had 
breast cancer in 2015. I was frail, I was withdrawn, and I lost people. People 
forgot about me. People forgot to ask. At first everyone sends bouquets, but 
flowers die. Cancer is not contagious but all disease feels catchy, the 
atmosphere is pungent with sickness and it might just mug you. I had a friend I 
saw almost every day, but after I was diagnosed with breast cancer, I never saw 
her. Where did she go? Where did everybody go? My world got so small.

Dogs <http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/dogs> do not give up – even on 
the owners who treat them badly. What a gorgeous persistence.

Augusta looked me directly in the eye with the intensity of the wolf she 
descended from. Human beings don’t do that. Human beings have too much to be 
ashamed of.

Augusta walked with me without a leash. In Greenwich Village, people loved 
seeing the black dog being followed around by her blonde owner.

Augusta would not go out with anyone else without me. She could not be 
separated from me. She was a herding dog and her job was to mind me. She made 
circles around me.

She surrounds me.

She is still with me.

She is the best thing that ever happened to me.

She is the love of my life. I am so sorry for the rare times we were apart, 
because I could never have had enough time with her. I will never love anyone 
the way I love Augusta. It was about a time and place and situation that only 
could have happened with Augusta, who I love so much and too much.

Next week: author Julia Pierpoint on her therapist
