
Most charities have taken action to improve the way they fundraise following 
last year’s scandals.

Nearly three quarters (73%) of all respondents to a survey carried out by PwC 
in conjunction with the Institute of Fundraising and the Charity Finance Group 
<http://www.pwc.co.uk/industries/charities/insights/managing-in-the-new-normal.html>
reported improving their fundraising practice over the past year.

Over 80% of respondents cited press and public scrutiny as the biggest 
challenge facing the sector. A series of scandals rocked the sector in the 
summer and autumn of 2015, including the widely reported collapse of Kids 
Company 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/05/the-guardian-view-on-the-fall-of-kids-company-a-social-policy-morality-tale>
 andthe controversy following the suicide of Olive Cooke 
<http://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/jul/10/everything-you-need-to-know-charity-fundraising-crisis>
 who is thought to have received up to 3,000 charity mailings a year.

Related: Fundraisers - tell us how the fundraising crisis affected you 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/jun/01/fundraisers-tell-us-how-the-fundraising-crisis-affected-you>

The report, Managing in the New Normal, found that one in three charities said 
maintaining public trust and confidence is the most important issue they are 
facing. This is in contrast to previous years where concerns about charitable 
giving and financial sustainability dominated.

Charities <https://www.theguardian.com/society/charities> were asked how they 
were attempting to improve the way they raise money and the results show that a 
variety of actions have been taken including reviewing consent statements on 
donation forms (40%), improving ways that supporters can manage their 
communication preferences (38%), and increasing training for fundraisers (37%). 
A third of respondents said they had increased the level of trustee involvement 
in fundraising oversight and about one in four charities were reviewing their 
relationships with third parties, such as telesales agencies.


These changes may seem subtle but they are what’s needed to ensure best 
practice across the board, said Lucy Caldicott, interim chief executive at
Diversity Role Models <https://www.diversityrolemodels.org/> and board member 
for the new Fundraising Regulator 
<http://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/may/31/fundraising-regulator-board-job>
. “I don’t think everything in the sector is going to be totally revolutionised 
following the scandals but I do think people are taking the opportunity to 
review their practice to make sure it is as good as it can be.”

Caldicott is positive about the impact the scandals have had on her 
colleagues. She said: “The vast bulk of fundraising was good quality and 
appropriate but there have obviously been some instances of poor practice. 
Having a light shone on those will help everyone else make sure they are as 
good as they can be.”

Caron Bradshaw, chief executive of the Charity Finance Group 
<http://www.cfg.org.uk/>, agreed: “I’m optimistic about the future of the 
sector, but it is important to realise the scale of the challenge facing 
charities. We are facing significant pressure to do more for less, but the 
focus on fundraising also means that some charities are reconsidering their 
business models. We are asking charities to change horses mid-gallop and this 
requires strong financial leadership.”

She added: “It is too early to tell what the long term financial consequences 
of the changes to fundraising regulation will be and the impact on every 
charity will be different. However, every fundraising charity needs to think 
about how their business model will be impacted and start making plans now in 
order to adapt to potential shortfalls.”

For more news, opinions and ideas about the voluntary sector, join our 
community <https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/> – it’s free.
