
The Danes have done it again. The travel company behind Do it for Denmark 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vrO3TfJc9Qw>, the ad watched by eight million 
people on YouTube that urges Danes to procreate for their country, has launched 
another video. This time, it is encouraging Danes to lie back and think of 
their mothers in a bid to make more grandchildren, inDo it for Mom 
<https://youtu.be/B00grl3K01g>.

A white-haired woman in her 60s sits on a park bench, looking wistfully at a 
grandmother feeding the ducks with her granddaughter. A John Lewis ad-style 
voiceover tells us: “You were there when your son learned to walk …” (cue 
footage of mother and son through the decades) “… you were there when he 
learned how to ride a bike. And when he learned how to read. But when it comes 
to making children, it might be abit awkward to help out …” At this point, we 
cut to a man and a woman in their underwear enjoying a passionate embrace while 
Denmark’s answer to June Whitfield tiptoes in and gives her son a hand removing 
his partner’s bra.

And yes, it’s just as weird as it sounds.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DB00grl3K01g&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DB00grl3K01g&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DB00grl3K01g>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DB00grl3K01g&media=>
 The Do it for Mom video. 
The video is the brainchild of strategist Søren Christensen and his team at 
Robert/Boisen & Like-minded advertising agency <http://rblm.dk/>, which was 
commissioned bySpies Travel <http://www.spies.dk/do-it-for-denmark>. Eva 
Lundgren, the head of marketing at Spies, says: “We have a problem withthe low 
birthrate in Denmark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/14/danes-facilities-babies-denmark-public-services>
, and a recent survey [conducted by Epinion Denmark 2015] confirmed that a lot 
of women in their 60s worry about not having any grandchildren. They are 
generally happy with their lives[Denmark has the happiest female retirees in 
the world] 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/03/europe-happiness-danish-women-pension>
, but they would just love grandkids. We wanted a new angle to promote our 
holidays, so this seemed an interesting fit.”

Christensen adds: “A lot of my friends and colleagues are in their 30s and 40s 
and we’ve all felt pressure from our mums, in particular, to get on with it and 
have children. So we knew it was an issue.” But rather than getting morose 
about the state of the nation, Lundgren and Christensen took a lighter 
approach. “We were actually inspired bythegreatschlep.com 
<http://www.thegreatschlep.com/>,” says Lundgren, “where Sarah Silverman made a 
video to tellJewish kids to visit their grandparents and persuade them to vote 
Obama <>. It was funny, but it really got the message across, too. And we 
thought: ‘Maybe we could take the same approach here.’” So they did.


“Don’t despair!” the voiceover reassures broody would-be grandmothers in the 
new video. “We may have found the solution.” Danish June has a eureka moment, 
and we splice to slow-motion footage of a bikini-clad blonde in her 30s heaving 
herself out of a swimming pool to greet an appreciative and similarly 
attractive man in trunks. What follows is a Carry On-worthy montage of the 
young couple engaging in various innuendo-laden, suggestive sporting 
activities. The voiceover reminds us that we have 51% more sex on a sunny 
holiday; are more aroused when we exercise, and even more likely to conceive – 
all of which will lead to more babies, AKA grandchildren.

Danish June seems to know all this instinctively, and so opens up her laptop (
Danish pensioners are among the most tech-savvy in the world 
<http://%20http//ec.europa.eu/eurostat/tgm/table.do?tab=table&tableSelection=4&labeling=labels&footnotes=yes&layout=time,geo,cat&language=en&pcode=tin00092&plugin=1>
) and books her son an action-packed break. The tagline: “Send your child on an 
active getaway, get a grandchild in nine months!” (a disclaimer, “delivery not 
guaranteed,” is added in parenthesis). The film continues with the couple, 
played by actor Emilia Liva Huusfeldt and her real-life boyfriend, climaxing 
after a particularly high-impact workout. Shortly afterwards, Danish June can 
be seen clutching a newborn before joining hoards of would-be grannies waving 
off a plane, presumably filled with other offspring.

“The video was only released on 30 September but we’ve already had a huge 
response,” says Lundgren. “In a population of just 5.5 million, it has been 
watched by two million Danes so far and most people love it.” The Do it for
Denmark <https://www.theguardian.com/world/denmark> campaign saw sales of Spies 
breaks up 39.8% – and Denmark’s birthrate even rose slightly in 2014, “which of 
course we’re putting down to our campaign,” jokes Christensen. He adds: “We’ll 
just have to see if we can get it up again this year …”
