


 “Terrorism” is a word our campus doesn’t like to think about. This is a place 
where 18-year-olds come to feel free, not to get theirFun Snaps bangers  
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bang_snaps>confiscated. 

The T word was first aired during the 2012 Olympics, when the team we were 
hosting turned up for a safety briefing with the security manager, who’d booked 
himself on annual leave.

Related: Campus security: 'We heard a scream and saw him running up the road 
naked' 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/feb/06/university-campus-security-guard-scream-sprinting-nude>

 Taking his place at an hour’s notice, I straightened my clip-on tie and 
entered the boardroom. Someone slid me a copy of the document I was meant to be 
presenting: “Highlites of Bomb Procedure”. I looked down and there was the 
script from Black Hawk Down twisted into a mind-bending flow chart. I looked 
across the table at two non-native English speakers in tracksuits.

 “You see anything strange,” I said in my loudest Brit-abroad voice, “you come 
to us. Anything strange, any time. Security office.” I pointed vaguely in its 
direction.

“If we see something strange, or need you to evacuate, we come to you. We say: 
‘group photo - everyone into car park’.” I maintained eye contact, intent on 
keeping their gaze away from my boss’s diagram, which he’d livened up with 
dynamite clipart, and a bubble labelled “improved ambience”.

Determined to make his mark, our boss designating the wheelie bin store as a 
fallout shelter

The reality is there is no agreed response to a terrorist attack on campus. 
There is also little chance of establishing one when you have academic 
secretaries who get pissed off with students banging on their windows, and so 
stick the building entry code to the inside of the glass.

Determined to make his mark, our boss did once designate the wheelie bin store 
as a potential fallout shelter in case of nuclear attack; this was not well 
received. One guard told him: “If I hear the four-minute warning, I’m grabbing 
the nearest member of staff I can and giving them one – and that includes you.”


It’s hard to take terrorism seriously when one day we’re briefed about Project 
Argus – a three-hour counter-threat lecture that we’re required to attend – and 
the next are told they’re cutting funds to the campus police community support 
officers.

The majority of our brushes with terror are digital. We once received bomb 
threats in Spanish signed by “Bradley”; when they’d finally been forwarded to 
the right inbox and translated, the bombs were already meant to have exploded.

Related: I won't stop offering a platform to so-called 'hate speakers' 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/feb/23/its-the-job-of-universities-to-challenge-ideas-we-cant-let-prevent-get-int-the-way>

The only terrorist we’re sure about has got eight legs and eats flies. Sammy 
the spider has to date triggered 100-plus burglar alarms, constantly building 
his web in front of our PIR sensors. If that isn’t “the unofficial or 
unauthorised use of violence and intimidation in the pursuit of political 
aims”, I don’t know what is.

One afternoon, the campus chaplain quietly told us he’d seen “a young man 
talking Russian and acting suspiciously”. Security guard Snowy – Cornish, 
ex-squaddy – took off at a sprint, like he’d been given orders to 
shoulder-charge the Kremlin.


I followed him and found a Serbian exchange student off his nut on mephedrone, 
and yodelling topless out of his bedroom window. Once we managed to pull him 
in, he broke into a madHopak <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hopak> dance: arms 
crossed, knees going up and down like West Ham. Snowy returned fire with a 
Cornish country jig.

The two were soon arm in arm. Prevent in action.


Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
