
Conflict, violence and natural disasters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/natural-disasters> forced nearly 28 million 
people to leave their homes and move somewhere else within their countries last 
year, according to a report.

The figures <http://www.internal-displacement.org/globalreport2016> from the 
Norwegian Refugee Council’s Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre 
<http://www.internal-displacement.org/> (IDMC) show that, by 2015, the number 
of people internally displaced by conflict – 40.8 million – was double the 
total number of refugees.

Violence displaced 8.6 million more people last year – 24,000 each day, on 
average – making it a record year for conflict-driven displacement.


Even more people were displaced by natural disasters, which forced 19.2 
million people in 113 countries out of their homes – more than twice the number 
made homeless by conflict. Although most left because of extreme weather such 
as storms and flooding, theNepalese earthquake in April last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nepal-earthquake-2015> prompted 2.6 million 
people to flee. Over the past eight years, a total of 203.4 million people have 
been displaced due to disasters.
Disaster displacements 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/may/2016-05-10T08:39:52/embed.html>
Three Middle Eastern countries accounted for more than half the new conflict 
displacements: Syria, Yemen and Iraq. Ukraine, Nigeria, the Democratic Republic 
of the Congo (DRC), Afghanistan, Colombia, Central African Republic (CAR) and 
South Sudan had the highest numbers of new IDPs.
8.6 million new displacements associated with conflict and violence in 28 
countries in 2015 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/may/2016-05-10T08:41:42/embed.html>
Five of the 10 countries with the highest number of conflict-driven IDPs – 
Colombia, DRC, Iraq, Sudan and, since independence in 2011, South Sudan – have 
appeared in the IDMC’s list every year since 2003.

Preliminary estimates suggest at least 1 million people were forcibly 
displaced by criminal violence in Mexico and Central America, while tens of 
millions more were uprooted across the world by development projects such as 
dams, urban renewal programmes and sporting events. Such people, according to 
the report, are all too often ignored or overlooked because they tend to exist 
“off the grid”.

Alexandra Bilak, the director of the IDMC, said the report was intended to 
illustrate the many challenges posed by the global internal displacement crisis.

“It also highlights the glaring absence of political solutions to address 
displacement, and constitutes an important wake-up call to national governments 
and global policymakers alike,” she said.

Without sufficient action, she added, IDP emergencies – such as those in 
Colombia and DRC – “drag on for years and even decades”.

The report comes almost a year after the UN estimated that 59.5m people were 
refugees, internally displaced or seeking asylum by the end of 2014 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/18/59m-people-displaced-war-violence-persecution-says-un>
. By the reckoning of the UN’s refugee agency, UNHCR,one in every 122 people on 
the planet is displaced by war, violence and persecution 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/18/59m-people-displaced-war-violence-persecution-says-un>
.


Related: How do we make life better for people living as refugees for 
generations? | Laurie Lee 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/05/how-do-we-make-life-better-for-people-living-as-refugees-for-generations>

Jan Egeland, secretary general of the Norwegian Refugee Council 
<http://www.nrc.no/>, said that while the plight of the world’s 19.5 million 
refugees is firmly on the political and media agenda because of the European 
refugee crisis, its IDP population is often forgotten.

Egeland said refugee numbers represented only the tip of the displacement 
iceberg, adding that 6.6 million people have been displaced within Syria alone.

“Large crises such as Syria should lead to a new and more holistic thinking 
about displacement,” he said.

“A similar shift is needed in analysing the causes and consequences of 
displacement. We tend to think in terms of single, isolated triggers, but the 
reality is far more complex.”


With the number of IDPs rising worldwide, said Egeland, the international 
community needed to adopt a more comprehensive approach to development, 
resilience and governance.

“When displacement becomes inevitable, humanitarians attend to more immediate 
needs, but they must work with the development sector if sustainable solutions 
are to be achieved,” he said.

“There is a clear trend of displacement becoming more protracted and more of a 
development challenge.”
