
Jean-Pierre Bemba, the former vice-president of the Democratic Republic of the 
Congo <https://www.theguardian.com/world/congo>, has been sentenced to 18 years 
in prison for rape and pillage committed by his troops, becoming the 
highest-level official to be sentenced at the international criminal court.

Bemba, 53, wearing a blue suit and tie, watched impassively from the dock 
during the hearing at The Hague on Tuesday.


The former militia commander is the third person convicted by the 
controversial “court of last resort” set up to try the world’s worst crimes in 
2002.

Campaigners welcomed the lengthy prison term.

Related: Congo politician guilty in first ICC trial to focus on rape as a war 
crime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/21/icc-finds-ex-congolese-vice-president-jean-pierre-bemba-guilty-of-war-crimes>

“Today’s sentencing marks a critical turning point for the thousands of women, 
children and men who were victims of Bemba’s orchestrated campaign of rape and 
murder,” saidKaren Naimer 
<http://physiciansforhumanrights.org/about/people/staff/karen-naimer.html>, the 
director of the sexual violence in conflict zones programme at Physicians for 
Human Rights.

“The punishment meted out today can’t turn back the clock, but it can bring a 
measure of closure to those victims who’ve waited patiently more than a dozen 
years for this day to come,” she said.

The conviction was the ICC’s first verdict to recognise rape as a weapon of 
war and to employ the doctrine of command responsibility: that leaders are 
accountable for the crimes of their subordinates, the group said.


The court told Bemba that the years he had spent behind bars since his arrest 
in Belgium in 2008 and subsequent detention would be deducted from his sentence.

Earlier in the day Bemba’s lawyers said they would appeal against his war 
crimes conviction and press for a mistrial.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ma5g%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ma5g%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F596bf549fe70bdd8c2b35d2cec92af9e27b2e859%2F0_0_2310_1386%2F2310.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jean-Pierre%20Bemba%20sentenced%20to%2018%20years%20in%20prison%20by%20international%20criminal%20court&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ma5g%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jean-Pierre+Bemba+sentenced+to+18+years+in+prison+by+international+criminal+court&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ma5g%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F596bf549fe70bdd8c2b35d2cec92af9e27b2e859%2F0_0_2310_1386%2F2310.jpg>
 Chief prosecutor Fatou Bensouda said it was an important day for international 
criminal justice. Photograph: Jerry Lampen/EPA 
Bemba was found guilty in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/21/icc-finds-ex-congolese-vice-president-jean-pierre-bemba-guilty-of-war-crimes>
 of five charges of war crimes and crimes against humanity committed by his 
private army – the Congolese Liberation Movement (MLC) – after he sent them 
into the neighbouring Central African Republic (CAR) from October 2002 to March 
2003 to put down a coup.

“I believe this is a very important day for international criminal justice, 
especially when it comes to sexual and gender-based crimes,” the chief 
prosecutor, Fatou Bensouda, told Agence France-Presse news agency at the time.

The prosecution had called for a minimum 25-year jail term.

In their ruling, three trial judges found that Bemba was responsible as the 
military commander of the MLC for a reign of terror by about 1,500 of his 
troops, including wide-scale rapes and murders, as they sought to quash a coup 
against the then CAR president Ange-Félix Patassé.

Bemba, who in 2002 became one of four vice-presidents of Congo under a peace 
agreement brokered by SouthAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> 
which ended the bloody civil war, was sentenced to two 18-year terms and two 
16-year terms, to run concurrently.

The judges said Bemba could at any point have ended the MLC’s five-month 
rampage, but chose not to.

The ICC was set up in 2002 to be an independent international “court of last 
resort” for grave crimes that could not be dealt with locally.


The conviction and sentencing of Bemba will boost the court, which has a 
budget of more than $150m (£102m) annually.


Campaigners said the case was also historic because a record number of 
civilian victims – more than 5,200 – participated in the proceedings and may 
now be eligible for reparations.

However, analysts say the judgment will also highlight the failure of the 
court to punish anyone for the widespread and systematic human rights abuses 
committed by militia in Congo itself, particularly during the years of the 
civil war from 1998 to 2002.

“For the Congolese, it would feel like a missed opportunity for what happened 
there. One shouldn’t minimise what happened in the CAR but there is a sense of 
a missed opportunity,” said Hans Hoebeke, a senior analyst with the 
International Crisis Group in Nairobi, Kenya.

The institution has repeatedly been criticised for unfairly targeting Africa 
and African leaders. Critics point out that nine of the 10 “situations” 
currently being examined by the court relate to Africa.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ma5g%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ma5g%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8122d80c9cde2856e9d954c659b6047779768438%2F0_139_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jean-Pierre%20Bemba%20sentenced%20to%2018%20years%20in%20prison%20by%20international%20criminal%20court&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ma5g%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jean-Pierre+Bemba+sentenced+to+18+years+in+prison+by+international+criminal+court&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ma5g%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8122d80c9cde2856e9d954c659b6047779768438%2F0_139_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 Supporters of the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s president, Joseph Kabila, 
celebrate his 45th birthday at the Velodrome stadium. Kabila’s term expires in 
December. Photograph: Junior D Kannah/AFP/Getty Images 
Current high-profile ICC trials include that of Laurent Gbagbo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/28/former-ivory-coast-president-on-trial-for-unspeakable-crimes>
, the former president of Ivory Coast, who denies charges that he orchestrated 
“unspeakable violence” in an attempt to hold on to power after losing an 
election in 2010, and that ofAhmad al-Faqi al-Mahdi 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/feb/28/iccs-first-cultural-destruction-trial-to-open-in-the-hague>
, who is accused of razing medieval shrines, tombs and a 15th-century mosque 
that formed part of theUnesco <https://www.theguardian.com/world/unesco> world 
heritage site in Timbuktu, Mali, when the city was seized by Islamic militants 
in 2012.

In 2015, the ICC was forced to drop charges against Kenya’s president Uhuru 
Kenyatta, who had been accused of stoking ethnic violence after Kenya’s 2007 
presidential election.

Prosecutors blamed their failure to put Kenyatta on trial on political 
interference and massive interference with witnesses, especially after Kenyatta 
was elected president in 2013. In April, charges against Kenyatta’s deputy, 
William Ruto, were also dropped for similar reasons.


In an interview with the Financial Times last week, Kofi Annan, the former 
United Nations secretary general,rejected accusations 
<http://next.ft.com/content/204df924-32cd-11e6-bda0-04585c31b153> that the ICC 
was institutionally biased against Africans.

“I remind the Africans that it’s wrong for them to say that only African 
leaders are put into the dock,” Annan, who is from Ghana, said.

Several African governments have threatened to quit the ICC.

In February, the African Union backed a proposal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/01/african-union-kenyan-plan-leave-international-criminal-court>
 by Kenyatta “to develop a road map for the withdrawal of African nations” from 
the court.

Last month, Yoweri Museveni 
<http://europe.newsweek.com/uganda-museveni-prompts-western-leaders-walkout-calling-icc-useless-459605>
, the president of Uganda, called the ICC useless during a swearing-in ceremony 
for his fifth term in power, prompting a walk-out by western diplomats.


Museveni has been named as a supporter of Bemba during Congo’s most recent 
civil war

Bensouda has said charges of bias are misplaced. “If certain people are 
looking to shield the alleged perpetrators of those crimes, of course they will 
say we are targeting [African states]. But … the victims deserve justice, the 
victims are Africans, and in the absence of the ICC nobody else is giving them 
justice,” Bensoudatold the Guardian recently 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jun/05/fatou-bensouda-international-criminal-court-tyrants>
.

The ICC is also conducting “preliminary examinations” into eight further 
conflicts, including in Afghanistan, Colombia and Burundi, a spokesperson said.


The court’s decision has significant implications for politics in Bemba’s 
homeland.

Bemba finished second to the current president Joseph Kabila in the second 
round of the 2006 presidential elections with 42% of the vote. In 2007, 
hundreds of people died in the streets of Kinshasa when forces loyal to the two 
men clashed in the capital.

Bemba fled first to the South African embassy, then to Portugal and finally to 
Belgium, where he was arrested.

However, the wealthy businessman remains president of the opposition MLC and 
has retained a significant power base in the north and east of Congo, along 
with a presence in Kinshasa.

“His party still exists but is seriously diminished … The opposition at this 
point does not have a strong figurehead and there is no evidence of any 
significant mobilisation,” said Hoebeke.

Kabila’s second term expires in December, but polls are unlikely to be held as 
scheduled. Supporters of the president say more time is needed to organise 
logistics and prepare electoral rolls. Kabila’s critics accuse him of mounting 
a bid to remain in power indefinitely.

One leading opposition figure – Moise Katumbi – left Congo last month for 
medical treatment after being charged with mounting a coup attempt. Katumbi 
remains overseas, rallying opposition figures.
