
There is a small moment towards the end of my meal at the restaurant voted the 
best in the country by the readers of OFM that sums up the whole experience. 
Darren McHugh, the restaurant manager, places a bowl containing two little orbs 
of sugar-dusted loveliness on the table. “I could call them beignet if I wanted 
to sound clever,” he says in his soft Irish lilt. “But we all know they’re 
donuts.” And off he floats to attend to the next happy table. The donuts, back 
filled with their own silky fig jam, manage the difficult trick of being both 
comfort food and technically thrilling at the same time. That sums up the 
Ledbury. It’s an ambitious gastronomic restaurant with ideas well below its 
station. Sure, it has Michelin stars; two of them as it happens. Though, 
uniquely, chef and co-owner Brett Graham has to think very hard to recall which 
years they were acquired. It has been garlanded with numerous other awards. And 
no, it is not cheap. The evening à la carte is £90. (Lunch set menus are 
cheaper at £45.)

But none of that buys you pointless flash, heel-clicking or outbreaks of gold 
leaf. “The food’s got to be real,” Graham says, over a coffee before evening 
service, in the relaxed dining room, with its shades of olive and deep polished 
wood. “We have to walk the tightrope of deliciousness with a modernist touch. I 
want people to feel they could eat here once a month, not feel that it’s too 
full-on for that.”
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Foct%2F19%2Fledbury-best-restaurant-ofm-awards-2014-video&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Foct%2F19%2Fledbury-best-restaurant-ofm-awards-2014-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F10%2F14%2F1413297003387%2FThe-Ledbury-017.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Ledbury%3A%20'The%20ingredients%20are%20incredibly%20important.%20You%20can%20taste%20the%20difference'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Foct%2F19%2Fledbury-best-restaurant-ofm-awards-2014-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+Ledbury%3A+%27The+ingredients+are+incredibly+important.+You+can+taste+the+difference%27+%E2%80%93+video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Foct%2F19%2Fledbury-best-restaurant-ofm-awards-2014-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F10%2F14%2F1413297003387%2FThe-Ledbury-017.jpg>
 The Ledbury: ‘The ingredients are incredibly important. You can taste the 
difference’ 
It’s there in a menu of the plumpest langoustine, wrapped in slivers of 
shitake, alongside the light pungency of cauliflower. It’s there in a bowl of 
silky buffalo milk curd beneath a ripe, clear broth of grilled onions chased 
down by truffled sourdough toast. It’s there in the very best of British game, 
be it grouse or snipe or venison, given the gentlest of attentions, so they 
taste most acutely of themselves. It’s a menu of earthy British ingredients, 
treated with respect and imagination rather than processed to within an inch of 
their lives. “I love the English countryside,” says Australian-born Graham. 
“There’s just so much good stuff out there.”

Graham admits now that the Ledbury was neither his plan nor ambition. He 
arrived in the UK from Australia at the turn of the millennium, courtesy of a 
bursary for young chefs and went to work for Phil Howard at the highly regarded 
Square in Mayfair. By the age of 22 he was a junior sous chef. “One day Phil 
said to me that he’d never come across anybody he wanted to open a restaurant 
with,” Graham recalls. “But I was different.” With backing from Nigel 
Platts-Martin, Howard’s business partner at the Square (and now at the Ledbury) 
they went searching for a site. In 2005 they opened for business. Not that 
Graham thinks he was ready. “I’d never written my own menu,” he admits now. “At 
that age you think you’ve worked it all out. The first one I wrote was 
impractical and fussy. I couldn’t find a voice.” Some critics agreed. “I 
remember Michael Winner saying the site would be far more useful as a car park.”

So what, I ask, was the turning point? “I sat down one day when we weren’t 
very busy in 2007 and I asked myself what are we doing wrong? And I realised it 
was stuffy service. We treated everybody the same. I wanted people to think the 
Ledbury was a reliable place for a fabulous time.” And so he started from the 
grass roots. The front of house staff were told their job was no longer to 
follow rules and regulations but to adjust to everybody’s needs. “If a waiter 
wants to give an extra – another course, a complimentary glass of champagne – 
which will enhance the experience they’re told just to do it. No need to ask my 
permission.” Likewise, the artificial divide between dining room and basement 
kitchen came down. “I started inviting diners into the kitchen, feeding them 
extras there.”

And what about the food? “It’s got a lot lighter over the years. We never cook 
meat in butter for example.” I ask what the light-bulb moment with that was, 
and he launches into a long explanation of how they worked out the perfect way 
to cook grouse, how it should be poached first in seasoned chicken stock, and 
then served with lots of bright fresh vegetables. Or, as he says simply, “no 
dairy, no carbs”.

He talks about his love affair with the most humble of ingredients, the way he 
likes to bake celeriac and beetroot in clay or salt bake turnips “until they 
reach an internal temperature of 47C.” James “Jocky” Petrie, who for many years 
was head of creative development at Heston Blumenthal’s Fat Duck in Bray, 
recently joined the Ledbury in a similar role to help develop all aspects of 
the restaurant. “Brett’s a real obsessive,” Petrie says. “He absolutely loves 
the detail.” One of those is the carbon footprint of the restaurants. “I’ve 
banned mineral water,” Graham says. “And we’re looking at installing 
composters.”

Graham is all but unique among top-flight chefs in not popping up repeatedly 
on food TV; if he has free time, he says, he prefers going to Richmond Park 
with his wife Natalie to walk their pug Winston. “If you do all those outside 
commitments you’re not going to be here cooking,” he says. And cooking is what 
drives him. “I love service. It’s what I’m made for.”

So does it matter to him that this award is voted for by the readers? “It’s 
amazing,” he says. “Customers are my priority. As I get older I’m driven less 
by a desire to be famous or make money. I’m driven by pleasing my customers. 
We’re many things, but not an overnight success.” Clearly, the OFM readers’ 
restaurant of 2014 is a work in progress. And probably always will be.

theledbury.com <http://www.theledbury.com/>
