
Only Labour can “save Britain from Brexit” according to Tony Blair and Gordon 
Brown, who have come together with former Labour leaders to issue a warning to 
the party’s voters ahead of theEU referendum 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>.

Related: Kinnock, Beckett, Blair, Brown, Harman and Miliband: ‘Labour party’s 
purpose is aligned with Europe’ | Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/03/kinnock-beckett-blair-brown-harman-and-miliband-labour-partys-purpose-is-aligned-with-europe>

The two former prime ministers have put aside differences to sign a letter – 
published by the Guardian 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/03/kinnock-beckett-blair-brown-harman-and-miliband-labour-partys-purpose-is-aligned-with-europe>
 – that argues that a failure of Labour supporters to turn out in large numbers 
will lead to Britain opting to leave the EU.

Ed Miliband, Neil Kinnock, Harriet Harman and Margaret Beckett 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaret-beckett> are also signatories to 
the statement that says a British exit would trigger a “bonfire of workers’ 
rights” under a rightwing Conservative government.


“If Labour stays at home, Britain leaves. And a vote to leave is a vote for a 
profound and permanent loss the whole country would feel, whether through lost 
jobs or lost generations. Only Labour can save Britain from Brexit,” they write.
 The letter claims that Europe has protected workers, stimulated jobs and 
maintained lower prices, as well as ensured global action on climate change and 
terrorism. They insist that the EU chimes withLabour 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> values.

“But make no mistake: this would be lost if we leave. Labour communities would 
face a double threat: the return of recession, led by a Tory government with an 
emboldened right wing,” they say. “In such circumstances Labour communities 
would suffer most: from spending cuts, neglect for the needy and a bonfire of 
workers’ rights. Those Labour seeks to represent – the hardworking, ambitious 
majority – have the most to lose if we leave. But also the most to gain if we 
remain.”

That should be the party’s future, they say. “But we need to vote for it ... 
That’s why we join with our present leadership in urging every person who seeks 
a progressive future for Britain to vote remain on 23 June.”

There are worries within Labour about a leaked analysis that shows 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/30/labour-voters-in-the-dark-about-partys-stance-on-brexit-research-says>
 that about half of the party’s voters are not clear that the Labour party is 
in favour of staying in the EU. Tom Watson, the party’s deputy leader, said he 
was very concerned that Labour’s pro-EU message was not sufficiently getting 
through to voters.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k8n9%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k8n9%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcef07fa1a3ddd621ce84d4c49d408585b11cb92c%2F412_152_3239_1944%2F3239.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Blair%20and%20Brown%20letter%20aims%20to%20unite%20Labour%20over%20EU%20poll&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k8n9%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Blair+and+Brown+letter+aims+to+unite+Labour+over+EU+poll&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k8n9%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcef07fa1a3ddd621ce84d4c49d408585b11cb92c%2F412_152_3239_1944%2F3239.jpg>
 Labour’s deputy leader, Tom Watson, who believes the pro-EU message has not 
reached party voters. Photograph: Jonathan Brady/PA 
That was echoed by David Miliband, the former Labour foreign secretary, who 
returned to Britain on Friday to urge remain voters to turn out to cast their 
ballot on the day.

Attending a Muslim community meeting and Sikh temple in Birmingham on the 
Labour battlebus, with the former home secretary Alan Johnson, Miliband said 
the party faced “the fight of our lives”. They had to make arguments both with 
the government and on its own. “We have to do both, I think there’s a national 
interest case and there is a distinctly Labour case and we should be proud of 
both.”

Now resident in New York, where he runs an aid charity, Miliband argued in 
favour of Labour figures sharing platforms with Conservative rivals who had the 
common goal of staying in the EU.


“Where centre-right and centre-left agree, we should say so,” he said, 
dismissing fears that perceived closeness with the Tories could damage Labour 
electorally in a similar way to the aftermath of the Scottish referendum.

Miliband had flown in from New York for a second day of campaigning since his 
last appearance where he met the prime minister. He said speaking and agreeing 
on the same issue with Cameron was “a bit odd”. He added: “David Cameron and I 
looked at each other as if to say, fancy meeting you here. But the truth is 
that he is making a good argument. He’s making a core argument. It does not 
mean we can’t make the centre-left argument – there is a progressive, 
intellectualist, argument which needs to be heard.”

Labour should not be timid about speaking with Conservatives because of the 
party’s disastrous election results in Scotland post its independence 
referendum, he said. “I think it’s always important not to fight the last war,” 
he said. “This referendum has to be addressed in and of itself. What happened 
in Scotland actually happened after the referendum, and let’s not re-fight 
that. What we’ve got is a strong Labour campaign, actually an united Labour 
campaign. The media will say unity is boring but this unity is interesting and 
striking.”

In a new push to highlight their pro-EU stance this weekend, Labour figures 
are to take part in 30 rallies across Britain to speak in favour of membership 
and encourage voter registration alongside politicians from other parties.

Kinnock and Harman will take part in the coordinated series of events along 
with the Conservative business minister, Anna Soubry, the former Lib Dem Paddy 
Ashdown, and the Green party MP Caroline Lucas on Saturday.

Ashdown said the risks of not registering and voting were a victory for Brexit 
that would leave the UK “divided and weakened”. He said: “If we do not now pull 
out every stop to get people registered and get them to vote, then we risk a 
lost generation for Britain’s young people outside the EU,” he said.

Jeremy Corbyn, Labour’s leader, and the shadow chancellor, John McDonnell, 
were also out campaigning in Cardiff on Friday evening for votes to remain in 
the EU.

