
Ruth’s story* is not an easy one to listen to. She was in the bush to look for 
food for her family when she was approached by a soldier – a very young man – 
who asked her for food. She told him she could only offer him a little because 
her children hadn’t eaten for two days. The soldier’s response was to lead her 
to a place where his four friends were waiting. They made her take off her 
dress and lie on the floor. They then took turns to rape her.

“I couldn’t cry because I was afraid I would be killed,” she told me. Four 
hours after they left her, she was still bleeding heavily and didn’t have the 
strength to walk, but cried out for help until eventually people heard her and 
took her to a village where she could get treatment. As a result of the rape, 
Ruth became pregnant and has since had her baby, but hasn’t been able to talk 
to her community about what happened for fear of being judged.

Related: Child bride freed by Nigerian authorities looks to new beginnings 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jun/11/child-bride-threatened-with-death-freed-nigeria>

What happened to Ruth is not unique. In the Democratic Republic of Congo 
(DRC), the civil war that began in 1998 and which still rages in the eastern 
part of the country, has been characterised by groups of militias that kill, 
rape, steal and torture. One 2011study 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2011/05/12/world/africa/12congo.html?_r=0> estimated 
that nearly two million women and girls in DRC have experienced rape; the 
victims range from tiny children to old women. The physical consequences 
include HIV infection, obstetric fistula (where a tear between the vagina and 
rectum or bladder can leave a woman incontinent) and pregnancy.


In 2011, I set up a charity, Hope and Health Vision 
<http://www.hopehealthvision.org/>, with two friends who had backgrounds in 
clinical and social psychology. We now have 15 employees, all of whom, like us, 
provide their services for free. The charity, which operates in both DRC and 
neighbouring Burundi, supports women and children traumatised by war. Our work 
with children includes providing a safe environment for orphaned and homeless 
children, offering them food, education, therapy and help with substance abuse. 
My own focus as a social worker has been helping women in the South Kivu 
province to cope with the aftermath of rape.


Women suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder find it hard to trust a 
man, because it can trigger memories of rape

Women <http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> who have been raped 
don’t only suffer physical damage. Some victims, like Ruth, become pregnant and 
find it difficult to bond with the child, who is a constant reminder of the 
terrible thing that was done to them. We have seen some mothers treat children 
harshly, with devastating psychological consequences – some children are 
abandoned and forced into prostitution. Sometimes the children themselves are 
infected with HIV.


Many rape victims are shunned by their communities or abandoned by their 
husbands <https://www.hrw.org/reports/2002/drc/Congo0602-06.htm>. One woman I 
saw, Grace, was at home one evening with her husband and three children, when 
two young men armed with guns broke into the house, tied up Grace’s husband and 
raped Grace in front of her family. A few weeks later, her husband threw her 
out. Grace went to a doctor, who told her she needed hospital treatment for her 
injuries, but she was afraid to go because she didn’t want her community to 
find out that she has been raped and stigmatise her.


Related: Letter to my daughter: what is it like to be a girl in 2016? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/feb/03/letter-to-my-daughter-what-is-it-like-to-be-a-girl-in-2016>

Offering support to women who have been traumatised by rape isn’t easy – it 
takes a while to build up trust. When I studied for my degree in social work, I 
received some training in supporting victims of violence, but women suffering 
from post-traumatic stress disorder find it understandably hard to trust a man, 
because it can trigger memories of the rape.

Hope and Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Vision 
collaborates with a Catholic mission run by nuns, which provides shelter for 
rape victims. Before I start counselling a woman, the convent sisters talk to 
her to explain who I am and what the charity does. I can then begin to offer 
her support. Initially, women find it difficult to tell me what happened to 
them, but they gradually become more trusting after three or four sessions.

Most of what I offer is practical guidance – finding sources of funding to pay 
school fees for their children, helping them resolve some of their everyday 
problems, connecting them with community resources and referring them for 
medical treatment. As a charity, we can also provide financial help with food, 
medicine and clothing.


Related: Five ways tech is crowdsourcing women’s empowerment 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/feb/03/five-ways-tech-crowdsourcing-womens-empowerment>

I also work closely with hospitals in the region, where Hope and Health Vision 
psychologists have trained nurses to provide individual and family therapy to 
rape victims. Where the woman has children, I intervene to help make sure they 
receive an education, particularly in basic literacy. Their school fees are 
paid for by donations from supporters of our charity.


It’s not an easy job. I walk or cycle miles, often through dangerous 
territory, to visit people who need help, and often spend a week or two weeks 
in a village, visiting different families and listening to their problems. But 
by working with other organisations, we are able to offer some women and 
children the hope of rebuilding their lives.


* Names have been changed

Lucio Kikuni qualified as a social worker from Hope Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> University in Burundi before 
co-founding the charity Hope and Health Vision.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter. Join the conversation with the 
hashtag#SheMatters <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23SheMatters&src=typd>.
