
It’s fair to say that I’m not a morning person. I hate getting up. Breakfast 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/breakfast> telly drives me mad. I 
can’t stand morning smalltalk (apologies to everyone I’ve ever lived with). It 
feels like a violation of a basic human right that anyone should have to get up 
at six-anything; for the many of you up earlier, you will forever have my 
respect.

Like an addict in rehab, I start bargaining as soon as the alarm goes off. 
“Just one more snooze, I promise this is the last one. I swear I’ll definitely, 
100% get up after this one. Or the one after that.” Eventually my fear of being 
late will win out and I’ll move, in slow motion, a grunting, monosyllabic sloth 
to the bathroom, randomly mashing my fist against the wall in search of the 
light switch.

Needless to say after this daily purgatory, breakfast doesn’t get much of a 
look in. On the exceptionally rare occasions that I’ve got enough time, I’ll 
make a bowl of porridge and a cup of green tea. I can count the number of times 
that’s happened this year on one hand. More likely is that I’ll just about 
manage to scoff some cornflakes or, if it’s a particularly cold morning, I’ll 
grab a bit of toast that I can eat in the car on the way to work.

I know there’s an obvious solution: go to bed earlier and stop using the 
snooze button. But as my Netflix addiction shows no signs of letting up, I’ll 
probably be having breakfast in my bashed-up Citroën Saxo for a while to come. 
With that in mind, it would be nice to have something more imaginative than 
toast to enjoy on the morning commute.

I’m not usually one for healthy baking; if you want to be healthy then don’t 
eat cake, have a bit of fruit instead. As this is breakfast, though, I want 
something more wholesome than the average teatime cake. Something that will 
give me energy for the morning without the guilt trip and sugar crash that 
usually accompanies my purchases from the canteen.

Though the muffins and breakfast bars below are free from added fat and 
relatively low in sugar, there’s enough flavour packed in them to ensure you 
won’t be reaching for some honey to pour on top. Just don’t try to pass off the 
bars to anyone as healthy flapjacks. The puzzled look my nephew gave me when he 
tried them taught me that oats can’t be called flapjacks unless they’ve been 
swimming in golden syrup and butter.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tfj5%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tfj5%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8986c43441bb41c51bfdb89a11c9407a7afa2db%2F0_256_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tamal%20Ray%E2%80%99s%20breakfast%20treats%3A%20from%20wholemeal%20muffins%20to%20mocha%20biscotti&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tfj5%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tamal+Ray%E2%80%99s+breakfast+treats%3A+from+wholemeal+muffins+to+mocha+biscotti&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tfj5%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8986c43441bb41c51bfdb89a11c9407a7afa2db%2F0_256_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Tamal Ray’s apple and orange wholemeal muffins. Photograph: Christopher 
Thomond for the Guardian 
Apple & orange wholemeal muffins

These tasty little muffins contain quite a lot of acid from all the fruit 
juice and yoghurt. This gets the raising agent working very quickly as soon as 
it’s all mixed together; you can hear it fizzing if you get close enough to the 
bowl. To stop yourself ending up with stodgy, under-risen cakes you need to 
work quickly once you mix the wet and dry ingredients together and get them 
into the oven as soon as you can. They also seem to form a powerful bond with 
the paper cases they are baked in, so you might want to try greasing the cases 
before you spoon in the mix. A quick squirt from one of those cans of spray-on 
oil is the easiest way of greasing the cases without damaging them.


Makes 12

2 large eggs

100g light brown sugar

2 oranges, zest & juice

160g natural yoghurt

1 Bramley apple peeled, cored and grated

240g wholemeal flour

2tsp ground cinnamon

1.5tsp bicarbonate of soda

40g sunflower seeds

100g fresh or frozen raspberries

Optional - oil to grease the cupcake cases

Preheat the oven to 200C/390F/gas 6. In a large bowl, mix together the eggs, 
sugar, orange zest and juice, yoghurt and grated apple. In a separate bowl sift 
together the flour, cinnamon, soda and then add in the sunflower seeds. If 
using the oil, grease 12 muffin cases in a muffin tray. Stir the dry 
ingredients into the wet and then, working quickly, half fill the muffin cases 
with batter, add in 2 or 3 raspberries and cover with the remaining batter. 
Bake for 15 minutes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tfj5%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tfj5%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e1b54dcd8ffda1cfc6a213506e063b426c7dfcf%2F0_283_5642_3385%2F5642.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tamal%20Ray%E2%80%99s%20breakfast%20treats%3A%20from%20wholemeal%20muffins%20to%20mocha%20biscotti&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tfj5%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tamal+Ray%E2%80%99s+breakfast+treats%3A+from+wholemeal+muffins+to+mocha+biscotti&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tfj5%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e1b54dcd8ffda1cfc6a213506e063b426c7dfcf%2F0_283_5642_3385%2F5642.jpg>
 Tamal Ray’s breakfast bars. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
Breakfast bars

Try not to think of these as diet bars: though they don’t contain any added 
refined sugar, the oats and fruit ensure they’re still packed with carbs. With 
any luck, though, all that fibre and protein should keep you full until 
lunchtime with a lot more good stuff than your average chocolate bar.


Makes 12

4 overipe bananas

240g natural yoghurt

240g unsalted crunchy peanut butter

175g dried cranberries

125g whole blanched almonds

240g whole oats

50g pumpkin seeds


Preheat the fan oven to 200C/390F/gas 6. Mash up the bananas in a large bowl 
and then add the yoghurt and peanut butter. Roughly chop up the almonds and 
stir into the mix along with the rest of the ingredients. Spread out the 
mixture into a 9-inch square baking tin lined with greaseproof paper and bake 
for 40 minutes. Allow to cool before cutting into 12 slices.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tfj5%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tfj5%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7cc3101629c4aee85150ae9e1ee45c79ec054fcd%2F0_354_5642_3385%2F5642.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tamal%20Ray%E2%80%99s%20breakfast%20treats%3A%20from%20wholemeal%20muffins%20to%20mocha%20biscotti&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tfj5%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tamal+Ray%E2%80%99s+breakfast+treats%3A+from+wholemeal+muffins+to+mocha+biscotti&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tfj5%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7cc3101629c4aee85150ae9e1ee45c79ec054fcd%2F0_354_5642_3385%2F5642.jpg>
 Tamal Ray’s mocha biscotti Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
Mocha biscotti

I’ll be honest, there’s a bit more faff to making this than the other two 
recipes and though it has no added fat, you couldn’t really describe it as 
healthy. Its one major plus point as a breakfast food, though, is that having 
been baked twice, it will keep for up to a couple of months sealed in an 
airtight container. Perfect as a backup option if you’re not the most organised 
person.


Makes 12-16 pieces


4tsp instant coffee granules

40g milk

120g dark muscovado sugar

2 large eggs

225g plain flour

40g cocoa powder

1tsp baking powder

100g hazelnuts

125g dried cherries

Preheat the fan oven to 200C/390F/gas 6. Dissolve the coffee granules in the 
milk and set aside. You can warm the milk for 20 seconds in the microwave if 
you’re having trouble getting the granules to dissolve. Stir together the sugar 
and eggs, then add in the coffee mixture. In a separate bowl, mix together the 
flour, cocoa powder and baking powder and then add to the other ingredients 
along with the nuts and cherries. Stir together into a dough and then form into 
a flat loaf shape about 9x5 inches and 3/4 in thick. If you find the dough too 
sticky to handle then you can dust the outside with a little flour. Place on a 
baking sheet lined with greaseproof paper and sprinkled with a little flour. 
Bake for 25 minutes and then remove from the oven to cool. Turn the oven down 
to 170C/335F/gas 3. Using the sharpest bread knife you can find, carefully cut 
the loaf diagonally into slices approximately 1cm thick. If the loaf is still 
warm or your knife is blunt you will find into difficult to cut the slices 
without them breaking apart. Return the biscotti slices to the oven on a baking 
sheet and bake for 8 minutes, then flip them over and bake for another 5 
minutes.
