
The world’s 48 least developed countries (LDCs) must transform their economies 
to break a vicious circle of underdevelopment, according to a report fromUnctad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/unctad>, the UN’s trade and development arm.

The report – Growth with Structural Transformation: A Post-2015 Development 
Agenda 
<http://unctad.org/_layouts/UNCTAD/UNCTADLogin.aspx?ReturnUrl=%2fen%2f_layouts%2fAuthenticate.aspx%3fSource%3d%252Fen%252FPublicationsLibrary%252Fldc2014%255Fen%252Epdf&Source=%2Fen%2FPublicationsLibrary%2Fldc2014_en%2Epdf>
 – says the international community must learn from the “LDC paradox”: most of 
these countries look certain to fall well short of the millennium development 
goals (MDGs), which expire next year, despite growth exceeding 7% before 2008, 
and averaging 5.7% after the 2008 financial crisis.

“LDCs are the battleground on which the post-2015 development agenda will be 
won or lost. Its success will depend on action by the international community 
and the LDCs to structurally transform their economies and break the vicious 
circle of human and economic development that has trapped these countries in 
poverty,”Unctad <https://www.theguardian.com/world/unctad> said.


Innovation, skills upgrades, and a massive transfer of resources towards more 
sophisticated products and activities are needed, especially in those countries 
that are overly dependent on the extractive sector, the report added. Donors 
must also fulfil long-standing aid commitments.

“There is a need to find a much more reliable, sustainable and inclusive 
process of development … to reduce levels of poverty [and] to provide the 
social and human development needed,” said David Woodward, part of the report 
team and senior adviser at Unctad’s Africa division on LDCs.


Complicating the task for LDCs – a group that includes countries as diverse as 
Cambodia, Sierra Leone and Bhutan 
<http://unctad.org/en/pages/aldc/Least%20Developed%20Countries/UN-list-of-Least-Developed-Countries.aspx>
 – is the uncertainty surrounding export prices amid the financial crisis, and 
less aid from cash-strapped donor countries.


UN member states are drawing up  
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/sep/24/un-begins-talks-sdgs-battle-looms-over-goals>
sustainable development goals (SDGs) to replace the MDGs. The new targets will 
be introduced from September 2015. A draft set of 17 SDGs, with 169 targets, 
cover the broad themes of the MDGs, including ending poverty and hunger, and 
improving health, education and gender equality.


Unctad said the SDGs were expected to commit to eradicating poverty by 2030. 
“This means reducing it to zero everywhere – and it is in the LDCs that this 
will be most challenging,” predicted the report, pointing out that even China 
had not managed to eradicate poverty despite a longer period of economic growth 
and development.

Only one LDC – Laos – was on track to achieve the seven MDG targets analysed 
in the report. Only four of the 39 LDCs outside south and south-east Asia – 
Ethiopia, Malawi, Rwanda and Uganda – are on track to meet a majority of these 
targets.

“My sense is that there has been a more assertive stance on the part of 
Rwanda, Uganda and Ethiopia, a greater willingness and ability to set a 
direction and draw the donors along with them,” said Woodward. For other 
countries, donors tended to dictate direction, with a risk of incoherence 
because of different agendas.


Woodward highlighted rural development as a priority, with a need to upgrade 
agriculture and create more non-farm jobs.


“In LDCs, two-thirds of the population live in rural areas. There is a major 
need to increase productivity in agriculture but if you are going to do that, 
you’re losing a lot of surplus labour … the cities are not going to be able to 
absorb that amount of labour, so developing the non-farm sector in rural areas 
is going to be essential,” he said. “You need diversification in rural 
economies to generate demand so that demand grows in parallel with supply [and] 
the income effects for farmers are not offset by falling prices.”



Mukhisa Kituyi, Unctad’s secretary general, wrote in the report: “History has 
shown that sustained economic growth and development are achieved by those 
countries that are able to effectively transform their productive activities 
from low to high productivity, and diversify their production and exports.”

Woodward said aid to the three countries worst affected by the Ebola crisis – 
Sierra Leone, Guinea and Liberia – may be diverted from economic development 
programmes. “Aid to health is good but … if you don’t have the underpinning of 
economic development then that’s not sustainable over the long-term,” he said.

He described challenges to development in LDCs as a set of “interlocking, 
interacting vicious circles” that must be dealt with simultaneously. “You need 
to improve your governance, you need to get your economy going, your health 
systems, your education, your financial systems,” he said. “Every one of them 
depends on everything else.”
