
In our local press last week was a rare positive news story about the hospital 
I work at. There was a flattering photograph of me and a male colleague, with 
the respective captions of “project coordinator” and “consultant orthopaedic 
surgeon”. I am indeed the project coordinator, and happy to have the 
recognition, but I am also a consultant orthopaedic surgeon.

 I don’t mind losing the job title, I was never one those house officers who 
booked a restaurant or car service as “Doctor so-and-so”, but I do regret the 
missed opportunity to positively represent and promote women in surgery.

 Patients often don’t understand that I am medically qualified, that I do the 
operations and that I am most certainly strong enough. I introduce myself with 
my name and job title and yet, after being examined in their underwear, 
patients often ask when they are going to meet the doctor, or comment that “it 
must be hard being a medical secretary”. It’s not just the patients. I was 
working at a computer in the cardiothoracic department when a surgeon walked in 
and assumed I was his new secretary.

 I have watched patients ignore everything I say when male junior doctors have 
called me in for advice; they continue to look to the alpha male six-month 
qualified trainee for his opinion while he squirms uncomfortably. Even the 
eight-year-old daughter of a female colleague had assumed her mother was a 
nurse; when the revelation was made she proceeded to argue that Mum couldn’t 
possibly be a surgeon, because she was a woman.

 I am always delighted to be mistaken for a company rep, they are terribly 
glamorous. But I don’t appreciate receiving post mistakenly addressed to a 
mister; the only man I know with my surname is my non-medical father. Last week 
I received a letter about a patient I had operated on from a physiotherapist in 
a peripheral hospital who had assumed my title to be Mr. I have also received 
correspondence from the British Orthopaedic Association and the Royal College 
of Surgeons addressed to my dad.

Related: One challenge of being a female surgeon is patients presuming I'm a 
secretary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/jul/24/one-challenge-of-being-a-female-surgeon-is-patients-presuming-im-a-secretary>

 I hate it when I’m referred to as a lady doctor, I never hear of any 
gentleman doctors. I do adore it though when patients lean in to take my hand 
and warmly tell me: “It’s so nice to see a lady”. And I don’t mind at all when 
patients exclaim: “Oh, so YOU do the operations? Are you strong enough?” as 
it’s my opportunity to challenge their preconceptions. If the general public 
don’t see photographs of female surgeons in their local newspaper, why would 
they expect to meet one in real life? They also need to believe that their 
daughter or granddaughter can be anything she wants to be. Challenging the 
gender stereotype is part of my everyday life, and I relish it.

If you would like to write a blogpost for Views from the NHS frontline 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline>, 
readour guidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2014/aug/12/highs-lows-nhs-write-guardian>
 and get in touch by emailinghealthcare@theguardian.com 
<mailto:healthcare@theguardian.com>.


Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
