
I can get showered, dressed, made up and do my hair in half an hour. I have 
very dry skin, so I moisturise after every shower. My main makeup thing is my 
eyes. When I was discovered in the 60s, it was all about false eyelashes and I 
used to draw on what became known as ‘twigs’ under the eyes. I haven’t worn 
false eyelashes for 30 years but I do like my smoky eyes. I am not a big 
lipstick person. I’ve a few soft pinks and a bit of gloss.

I have had highlights since I was 16, when Leonard of House of Leonard cut my 
hair in that famous little bob and Daniel Galvin gave me my first set of 
highlights. So I have always been a blonde – out of a bottle. I am actually 
mousey brown which is a good base because you can go blonder or darker. Fringes 
are flattering and I’ve had a full fringe since the late 80s when I was coming 
up to my forties. I haven’t had plastic surgery but, if I ever felt the need, I 
would find a very, very good surgeon. I would never use Botox because in my 
mind it’s poison.

Related: Joanna Lumley: ‘I like a bright lipstick in a “Patsy red”’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/may/21/how-get-ready-joanna-lumley-patsy-red-lipstick>

I have most colours in my wardrobe. I steer away from yellows, because I am 
blond and fair-skinned. My favourite colours are cobalt blue, purple and 
orange. Every skin and hair colour looks fabulous in orange and I’ve more 
orange in my wardrobe than anything else. If I look at pictures of how I have 
dressed over the years, it hasn’t changed much. I love my skinny jeans, I love 
tailored jackets and, even if we go to a black-tie do, I often wear a tuxedo. I 
plan from my feet up. Once I’ve decided how much I am going to be walking, 
I pick the shoes and work upwards.

The Twiggy for Aurora range is available exclusively at Specsavers 
<http://www.specsavers.co.uk>
