
One of the challenges for charities in the digital age is the pressure to be 
responsive and always on. So how do charities, including those with small teams 
and budgets, deal with their stakeholders’ queries, comments and complaints? 
There’s a plethora of channels to consider, from instant messaging to answering 
questions via social media, or steering beneficiaries towards FAQs on your 
website. Your audience also want you to reply quickly. A recent study indicated 
that42% of people 
<http://www.convinceandconvert.com/social-media-research/42-percent-of-consumers-complaining-in-social-media-expect-60-minute-response-time/>
 expect a response on social media within 60 minutes.


As more people go online 
<http://wearesocial.com/uk/special-reports/digital-in-2016>, the digital 
customer service trend is likely to grow. It may seem daunting but it’s a big 
opportunity for charities to engage with their audience. It may even generate 
income. According to Buffer, 50% of customers aremore likely to buy products or 
services <https://blog.bufferapp.com/social-media-for-customer-service-guide> 
from organisations that are contactable on social media.Ross McCulloch 
<https://twitter.com/ThirdSectorLab>, head of communications at Relationships 
Scotland and director of digital agency Third Sector Lab, advises charities to 
“go where your customers are”.

“We shouldn’t expect people to email or phone us if they’re far more 
comfortable asking a question on Twitter or speaking direct to staff on a 
messenger platform such as WhatsApp,” he says. “As well as offering people 
choice and flexibility, this has the potential to save organisations time and 
money.”

So what should charities be aware of when delivering digital customer service?


Related: Charity boards are failing to adapt to the digital age – this has to 
change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/apr/11/charity-governance-digital-technology-trustees>

• Understand how your audience behaves online
During his time at Relationships Scotland 
<http://www.relationships-scotland.org.uk/>, McCulloch has observed that 
contacting charities for the first time via social media has become the norm. 
He says: “For many of the people who go on to access a family mediation or 
relationship counselling service, Facebook is the natural place for them to 
have their first contact with our organisation. The staff who deal with it are 
the same staff who handle queries from the public via email and telephone – we 
take it seriously as a customer service channel.” Knowing why and how your 
stakeholders use digital channels is essential.

• Know the problem you are trying to solve
Damien Austin-Walker, head of digital at vInspired <https://vinspired.com/>, 
says: “Our insights show that young people have limited time, and our analytics 
showed young people searching for opportunities, but many then drop off without 
applying. We wanted to see what the effect was of solving customer issues and 
providing support in real-time.” His charity recently trialled an on-site 
pop-up chat service and found young people’s willingness to engage with it, and 
the positive sentiment it generated, encouraging.

• Review your enquiries process
Rachel Peck, digital marketing manager at Diabetes UK 
<https://www.diabetes.org.uk/>, advises charities to map out the messages you 
are getting into your social media accounts, along with the topics that are 
covered, the teams the messages are sent to and the frequency with which they 
are received. Her charity gets queries on topics ranging from nutrition and 
healthcare to fundraising via social media.

Initially, Peck’s team emailed these queries to the charity’s helpline 
counsellors, but as they increased it became time consuming and less efficient. 
As part of its commitment to providing advice and support, the digital team 
worked closely with the customer service staff to streamline the process, and 
eventually trained counsellors and those in customer care to respond to 
stakeholders via the social media management system. Diabetes UK’s average 
response time for social media messages is now 90 minutes, compared with two to 
three days previously.

Related: Telling charities to step away from social media is short-sighted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/mar/17/charities-social-media-should-invest>

• Instant messaging and bots are the future
Instant messaging offers huge potential due to its growth 
<https://contently.com/strategist/2016/06/03/6-takeaways-marketers-mary-meekers-internet-trends-report/>
 and the private nature of the channel. Nick Owen, digital communications 
officer atMédecins Sans Frontières <http://www.msf.org.uk/>, says: “Instant 
messaging channels such as WhatsApp are already changing the way we 
communicate, not only with our supporters but also with our patients and 
beneficiaries. We’ve had people come to us through WhatsApp in places like Mali 
and India asking for medical care which we’ve been able to relay to the field.”


McCulloch adds: “Bots within messenger apps and other forms of artificial 
intelligence will be the real game-changer, allowing people to ‘self-service’, 
thus freeing up staff time to deal with more difficult queries. These types of 
AI within online channels could transform the way advice and support 
organisations deliver services.”



For more news, opinions and ideas about the voluntary sector, join our 
community <https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/>.
