
Lack of rain in California <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california> 
has had an unexpected consequence: it has slowed down the movement of the land. 
In some regions hillsides move gradually, perhaps sliding a metre or so every 
year, but over the past five years the dry conditions have reduced this 
movement to a snail’s pace.

The discovery was made by comparing satellite imagery, aerial photographs and 
on-the-ground measurements from northern California’s Eel river basin. 
Initially researchers were puzzled to see that the trees and rocks above the 
slow-moving landslides in the region had barely moved in recent years. But 
comparing the land movement data with climate records back as far as 1944 
revealed that the slow-down was almost certainly linked to theCalifornia drought
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/18/california-drought-conservation-order-lifted-jerry-brown>
.

Related: When in drought: the California farmers who don’t water their crops 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/05/dry-farming-california-drought-wine-crops>

In this case rocks and soil have dried out, and there is no longer enough 
moisture to lubricate the movement of the land. “A question now is how much 
water will it take, and how long will it take to get water down the depths at 
the base of these sliding surfaces to reduce the friction and get them to start 
moving again,” said University of Oregon researcherJoshua Roering 
<http://geology.uoregon.edu/profile/jroering/>, whose findings have been 
published inGeophysical Research Letters 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/2016GL068378/abstract>. This summer 
the team will be collecting more measurements and trying to better understand 
the plumbing system beneath these slow-moving landslides.

Slow landslips are typical in many parts of the world, causing roads to crack, 
rails to buckle and houses to subside. The new data from California will help 
scientists better understand these gradual landscape changes, and the impact 
that climate change is likely to have.
