
It’s a Tuesday night, there’s nothing in the fridge, and that last meeting of 
the day sucked the life out of you. You should cook, but it’s late. You go 
online and, in one click, you’ve chosen a meal: half an hour later, it’s here. 
And it’s actual restaurant food, carefully packaged, still hot, from a 
restaurant you like and trust. Chances are, it’s from Deliveroo. But it now has 
more competition – at least in London, where US-based UberEATSlaunched its 
restaurant food delivery yesterday 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/business/news/uber-launches-deliveroo-rival-ubereats-in-london-a7085101.html>
 (Wagamama has just launched its own delivery services, too). Delivery is 
becoming more than just a simple add-on for already-established businesses.

Founded by New Yorker-turned-Londoner Will Shu in 2013, UK-based Deliveroo is 
growing at phenomenal speed: 25% month on month, in more than 70 countries 
worldwide, and with still-rampant plans for further growth. Indeed, there are 
now so many black and turquoise-branded cyclists zipping about carrying 
implausibly sized padded boxes on their backs – 3,000 of the company’s 5,000 
cyclists operate across London, Deliveroo says ‒ that the company has even 
started to get the inevitable backlash about supposed dangerous cycling 
(although Deliveroo assures me that all its cyclists receive safety training 
and quality bike equipment).

Related: Posh nosh: Britain's big appetite for gourmet takeaway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/sep/13/britains-takeaway-revolution>

In fact, the trend is so unmissable that one restaurant group, London 
rotisserie chickenpurveyors Clockjack <http://www.clockjack.co.uk/>, last week 
opened a “delivery-only” kitchen, solely offering food to the City through 
Deliveroo orders. That’s a “restaurant”, but without any seating. At all. 
Founded by Jerry Goldberg and Fraser Duncan, Clockjack, which already runs a 
site in London’s Soho, actually opened this new kitchen more than a month ahead 
of its second “proper” restaurant. It’s the biggest sign yet that restaurateurs 
are seriously tapping into the delivery trend.


If deliveries in the smartphone age get too good, will they eventually kill 
proper restaurants? Dining out isn’t always as good an option as it first 
seems, especially in these days of queuing for no-reservation places, tipping 
stressand other annoyances 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2013/aug/26/restaurant-pet-hates-ruin-my-appetite>
 that mar the experience. Goldberg agrees that the boom of the delivery market 
opens up some far-reaching questions for the future of actual restaurants. 
“This is critical for the whole restaurant market and could have huge 
implications,” he says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yexk%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yexk%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3658dbc1892d799f1f983ae757ec854614e8305a%2F0_132_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20home%20delivery%20kill%20the%20restaurant%20trade%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yexk%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will+home+delivery+kill+the+restaurant+trade%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yexk%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3658dbc1892d799f1f983ae757ec854614e8305a%2F0_132_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Chicken dishes from Clockjack, one of the first restaurants to adapt to the 
home-delivery trend 
“So far, in our Soho restaurant, deliveries do not affect our sit-down demand. 
But I don’t think anyone knows yet. It’s going to be interesting to see how 
changing consumer behaviour influences the broader restaurant market. 
Personally, I do think it’s a major new trend in the industry.”

If all goes well, Clockjack is aiming to open more delivery-only kitchens, and 
build on the model’s success. Goldberg adds: “The growth of the delivery market 
has been huge, as demonstrated by Deliveroo’s meteoric rise. It’s not just big 
cities like London or just a UK trend, it’s everywhere. That demonstrates the 
size of the opportunity.”

Related: The truth about working for Deliveroo, Uber and the on-demand economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/15/he-truth-about-working-for-deliveroo-uber-and-the-on-demand-economy>

Because it’s not just glorified chicken shops for city workers that are 
thriving in this new model. Nearly every type of food or popular brand you can 
think of is on Deliveroo now. There’s pan-Asian Wagamama; Vietnamese Pho; 
burger stalwarts Byron and Honest Burger; Italian Carluccio’s; 
delicatessen-style Bill’s; and even steak-and-chicken Tramshed, from as big a 
chef as Mark Hix. PizzaExpresssigned with the company this month, making it the 
group’s biggest restaurant partner yet.

And many higher-end restaurants – including Atul Kochhar’s one-star Benares 
and City favourite L’Anima – areoffering food through Supper 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/sep/13/britains-takeaway-revolution>
, the Michelin-starred restaurants’ answer to Deliveroo. Using a fleet of 
bespoke, Japanese-designed eco-motorcycles, Supper founder Peter Giorgiou aims 
to “bring the best restaurants in London into people’s homes”. “Nothing has 
been overlooked,” its glossy website explains.



Customers are turning to independent businesses too, with delivery seemingly 
working as well for one-site operations as UK-wide chains. Mac & Wild, which 
launched in August last year in London’s West End, seeks to give customers “a 
taste of the Scottish highlands”, with more unusual dishes including venison 
burgers, haggis pops and smoked scallops. Owner Andy Waugh calls the Deliveroo 
service “epic”. “Every restaurant should be linked to a delivery service,” he 
says. “It’s a no-brainer.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yexk%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yexk%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3cf5ac66c08894c1406bde92c3b8ed41df93fe03%2F1179_0_1601_2002%2F1601.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20home%20delivery%20kill%20the%20restaurant%20trade%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yexk%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will+home+delivery+kill+the+restaurant+trade%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yexk%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3cf5ac66c08894c1406bde92c3b8ed41df93fe03%2F1179_0_1601_2002%2F1601.jpg>
 UberEats hopes to grab its lucrative share of the home-delivery market 
Allan Pickett, high-end chef-patron at recently opened Piquet in London’s 
Fitzrovia, suggests that businesses could suffer if they don’t evolve. Although 
his restaurant doesn’t yet offer delivery, he says: “Restaurants are always at 
risk; it’s always about bums on seats. You’re always trying to maximise it, 
getting people through the doors. Especially if the economy changes; some 
people might say: ‘I can’t afford to go out, but I can get a great bowl of hot 
food delivered to my door.’””

“I have no idea if Deliveroo customers come into the restaurant,” Waugh says. 
“But I would expect they have, due to the fact that I have eaten in most places 
I get Deliveroo from.”

David Moore, successful restaurateur best known for the Michelin-starred 
London site Pied à Terre – and, coincidentally, non-executive director of 
Clockjack ‒ thinks delivery is now an essential part of the business. Although 
he thinks delivery is a great idea that works by exploiting people’s 
impatience, and offering a well-run option for people who want to eat “right 
now”, he says the two experiences can exist concurrently.

“I don’t see people inviting friends round to their front room, to look 
through a Deliveroo catalogue,” he says. “When you go to a restaurant, you want 
the charm, the service, the conviviality. It’s about personalities. It’s not 
surprising delivery companies are doing well, as there is demand, but I’ll eat 
my hat if deliveries outstrip restaurants.”
