
One way or another, David Cameron will soon be a history man. In 12 days’ 
time, he will have pulled off his great gamble, prevailed in one of the most 
significant – and vicious – political contests in the life of this nation and 
won the referendum, or Britain’s membership of theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> will be toast and he with it, leaving 
future historians to debate why a previously skilled and supple leader made 
such a catastrophic mistake.

Related: David Cameron says state pensions could be at risk if Brexit becomes 
reality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/11/brexit-axe-state-pensions-david-cameron-nhs-cold-reality>

The campaign has not unfolded as Cameron anticipated when he fired the 
starting pistol. He didn’t foreseeBoris Johnson 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> and Michael Gove leading the 
Brexiters, he did not reckon with it being so poisonous between Tories and he 
didn’t think it would be so tough. By the final stretch, he expected to be 
sitting on a confident lead for In, not locked in a fight so tight that Remain 
campaigners talk of this being “squeaky bum time”.

Cameron comes as near as a politician ever does to conceding that the vote 
could be lost: “It’s clearly a very competitive referendum, it’s clearly very 
close.”

He also talks in a way that suggests he thinks his side needs to accentuate 
the positive arguments for membership: “We’ve got an incredibly strong case to 
say: look, if we stay in a reformed European Union, we’ve got a very bright 
future. A lot of businesses and investors will see Britain has decided its 
future in Europe and has got enormous opportunities around the world. I think 
we’ll see investment. We’ll see more jobs.

“All this is an exciting future and we need to get that across alongside the 
huge risks there are from leaving.”

Having said that, he is not going to stop playing that risk card which is his 
core argument for why it would be folly for Britain to take “a leap in the 
dark” by self-ejecting from the EU: “To people who say there’s been too much 
scaremongering, too much talk of dangers to the economy, that is what I 
believe.”

To his previous warnings about the perils of Brexit, he adds a new one when he 
cites the Institute for Fiscal Studies and other expert bodies in support of 
his contention that departing the EU would be so damaging to the economy that 
it would create “a black hole” in the public finances that would entail 
spending cuts “to the tune of something like £40bn”. That, he says, would mean 
the NHS and pensions could no longer be guaranteed ringfencing from cuts: 
“Those things are on the ballot paper and they are at risk.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kqqk%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kqqk%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F373021aa85fe1f8caecc8188ce3c2b9e2ffb0535%2F0_169_5125_3076%2F5125.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Cameron%20on%20the%20prospect%20of%20Brexit%3A%20%E2%80%98Leave%20want%20to%20take%20the%20country%20backwards%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kqqk%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David+Cameron+on+the+prospect+of+Brexit%3A+%E2%80%98Leave+want+to+take+the+country+backwards%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kqqk%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F373021aa85fe1f8caecc8188ce3c2b9e2ffb0535%2F0_169_5125_3076%2F5125.jpg>
 On Michael Gove’s position: ‘Even if one can find experts frustrating … the 
idea that you brush all these warnings aside is absurd.’ Photograph: Andy Hall 
for the Observer 
We remind him that Gove – still, though it may sometimes be hard to believe, a 
member of his cabinet – has dismissed the many warnings from expert bodies of 
the perils of Brexit on the grounds that “people in this country have had 
enough of experts 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2016/jun/08/experts-eu-referendum-michael-gove>
”. Cameron responds with a withering contempt that suggests he’s had enough of 
his erstwhile friend: “I thought that was a telling phrase because, in fact, 
even if one can find experts frustrating, you wouldn’t buy a house without 
listening to one, you wouldn’t build a bridge. The idea that you just brush all 
these warnings aside is absurd.”

He was bitterly disappointed with Gove’s decision to join the Outers, but at 
least credits him with acting from principle because he “had a very 
longstanding view about getting out of Europe”. But there is only boiling rage 
towards Boris Johnson within No 10. It is not officially admitted, but 
universally assumed, that the prime minister must have licensed the 
full-frontal attack on Johnson by cabinet minister Amber Rudd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/09/eu-referendum-our-panel-on-boris-johnson-and-nicola-sturgeons-tv-debate>
, when she told a TV debate audience: “We need to look at the numbers. I fear 
the only number Boris is interested in is the one that says No 10.” A good 
line, wasn’t it?

Cameron laughs, takes a beat to consider how to answer, then effectively 
endorses her characterisation of Johnson as a man driven only by his 
unprincipled ambition: “It was a very good debate. I thought she was very 
strong. I think she’s a real, real star. She says it as she sees it and she 
does it very strongly.”

He launches his fiercest broadside yet on the Tory Brexiters. They have 
comprehensively lost the argument on the economy, he contends, and as a result 
have sunk to singing along with the anti-immigrant tunes of Nigel Farage.

“When you look at the Leave campaign, it is beginning to sound very much like 
Farage’s Britain. They’ve bought into the Farage argument that everything’s 
disastrous. When they say take the country back, I think sometimes they mean 
take the country backwards to when it was the sick man of Europe. In Farage’s 
case, immigrants are demonised as being rapists and all the rest of what comes 
with Farage’s Britain.”

Does that disgust him? “Yes, like a lot of the things he says. I’ve been 
watching this guy for a decade now. You go back and you add it up – ‘Chinese 
people are Chinks, gay people are fags, women should breastfeed in a dark 
corner of the room’, all the rest of it. He’s got a track record as long as 
your arm and there is a danger that the Leave campaign is morphing into the 
Nigel Farage Little England campaign. And I would say that’s not what this 
country is. It’s not what our country wants to be. It’s not the country I want 
for my children. So don’t vote for Nigel Farage’s vision of Britain on 23 June.”

It is evident, though, that the Outers are focusing so heavily on immigration 
because it strikes a resonant chord with a significant proportion of voters. 
Cameron doesn’t really argue when we suggest that he and Remain have struggled 
to answer the Outers on immigration.

“It’s difficult in the sort of soundbite culture in which we exist to try to 
make a complicated argument. But the complicated argument is that Britain 
benefits from immigration, has done in the past, will do in the future. You can 
see that in our public services, you can see that in people who come here and 
work hard.

“It’s a balanced and nuanced argument which is a mixture of no more 
something-for-nothing, control for immigration from outside the EU – but keep 
returning to the benefits that immigration can bring.”

One question has loomed over Cameron from the very start of the campaign, a 
question being asked even by some of his allies. If Brexit is such a whopping 
risk, what possessed him to take the gamble by promising this referendum in the 
first place? It is widely believed at Westminster that his chancellor and 
closest collaborator, George Osborne, thought it a crazy idea to make the 
pledge. “It was time for the British public to make this decision again,” 
Cameron insists. “This has dogged our politics for decades.” It has certainly 
riven his party for decades. “The fact that politicians have promised 
referendums and not delivered them has been corrosive and it was time to deal 
with it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kqqk%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kqqk%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a3aa7b9a29d2d2ff51cc05fe5ff4154b7016325%2F0_104_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Cameron%20on%20the%20prospect%20of%20Brexit%3A%20%E2%80%98Leave%20want%20to%20take%20the%20country%20backwards%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kqqk%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David+Cameron+on+the+prospect+of+Brexit%3A+%E2%80%98Leave+want+to+take+the+country+backwards%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kqqk%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a3aa7b9a29d2d2ff51cc05fe5ff4154b7016325%2F0_104_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 On Nigel Farage: ‘I’ve watched this guy for a decade – “Chinese people are 
Chinks, gay people are fags”, all the rest of it. He’s got a track record as 
long as your arm.’ Photograph: Andy Hall for the Observer 
He cannot secure a vote for Remain without the support of people who may 
absolutely loathe him – supporters of Labour, the Nationalists, the Lib Dems 
and other non-Tories. Some would normally rather have their eyeballs stabbed 
with hot needles than follow the recommendation of a Tory prime minister. How 
does he appeal to them?

“I’d say this is not about one politician or one government, or protesting 
about issues you might be concerned about. It’s much bigger. I think they know 
they’re voting for a generation, for a lifetime.” He also invites them to look 
at the breadth of the cross-party support for continuing with membership. “It 
is a very, very big coalition of different people.”

He thinks that having all the major trades unions on the same side of the 
argument as a Tory prime minister ought to be very persuasive, and is clearly 
concerned that this is not getting through to voters because there has been so 
much media concentration on the personality battles between seniorConservatives 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives>. “Other parties and the 
trade unions are working very hard. Sometimes they can get squeezed out 
because, you know, the media love the sort of Dave and Boris show. That is a 
problem.”

He expresses anxiety that it has been “too much of an intra-Tory contest and 
that’s not good for the campaign”. This reflects worries among Remain 
strategists that non-Tory voters have been insufficiently engaged. So he is in 
the unfamiliar position of now wanting “to almost take myself out of the firing 
line so that Labour figures and others can have their say; I’m part of a huge 
coalition and I almost need to give those other parts of the coalition the 
chance to speak up because I mustn’t sort of hog it as prime minister”.

It is clear he wants more media attention for other advocates of Remain, 
especially Labour ones, because Labour votes are badly needed to win this 
referendum. “Look, even if you don’t agree with me, listen to the trades 
unions, listen to the Greens, listen to Jeremy Corbyn. And you can’t be accused 
of an establishment stitch-up if you’re saying listen to Jeremy Corbyn and the 
Green party.”

That is surely something he never thought he’d hear himself say: “Listen to 
Jeremy Corbyn.”

The argument about Europe has self-evidently shone stark illumination on the 
deep fissures within the Tory party, but it has arguably also highlighted 
something even more profound and disturbing: vivid and visceral fractures 
running through all of contemporary Britain. Between metropolitan and 
non-metropolitan Britain, between young and silver Britons, between doing-well 
Britain and the one that feels left behind, between a Britain that is basically 
comfortable with globalisation and another that feels an acute sense of 
identity loss.

He half accepts this. “We really need to explain that these opportunities are 
not simply for people who’ve already got advantage: these are opportunities for 
everyone.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kqqk%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kqqk%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ee380aea17cada31a0954615700edbafc3ee55a%2F0_339_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Cameron%20on%20the%20prospect%20of%20Brexit%3A%20%E2%80%98Leave%20want%20to%20take%20the%20country%20backwards%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kqqk%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David+Cameron+on+the+prospect+of+Brexit%3A+%E2%80%98Leave+want+to+take+the+country+backwards%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kqqk%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ee380aea17cada31a0954615700edbafc3ee55a%2F0_339_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 On the campaign: ‘You can’t be accused of an Establishment stitch-up if you’re 
saying listen to the Green party.’ Photograph: Andy Hall for the Observer 
Whichever way it goes, we suggest that such divisions will not simply 
disappear on 24 June. That he disputes. “I think the British electorate is very 
fair-minded. If the decision is made to stay, people will say, Inners and 
Outers will say, thank God that’s over. They’ll say: ‘fair contest, fair vote, 
we’ve decided, let’s got on with it’. I think we’ll be surprised by how quickly 
people come back together again.”

This strikes some of us as too insouciant about the high passions and deep 
divisions exposed by this referendum. Or perhaps we are asking too much of 
Cameron in seeking to get him to reflect on the healing that may be needed 
afterwards. In the fight of his life, with his country’s future and his 
historical reputation at stake, his mind has room to think only about the next 
12 days.
