
There’s a great scene in Fried Green Tomatoes at the Whistlestop Cafe 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kXZs3mjGlQU>. No, really, there is. And it 
sums up eloquently the unexpected joys of being middle aged. Kathy Bates is 
waiting patiently in her car for the guy to reverse out of a parking space at 
the mall. Then two entitled young twerps in big hair and yucky, acidulous tops 
(it’s 1991 in the US) drive into the space in their vile VW Beetle convertible. 
“Excuse me. I was waiting for that space,” Bates complains. “Yeah? Tough,” says 
one. “Face it, lady, we’re younger and faster,” says the other.

Cut to Bates seething at the wheel. Then a smile crosses her face. She puts 
the car into drive, smacks into the VW. Reverses. Hits drive. Smack! Reverses. 
Hits drive. Smack! The twerps scream at her. “Are you crazy?” “Face it, girls,” 
says Bates triumphantly. “I’m older and I’ve got more insurance.”

This scene is worth bearing in mind in the wake of an Office for National 
Statistics (ONS) study 
<http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/wellbeing/measuring-national-well-being/personal-well-being-in-the-uk--three-year-data-2012-2015/index.html>
 this week disclosing that Britons aged 45 to 59 report the lowest levels of 
life satisfaction. Why? We struggle to juggle family and work commitments, 
apparently.

Remember when you were young and didn’t wear stuff that might attract 
peer-group disdain? Those days are over

There’s more to it than that. The middle aged have got receding hairlines and 
advancing waistlines; we can’t get it up and we no longer know how to get down; 
we lose out parking-space-wise to sartorially challenged fluffheads, and life 
doesn’t make sense in a world in which David Bowie is no longer alive and 
pyjamas are OK on the school run. People like me (I’m 53) might as well just 
give up and die. Mightn’t we? On the contrary, here are 20 reasons to be 
cheerful when you’re middle-aged.

1 Ridicule, as Adam Ant argued, is nothing to be scared of

There’s a bloke who works in my library cafe. He wears a tricorn hat and a 
possibly silk frock coat. He must be about my age and he gives off a superb 
“nuts-to-whatever-you’re-thinking-about-me” vibe. Sir, I salute you. Remember 
when you were young and didn’t wear stuff that might attract peer-group 
disdain? When you’re middle-aged, those days are over. Score!

2 Teeth: the unbearable truth

Bad news! All your fillings are from the 70s and are disintegrating. Good 
news! Modern fillings don’t look like they’re made of old Ladas and you can 
afford to have the dental treatment!
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gd28%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gd28%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa2833070a1211b31714eb1fc9905184c108ccbd3%2F0_1441_4143_2484%2F4143.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=20%20reasons%20to%20be%20cheerful%20in%20middle%20age&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gd28%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=20+reasons+to+be+cheerful+in+middle+age&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gd28%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa2833070a1211b31714eb1fc9905184c108ccbd3%2F0_1441_4143_2484%2F4143.jpg>
 The tortoise and the hare: shortly after this was taken, the hare got run 
over. Loser. Photograph: GK Hart/Vikki Hart/Getty Images 
3 Happy the tortoise, not the hare

Some may think that it’s sad that middle-aged duffers can’t run or walk as 
fast as they could. Not so. Think of it this way. Sure, we could shave half an 
hour off rail journey times by building HS2. But does anybody actually want to 
get to Birmingham faster? Or, once being in Birmingham, to leave any faster 
than normal? In both cases, obviously not. The same is more generally true: one 
of the pleasures of middle age is really appreciating the flowers and car 
crashes that younger people heedlessly race past.

4 You’re older, wiser and don’t get fooled by surveys any more

I don’t mean to suggest that all surveys giving age-related breakdowns of 
self-reported well being are assembled by self-justifying twentysomething 
numpties posing as sober objective scholars, but often it seems that way. 
Consider this possibility. The leading reason for those under 45 in the 
Measuring National Well-Being study reporting that they’re relatively happier 
is because they’re in denial about how unhappy they are. Not just because 
they’re more likely to live with their parents than I was and face a future 
living on a planet that me and my ancestors have despoiled, but also because 
soon they’ll be 45 and, by their own lights, more miserable than they claim to 
be now. Losers.

5 After middle age comes old age. Result!

Middle-aged people like me can look forward with glee to happy old age. 
According to the study, those aged 90 and over reported higher life 
satisfaction and happiness compared with people in their middle years. And that 
fact alone makes middle-aged people happier, thus confounding the survey’s 
dubious results. True, the greater happiness of those over 90 may be because 
they have forgotten what they were miserable about, but that doesn’t matter. 
And the greater happiness of those under 45 may be because they’re too thick to 
appreciate how utterly bleak, miserable and cold the universe is, but again 
that doesn’t matter. The point is the prospect of old age is another reason for 
the middle-aged to be cheerful. As Blackadder put it: “I want to be young and 
wild, and then I want to be middle-aged and rich, and then I want to be old and 
annoy people by pretending I’m deaf.” I can’t wait for that last bit.

6 You can pretend to be a technophobe

The other day, some lovely Danish tourists asked me to take their photo with 
their phone outside the British Museum. I did, then blew on it and shook it 
like a Polaroid picture. They walked off chuckling, no doubt, about the old 
fart who had lost the plot. Which, in a sense, I have. But, still, the joke was 
on them. Which cheered me up no end.

7 You know how to take your pleasures where you can get them

I was at yoga the other night with some very attractive women. “You have a 
lovely bottom,” said the French instructor. I looked round – in a room full of 
lithe youngsters, she was talking to me! I’ve still got it, I thought happily. 
“But,” she added, “would you point it away from my face?” Then I noticed 
everybody else in the room was doing their cat’s pose with their bottoms 
pointing the other way. I was 180 degrees to the room. Did I feel depressed at 
being the Corporal Jones in this scenario? No – I felt cheered by a French lady 
praising my bottom. Albeit ironically.

You’d be really miserable if you didn’t have that well-developed sense of 
irony hardened from years of exposure to life

8 You’re more likely to own your own home

Thanks to the booming property market, the dearth of affordable housing, not 
to mention the spiritual and moral rottenness of late capitalism, young couples 
are finding it hard to get on the property ladder or anywhere to live that 
isn’t a skip on a landfill site. It’s a serious concern. Unlike them, though, 
you have benefited from the foregoing. That’s why you live in a house with a 
heated swimming pool and paddock, on a three and a half acre plot and behave to 
your under-butler with all thedroit de seigneur of Hugh Bonneville, while your 
smart kids, for all their asymmetric fringes and further degrees, can’t afford 
the downpayment on a lockup in Motherwell, the poor darlings. It doesn’t get 
any better than feeling middle-aged schadenfreude for your own kids.

9 Age gives you a well-developed sense of irony

Which is very useful given one of the ramifications of point eight, namely 
that because your kids can’t afford to live elsewhere, they will live with you 
until you or they are dead. The same is true of your parents who, because of 
cutbacks to social care, can no longer live in an old people’s home. You’d be 
really miserable if you didn’t have that well-developed sense of irony hardened 
from years of exposure to the absurdities of modern life.

10 Hair: the unbearable truth

Bad news! I haven’t got much hair on my head. Good news! I’ve got loads 
growing from more interesting places! Indeed, the only reason I got into social 
media was to post pix of my nasal hair on Instagram. Don’t look sniffy: I’m 
trending right now. Albeit under a pseudonym.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gd28%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gd28%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a46943e3504be4d0cf6e75accf01375576909a9%2F0_90_3407_4376%2F3407.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=20%20reasons%20to%20be%20cheerful%20in%20middle%20age&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gd28%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=20+reasons+to+be+cheerful+in+middle+age&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gd28%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a46943e3504be4d0cf6e75accf01375576909a9%2F0_90_3407_4376%2F3407.jpg>
 A middle-aged man cuts some rug to Bruno Mars, possibly. Photograph: 
Photodisc/Getty Images 
11 Dad dancing, so wrong that it feels right

Picture the scene. You’re a dad. You’re dancing. Possibly at your daughter’s 
wedding. To a 25-minute cover version of Kraftwerk’s Das Model. You’re not so 
much a middle-aged man as the stock figure of absurdity in TV ads and sitcoms 
alike. But do we ever get to consider the perspective of the dancing dad? Oh 
no, because of institutionalised misandry and ageism. If we did, we’d know that 
dads in the 45-59 age range are very happy busting their venerable moves, 
particularly if it embarrasses everyone else. All together now:“Im 
Scheinwerferlicht ihr junges Lächeln strahlt/ Sie sieht gut aus, und Schönheit 
wird bezahlt”.

12 Confusion is the spice of middle-aged life

Recently my daughter introduced me to Uptown Funk by Bruno Mars. Superb. But I 
couldn’t help being surprised that the actor who was so excellent as Hitler in 
Downfall looked so young in the video. I was confusing him with Bruno Ganz. 
Idiot. But for a while the world seem so much more interesting.

Aston Villa are going to be relegated. Boo hoo. If I was seven, I’d be 
inconsolable. But I’m not.

13 Nappies and projectile vomiting are so last decade


You’re less likely to get pregnant than when you were younger. Which, given 
the expense of kids, the pain of childbirth and the bleak, uncertain future 
faced by any children one brings into this benighted world, has got to be a 
good thing. Unless your kids have kids and expect you to look after them while 
they go out to work which, if you think about it, would be quite selfish on 
their part.

14 You can meet with Triumph and Disaster and treat those two imposters just 
the same

Aston Villa are going to be relegated. Boo hoo. If I was seven, I’d be 
inconsolable. But I’m not. In the school playground, small boys, smug Arsenal 
and Spurs fans mostly, gather round me frequently to offer faux condolences for 
that looming disaster. No worries, I say. I started supporting Villa in the 
late 1970s when they were in the old Third Division and within five years they 
had won the European Cup, something your teams never have and never will do. 
They have no idea what I’m talking about. Nor do they realise that, as the 
philosopher Spinoza put it:Sub specie aeternitatis, Villa’s relegation’s no big 
deal.

15 Your expectations are, like interest rates, sensibly low

Didn’t win Wimbledon this year? Didn’t even restring your racquet? Don’t worry 
– nobody thinks you can play tennis when you’re over 50 without having a 
cardiac arrest. So Wembley stadium remained un-sold out for your incredible 
debut tour? It’s OK. You don’t have to be a young gun guitar hero. And even 
better - if youwere over 50 and playing huge stadium shows, people would start 
adding up the ages of the people in your band, coming up with three figures and 
giggling (they did it with the Rolling Stones only the other day). So you’re 
avoiding that embarrassment, too!

16 Your sexual peak is still to come

It’s one of society’s great myths that men’s sexual peak is in their teens and 
women’s in the 30s. Take me, for example. What with increased life expectancy, 
all that muesli and the herbal tea I’ve been drinking, I have been able to draw 
a graph that suggests my sexual peak will be on my 59th birthday. It promises 
to be quite a day. Well, let’s not go crazy. Quite a 15 minutes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gd28%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gd28%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1bdf6947b63e36b011218183f6e9b48e722befa6%2F0_0_2311_2666%2F2311.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=20%20reasons%20to%20be%20cheerful%20in%20middle%20age&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gd28%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=20+reasons+to+be+cheerful+in+middle+age&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gd28%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1bdf6947b63e36b011218183f6e9b48e722befa6%2F0_0_2311_2666%2F2311.jpg>
 Sooty: not only guaranteed to cheer you up, but a sturdy ally in the battle 
against impoliteness. Photograph: FremantleMedia Ltd/Rex 
17 You can express yourself eloquently – with puppets

One day, a friend of the journalist Lynne Truss asked a store assistant how 
much an unpriced article cost. “What do you think I am – psychic?” said the 
(probably twentysomething) assistant. Truss became so irked at this sort of 
rudeness typical of modern life that she decided to wear a glove puppet on 
shopping expeditions to vent her spleen. “What’s that, Sooty? Thank you very 
much? What’s that, Sooty? Goodbye?” Her book was calledTalk to the Hand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/nov/07/digestedread.tvandradio>, but it 
could equally have been called Talk to the Glove Puppet. It remains a bible for 
the cantankerous middle-aged sociopath.

18 Eyesight: the unacceptable truth

Bad news! I keep getting on the wrong bus when I forget to wear my glasses. 
Good news! I get to go to more interesting destinations than I used to. I 
haven’t been to Crouch End for ages!

19 You’ve got so much to look forward to

If you are unhappy in middle age, there is some good news: you won’t be for 
long. According to Professor Andrew Steptoe, director of the Institute of 
Epidemiology andHealth <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Care at 
University College London: “If, as we suspect, happiness is beneficial for 
health, it follows that people who are less happy may not survive to such an 
old age. The oldest age categories will therefore include a greater proportion 
of happier people.” So if you do survive into old age, you may well be happier 
because the miserable gits who used to make you unhappy during your middle 
years will have popped off. That’s got to cheer you up, hasn’t it?

20 Life is, thankfully, short

When you were young, there used to be a seemingly endless supply of time. Now, 
at your back, you hear time’s winged chariot. You will never learn Mandarin; 
run a marathon; abseil down the Shard; bench your body weight; describe 
successfully the difference between Einstein’s special and general theories of 
relativity; pass grade seven oboe; or be Madonna’s toy boy. Don’t pretend 
that’s not a relief.
