 My weekend begins when I arrive home on Friday evenings. Last weekend felt 
extremely luxurious since I had just finished New York and London fashion 
weeks, and will be leaving in a day or so for Milan and Paris. I usually spend 
weekend evenings with my 10-year-old son, Sam, and this weekend is no 
exception, although I felt a bit ratty about it as I had to miss both the 50th 
birthday party of a friend and a last-minute invitation to see David Gray.
Instead I spend the time on my computer, finding spring garden bulbs and 
looking for light fittings. Although I look forward tremendously to these 
evenings, Sam and I almost always bicker and, true to form, this time it is 
about who can use the computer. Eventually, I cave in and go and eat some 
Parmesan and talk on the telephone. One caller is my boss, Nicholas Coleridge, 
who is straight off the plane from Bombay, where, he says, the Kate Moss story 
is at least as big as it has been here. I collapse with tiredness and a heavy 
cold into bed incredibly early. At around 2am, as usual, I wake up thinking I 
can hear a burglar. When I get up to investigate, I look out of the window and 
see that the huge moon, reassuringly, is shining like a searchlight on the 
whole garden. No one there.

Saturday morning the sky is clear blue and that same moon is still apparent in 
the sky. I eat breakfast in the garden and make to-do lists for the week ahead, 
while I cook chicken stock, which gives me a sense that life is in order - when 
it's not. I arrange to meet my sister and her sons on the Serpentine bridge for 
a game of cricket. This would have been a marginally better idea had a 
Breakthrough Breast Cancer walk and a Stop The War march not had the same 
rendezvous. When we get home, my boyfriend, David, arrives and we spend part of 
the evening watching a tape of 49Up.

On Sunday, I go to the newly opened Queen's Park Farmers' Market. I buy a 
Romanesco cauliflower because I keep reading about them, some sausages and 
rhubarb and croissants for David and Sam. They eat breakfast while I cook a 
bolognese sauce. For lunch, we drive to Petersham Nurseries where I have 
arranged to meet my friend and colleague Fiona Golfar, her husband, producer 
Robert Fox, and their children for lunch. Skye Gyngell, who has started a 
restaurant there, has written recipes for Vogue. It is an idyllic expedition, 
sitting in the huge shady greenhouse among the plants, eating delicious food 
while the children run around. The place is packed with people like florist 
Stephen Woodham and retailer Joseph. After lunch we stroll along the river 
before driving back to town.

In the evening, I force myself to the gym, Sam develops a cold and David 
worries about a piece he is writing before we all go to bed.

Â· Alexandra Shulman <http://www.theguardian.com/media/alexandra-shulman> is 
editor of Vogue
