
“Man, that dinner was good,” Neil Wampler, a retired woodworker told the 
Guardian after he finished his meal of spaghetti, salad and biscuits at the 
Malheur national wildlife refuge in south-easternOregon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/oregon>. “When I was at the Bundy ranch, 
we lit a fire on a propane stove in an outdoor shed and washed our dishes in a 
ditch. But I could get used to this.”

Related: The Bundy bunch: who are the armed militia in the Oregon standoff? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/06/oregon-standoff-who-are-they> 

Wampler came to Malheur to join Citizens for Constitutional Freedom, a militia 
group that seized the publicly owned wildlife refuge and its buildings this week
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/05/tension-grows-as-militia-prepares-for-fourth-night-in-oregon-standoff>
. He’s one of two dozen heavily armed men that have settled onto the public 
land and are prepared to spend weeks or months there, in defiance of the US 
government. They have lots of propane and power generators to sustain them.

What exactly they want is unclear. They’re mad at the government, that’s for 
sure, specifically for the imprisonment of a pair of local ranchers found 
guilty of arson, but they’ve made no specific demands.

This is a food column, however. So today, on their fifth day holed up 
together, I am concerned with the question of: what are these guys going to 
eat? Since they’ve said they could be there for “months”, I’m thinking canned 
goods are going to be their best option (Hormel’s chili, Campbell’s soup, 
Bumble Bee tuna – that sort of thing).

But not all canned goods are created equal. When I was writing a book that 
very few people would everbuy 
<http://local.safeway.com/or/burns-4469.html?utm_source=G&utm_medium=Maps&utm_campaign=G+Places]>
, I’d often hole up in a small ramshackle cabin in the woods of Catskill, New 
York to get some peace, quiet and undisturbed writing time. I am not a greatchef
 <http://www.theawl.com/2011/08/i-saw-a-bear>, but I would stock up on 
preserved food and alcohol and do all right for myself; in fact, I sort of 
consider myself an “expert” in this field.

So, in the hopes of finding a peaceful resolution to the situation in Oregon, 
I hereby offer my suggestions for the Citizens for Constitutional Freedom 
weekly Safeway shopping list. “Siege Cuisine”, we’ll call it. “Militia Meals.”

Progresso minestrone soup

The soup makers at Progresso have basically perfected the canned minestrone 
soup. It’s far from the homemade version that your buddy Vinny’s grandma makes 
every spring (and drizzles some fresh pesto sauce on before serving.) But it 
works. Progresso’s minestrone has almost become a distinct category. Sort of 
like how a McDonald’s hamburger doesn’t taste like any other hamburger, but 
hits the spot every time you eat one. It’s own special spot. Hopefully, you 
don’t eat one too often.

Campbell’s tomato soup

Same, basically, as above. And I imagine the militia members are all big 
Warhol fans, right?

Goya beans

For beans, for me, the choice is Goya (“Oh-boya!” as I have been trained by 
years of television commercials to explain every single time I hear the name ). 
The classic blue cans with that sort-of art-deco typesetting says it all 
doesn’t it? You got your pintos, your garbanzos, your small reds, your dark 
kidneys. Butter beans: so large and hearty, so underappreciated! A bowl of 
butter beans with a little olive oil and some salt: there’s a meal for you 
right there, my friend!

Militia men: I know you guys have a bent towards conspiracy theories. I assure 
you that this recommendation – that a group of two-dozen large men eats lots of 
beans night after night in a cramped, poorly-ventilated bunkhouse – does not 
come in cahoots with the feds. Also, I am far too mature to include a Blazing 
Saddles-stylefart joke <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FXHkFZ-nG4Y> here in my 
very serious food-and-politics column.

Canned tomatoes

There is only one option here, fellas. Cento’s certified Italian plum tomatoes 
are indeed “distinct in flavor”, like it says on the label. “These Cento San 
Marzano tomatoes are grown in the Agro Sarnese Nocerino region of Italy, 
renowned for its especially fruitful soil as a result of its proximity to Mount 
Vesuvius.” Mount Vesuvius! That’s a VOLCANO!

Morton’s salt

Salt is salt, right? (Unless you’re into importing pink crystals from the 
Himalayas 
<https://www.mountainroseherbs.com/products/himalayan-pink-salt/profile> or the 
“Alean <http://www.saltworks.us/alaea.html#.Vo07uRGPKkg>” kind from Hawaii that 
has the clay in it.) So again, go with the classic. TheMorton’s 
<https://img2.fastenal.com/productimages/MortonSalt_Logo.jpg’]> salt lady is 
one of the iconic images in American food-product marketing history (second 
only, perhaps, to Miller High Life’s splendiferousmadam-on-the-moon 
<https://msbeerlove.files.wordpress.com/2013/01/miller-high-life-lady-in-red.jpg>
). And hey, it can get a certain type of lonely out there in the woods, a bunch 
of dudes cooped-up for days, weeks, months …

Martin’s Potato rolls

For venison sandwiches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/may/24/grill-master-proper-technique-barbecue-meat-properly]>
, there is no substitute.

•••

Suppertime at Malheur rating: 3 stars

 Rating system: from best to worst 

5 stars: Dinner at home, with guns locked away safely, while not occupying a 
federal wildfire preserve

4 stars: Dinner at a wildlife preserve, but with all the guns dumped in the 
bottom of the sea like ol’Ronnie Van Zandt 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mWBoeY0AAec> recommended. (Surely we can find 
a little common ground over the mighty Lynyrd Skynyrd, right?)

3 stars: canned food

2 stars: raisins

1 star: Grape Flavor-Aid <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6wwrTYpjs_o]> and 
cyanide
