
With lava lamps, blow-up furniture and psychedelic prints, the cultural 
revolution of the 1960s made as much of an impact on the home as it did on 
music and fashion. The avant-garde treated their houses as blank canvases and 
created interiors that were as individual as they were. Strangely, the magazine 
that best documented this aspect of the 1960s was better known for its features 
on stately piles and envy-inducing gardens. Yet, asHouse & Garden’s archive 
shows, it had unprecedented levels of access into the homes of the people who 
were making waves in all walks of life – from pop stars to politicians.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h28m%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h28m%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F984b76673b6b7827d2b569251e4695fd1286ace1%2F0_0_2906_3366%2F2906.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Feeling%20groovy%3A%20the%201960s%20home&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h28m%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Feeling+groovy%3A+the+1960s+home&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h28m%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F984b76673b6b7827d2b569251e4695fd1286ace1%2F0_0_2906_3366%2F2906.jpg>
A young David Hockney <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/hockney> 
livened up his bedsit studio by cutting out a number of cartoon-like trees from 
plywood and painting them bright green.Mary Quant 
<http://www.theguardian.com/profile/mary-quant>’s London dining room had a 
black ceiling and metallic PVC shutters.David Bailey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/david-bailey>’s house in Primrose 
Hill was crammed with souvenirs of his travels and doubled up as his studio. 
Barbara Hutton bought seven Moroccan souks and knocked them together to create 
a sumptuous hideaway of palatial proportions. The artistPeter Blake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/peter-blake>, shortly after he 
designed theSgt Pepper album cover for the Beatles, was pictured with his 
nightie-clad wife in their bedroom, surrounded by hundred of stuffed toys. From 
the old establishment to a new breed of celebrities, they all invitedHouse & 
Gardeninto their homes to record the backdrops to their daily lives.

Some of these features capture their owners at crucial moments. For example, 
John Profumo’s house was pictured in the magazine in February 1961. The 
lighthearted photograph of him and his actor wife, Valerie Hobson, as they 
painted the walls of their sitting room, gives no indication of the scandal 
that was to come: the Profumo Affair occurred just a couple of months after the 
couple’s house was featured inHouse & Garden.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h28m%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h28m%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42ed12ec9dc746cc6aaa1f63db841388705e8011%2F0_261_4791_2875%2F4791.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Feeling%20groovy%3A%20the%201960s%20home&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h28m%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Feeling+groovy%3A+the+1960s+home&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h28m%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42ed12ec9dc746cc6aaa1f63db841388705e8011%2F0_261_4791_2875%2F4791.jpg>
 Making a splash: a Sixties bathroom with his ’n’ hers bathtubs. Photograph: 
John Wingrove/The Condé Nast Publications Ltd. 
It wasn’t just about the famous names. Plenty of the interiors in Sixties House
were chosen for their own merits. Seen collectively, they represent a time 
capsule of how we lived at a given moment: when Brutalist architecture was 
brand new and when “mid-century modern” appeared the first time round, as a 
wave of Scandinavian furniture, much of it designed in the 1950s, finally 
became relatively easy to buy in the UK.

As air travel became more popular, interior decorators increasingly looked 
abroad for inspiration, particularly to design-conscious countries such as 
Sweden, Denmark, Italy and the United States. Morocco also had an influence, as 
it became a popular destination on the hippy trail. Towards the end of the 
decade, interior design became progressively bolder and more psychedelic. 
Unlike the 1950s, which had a far more unified aesthetic, the 1960s saw a 
proliferation of different decorative styles emerge at the same time.

International trends such as Pop Art were translated into domestic settings, 
and interior fashions became more accessible and affordable. The founding of 
Habitat by Terence Conran in 1964 created a new benchmark for how furniture was 
sold, with showrooms where customers could see items styled in room sets, 
rather than having to pick out their furniture from catalogues. The rising 
generation of baby-boomers provided a willing market for products that had fun, 
light-hearted appeal, such as inflatable bubble chairs made out of brightly 
coloured PVC. In the same way that Pop Art embraced consumer culture, design 
also harnessed that sense of immediacy. It celebrated the new and, at times, 
the throwaway – theflat-packed cardboard chairs designed by Peter Murdoch 
<http://collections.vam.ac.uk/item/O21619/chair-thing-chair-murdoch-peter/>, 
for example, that had an estimated lifespan of just a couple of months.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h28m%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h28m%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e031acdc3f58d21a7500c1b6f53ecbc91db60b5%2F0_29_3298_1979%2F3298.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Feeling%20groovy%3A%20the%201960s%20home&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h28m%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Feeling+groovy%3A+the+1960s+home&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h28m%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e031acdc3f58d21a7500c1b6f53ecbc91db60b5%2F0_29_3298_1979%2F3298.jpg>
 Glossing over: John Profumo and his wife at home in 1961, just weeks before 
the famous scandal. Photograph: Ray Williams/The Condé Nast Publications Ltd. 
House & Garden even attempted to kick-start the odd craze of its own. Perhaps 
the best moment was a shoot for the November 1969 issue, when the decoration 
editor persuaded the in-house photographer to turn his hand to carpentry. 
Together, they created what they proclaimed would be “the 1970 answer to the 
four-poster bed” – with a madly oversized, curved wooden headboard that looked 
as if it would squash anyone silly enough to lie down underneath it.

Unsurprisingly, this trend never took off, but the DIY industry and freedom to 
experiment seemed to characterise many people’s attitude to decoration during 
the 1960s. You might want to leave the putty-toned lino and the 
orange-and-brown wallpaper to posterity. But in terms of bold ideas, clever 
colour combinations and a refusal to conform, there can be few better eras from 
which to draw inspiration.

Sixties House: Interiors, design and style from the 1960s 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/375406/> by Catriona 
Gray (£30, Conran Octopus) is out on 3 March. To buy a copy for £24, go to
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/375406/>
