
Sometimes organisations need to borrow money in order to grow or adapt to 
changing circumstances – and charities are no exception.

Maybe a charity needs to borrow money to buy its premises, reduce its rent and 
make its cashflow easier. Or perhaps new operating conditions require an 
improved finance or IT system which can only be paid for in the short term 
through borrowing.

Trustees and charity leaders also need to consider what kinds of borrowing are 
most appropriate. As Reema Mathur wrote inan article about borrowing 
<http://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2013/jul/18/charities-borrow-money>
 earlier this year, these can include overdraft facilities, term loans, and 
revolving credit facilities, plus social finance and social investment.

This live Q&A will look at:

• Common mistakes made by charities when borrowing money.

• Different forms of borrowing available.

• What lenders look for when considering applications from charities.

If you'd like to be on the expert panel, please contact Helen Crane 
<mailto:helen.crane.freelance@theguardian.com>, and if you'd like to leave a 
question, please email or write in the comments section below.

Expert panel

Ian Mansfield, Charities Aid Foundation <https://www.cafonline.org/>

Ian is senior client relations manager at Charities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/charities> Aid Foundation, managing a team 
of specialists dealing with both lending and investments. His approach to 
lending is built on 26 years experience in relationship banking having 
previously worked in the retail banking sector dealing with both SMEs and 
charitable organisations.

Twitter: @cafonline <https://twitter.com/cafonline>

David Hopkins, Charities Aid Foundation <https://www.cafonline.org/>

David heads up the Charities Aid Foundation's charities and grant making 
solutions team. He has over 15 years experience in the not for profit sector 
and has direct experience of managing grant making programmes in excess of £12m 
annually.

His approach is rooted in hands-on experience ranging from capacity building 
with grassroots community organisations to strategy development driving change 
within the public sector. Having spent more than three years working for a 
charity sector umbrella body he has advised and consulted across a wide range 
of areas including charity governance and registration; exit planning; 
organisational, project and policy development; grant management; and 
monitoring and evaluation.

Twitter: @cafonline <https://twitter.com/cafonline>

Helena Wilkinson, Price Bailey <http://www.pricebailey.co.uk/>

Helena is a partner specialising in advising not-for-profit organisations. She 
has commercial and practical experience gained from her time as a finance 
director, as well as an auditor. She has particular knowledge of the challenges 
and conflicts faced by a director of finance.

Twitter: @Price_Bailey <https://twitter.com/Price_Bailey>

David McHattie, Barclays 
<http://www.barclays.co.uk/PersonalBanking/P1242557947640>

David has over 30 years' experience of international and corporate banking 
with Barclays. He leads a team of nationwide Relationship Directors, 
responsible for providing banking services to the charities sector delivering a 
range of solutions from bank debt and capital markets through to day to day 
banking and deposits

Twitter: @BarCorp_News <https://twitter.com/BarCorp_News>

Reema Mathur, Stone King <http://www.stoneking.co.uk/>

Reema is an associate solicitor in the Charity & Social Enterprise team at 
Stone King. She acts for charities, CICs and social enterprises, ranging from 
start-ups to historic and international charities. She is experienced in 
charity registrations, contentious and non-contentious governance and 
constitutional issues, arrangements between charities and commercial partners, 
structural re-organisations, funding and trading issues as well as mergers and 
collaborative working.

Reema trained and practised for a number of years at a magic circle firm, 
before specialising in charity law. Her corporate and banking experience 
provides a commercial underpinning to her understanding of the sector.

Twitter: @StoneKingLLP <https://twitter.com/StoneKingLLP>

Nigel Morrison, Grant Thornton UK LLP <http://www.grant-thornton.co.uk/>

Nigel is a partner in the firm's advisory team. He specialises in advising 
organisations, businesses and lenders where financial pressures are evident. In 
recent years he has worked with a number of UK charities and their funders 
covering operational and financial restructuring, mergers and acquisitions and 
formal insolvencies, with particular experience of the specific issues that 
arise when charities are facing financial difficulties.

Twitter: @GrantThorntonUK <https://twitter.com/GrantThorntonUK>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. To join the voluntary 
sector network <http://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network>, click here
 <https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/>.
