
When the director of the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Kanpur, a top 
university in India, discovered that it had ranked fifth for engineering in the 
country, he addressed students in the gymkhana. Fifth place, for the 
illustrious institute’s director, was simply not good enough. Students, staff 
and administration, he said, would have to pull together and make sure that the 
university rose up the ranking next year.

Related: US universities top world rankings in three-quarters of subjects 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/mar/22/us-universities-top-world-rankings-in-three-quarters-of-subjects>

 For the past week, deans and vice-chancellors at universities across India 
have been holding similar meetings with faculty members and students to discuss 
the country’s first national league tables, released by the Indian government 
last week.

 Institutions that ranked highly have already put out advertisements and local 
newspapers are celebrating their towns’ top colleges. Meanwhile, a new 
mini-industry of consultants, who will work with universities to improve their 
rankings, is approaching administration staff.

 “This is going to have a huge impact on admissions,” says Dheeraj Sanghi, 
dean of academic affairs at Indraprastha Institute of Information Technology in 
Delhi. “We are looking very carefully at why we were ranked 53rd when we should 
be much higher.”

 For Sanghi, the new league tables are not a fair indicator of a university’s 
performance.

“For a government to get into this ranking business is very dangerous. 
Students and parents are going to look at these ratings as sacrosanct, and they 
shouldn’t. The rankings only consider certain parameters, such as 
faculty-to-student ratio, but the overall quality of teaching that a student is 
getting is very difficult to measure.”

Related: UK universities – it's time to go to India 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2014/feb/14/uk-universities-india-british-council-report>

 The new national league tables were released by the National Institute 
Ranking Framework, an organisation set up by prime minister Narendra Modi’s 
government last year in an effort to improve the prestige of Indian 
universities and increase accountability to students.

 Entrance examinations in the country are fiercely competitive, with top 
universities demanding exam scores of 100% for some courses, some with an 
acceptance rate of less than 2%. Yet, for years, Indian universities have 
received little recognition in international league tables. In thelatest QS 
rankings 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/ng-interactive/2015/sep/15/top-200-universities-in-the-world-the-table>
, only three of India’s 744 recognised universities made the top 200. The 
highest-ranked Indian university was the prestigious Indian Institute of 
Science Bangalore, which attracts some of India’s most brilliant academic 
minds, yet was ranked a humble 147th among universities worldwide. 

Growing pains

 Part of the problem is that India’s burgeoning academic institutions are 
relatively new compared to their foreign counterparts. University enrolment in 
India experienced a major boom from the late 1990s. Economic reforms at the 
beginning of the decade produced a new Indian middle class with growing 
aspirations. From 2000-11, student enrolment doubled from8.4 million 
<http://www.ey.com/Publication/vwLUAssets/Private_sector_participation_in_Indian_higher_education/$FILE/Private_sector_participation_in_Indian_higher_education.pdf>
 (pdf) to17 million <http://www.usief.org.in/India-Factsheet.aspx> and 
thousands of colleges and universities sprung up to meet demand.

Although more Indians are completing higher education than ever before, there 
is an increasing perception that academic standards are declining. Some 
students and academics blame this on the government’s decision in 2008 to 
reserve more seats for India’s underprivileged lower castes; students who take 
up reservation quotas have to meet lower academic requirements. This, according 
to critics, has led to an overall decline in university standards.

 Second-year maths student, Harshisht Bisht, explains that universities in 
India face chronic underfunding, as well as low faculty-to-student ratios and 
ever-increasing class sizes. “Indian universities don’t generate money from 
alumni donations and government funds like foreign universities,” he says.

Related: International students: where do they go to study? – interactive 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/ng-interactive/2014/jul/17/international-students-where-do-they-go-to-study-interactive>

 According to a recent Unesco report 
<http://www.uis.unesco.org/Education/Pages/international-student-flow-viz.aspx>
, India loses 181,872 students to foreign universities every year, particularly 
in the US and Australia.

 Shivam Mishra, a second-year student at IIT Kanpur, believes the new ranking 
system will force university administrations to improve. “It will make the 
university more accountable,” he explains. “It means universities are going to 
listen more if [students] say something is a big problem. I think there will be 
great development in the near future.”

 Bharat Kashyap, 19, is spending aabout 10 hours a day studying for his exams 
in May, so he can get into his first choice university, IIT Delhi. “Its been 
ranked fourth,” he says. “It’s strange, because it is considered to be the 
best.”

 Kashyap says he won’t take the new league tables too seriously because he 
doesn’t believe the ranks reflect the universities’ reputations. “There are a 
lot of new colleges included in the top 10, which you wouldn’t expect. The 
rankings are skewed, they don’t reflect what students think.

 He says most students applying to universities this year are unlikely to make 
decisions based on the new league tables.

 “There’s currently a long-established word-of-mouth system that will trump 
any ranking system,” he says.

 “The system is still new,” says Sanghi, “so there are some teething problems. 
But the system is here to stay and, over time, it should get better.”

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com

