
The advertising watchdog is to crack down on the way broadband prices are 
marketed – but will not be tightening rules on the contentious issue of how top 
speeds are advertised.

The Advertising Standards Authority <http://www.theguardian.com/media/asa> is 
to force companies including Sky, BT, Virgin Media, TalkTalk, EE, 3 and O2 to 
only be able to advertise a single-figure monthly cost for their broadband 
packages.

Currently, consumers are not provided with an “all in” costs figure, with line 
rental typically stated separately and extras such as installation fees only 
revealed in the small print.

The ASA was moved to order more simplified broadband pricing ads after 
research found that more than one in five consumers could not work out the 
correct monthly priceeven after viewing a TV ad twice 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/21/ad-watchdog-cracks-down-misleading-broadband-ads>
.


The new rules, which come into force on 31 October, include providing an 
all-inclusive monthly price, giving more prominence to contract lengths and 
costs after any discount offer has expired.

TalkTalk pre-empted the ASA’s rule change by announcing on Tuesday that it 
would become the first major broadband provider to start running ads with 
“all-in” pricing.

Related: Broadband ad rules are 'complete and utter joke', says culture 
minister 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/14/broadband-speed-ads-culture-minister-ed-vaizey>

The company has already rolled-out an all-in monthly price for those trialling 
its ultra fibre optic service in York.

Trisita Harrison, TalkTalk’s consumer managing director, said that the luring 
consumers with cheap-looking, but complicated, offers is a “bad habit” that the 
industry has all been guilty of exploiting.

“As long as line rental and broadband are priced separately, the temptation to 
advertise deals in this way will always be there,” said Harrison. “But it’s 
time for providers be honest about this – it’s a bad habit we have all been 
guilty of, it doesn’t serve customers well and it’s time it stopped.”

While the pricing clarity will be welcomed by consumer groups many critics 
including Virgin Media, which offers superfast broadband through its cable 
network, argue that the broadband advertising rulesshould be extended to cover 
claims about speed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/22/virgin-media-asks-asa-to-crack-down-on-false-broadband-speed-claims>
.

Under the current ASA rules companies are allowed to advertise their top 
speeds even if they are only available to 10% of customers.

Last month, culture minister Ed Vaizey called the laxity of the rules 
“misleading” and a“complete and utter joke” 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/14/broadband-speed-ads-culture-minister-ed-vaizey>
 and has called for them to be tightened.

“Our position on broadband speed claims in ads is based on extensive work 
undertaken in recent years, including a full public consultation on new 
guidance,” said a spokeswoman for the ASA. “We are an independent, 
evidence-based regulator and that underpins our regulation. We are, however, 
aware of concerns about this issue and we are carefully considering if there is 
further work we can do on the matter.”

Separately, on Wednesday the ASA banned a series of three TV ads promoting 
BT’s Infinity broadband service for making misleading claims that it provides 
more responsive online gaming and smoother video than Virgin Media, and faster 
download speeds than Sky.

