
Every month or two, the media offers up a new tale of a sad-looking wealthy 
couple, explaining how they’re living hand-to-mouth or planningto leave the 
country for a cheaper life 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/education/secondaryeducation/12021947/Private-school-fees-have-priced-us-out-of-Britain-were-moving-to-Denmark.html>
: the spiralling school fees, second home and twice-annual ski trips to St 
Moritz have simply become too much. This is the journalistic equivalent of 
lion-feeding time at the zoo, with the unsuspecting couple as hunks of meat. 
It’s a splendid opportunity for materially fortunate people – like me, and 
maybe you – to cackle at the un-selfawareness of the extremely fortunate, which 
feels better than laughing at the poor. But I still feel guilty. Because anyone 
who knows anything about psychology knows how swiftly we adapt: before we know 
it, things that were once luxuries have become non-negotiable. Cackle all you 
like, but there is probably no number of ski trips or holiday homes that can’t 
start to feel impossible to give up.

And human psychology is even more annoying than that: you can be entirely 
aware that your luxuries are luxuries, butstill make yourself crazy trying to 
preserve them. Ina recent New Yorker essay 
<http://www.newyorker.com/business/currency/the-madness-of-airline-elite-status>
, the investment manager Gary Sernovitz explained the torment of belonging to 
Global Services, the highest frequent-flyer category on United Airlines, with 
perks including first-class upgrades, no security queues and limousine transfer 
between terminals. He diagnosed himself with “Global Services maintenance 
anxiety disorder” – a compulsive effort not to lose his status, made worse by 
United’s refusal to reveal the basis on which it’s awarded. Among the symptoms: 
otherwise pointless “mileage runs”, flights made solely to gain the favour of 
the airline gods. Why not just relax and, if you lose your status, so be it? 
Apparently, that’s not an option.

This psychological mechanism, “hedonic adaptation” 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hedonic_treadmill>, is famous, yet I don’t think 
we’ve begun to appreciate the role it plays in life – how many of our choices, 
large and small, are made on the basis of fundamentally misjudging what we 
couldn’t live without. Next time you’re laughing at the squeezed super-rich, 
consider your own life, which doubtless includes plenty of things you don’t 
technically need in order to live. Would it hurt to give them up? Obviously; 
and there’s no reason to assume it’s different higher up the ladder.

Related: Can you make your own happiness? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/05/can-you-make-your-own-happiness>

But the saving grace, which people in the grip of hedonic adaptation never 
remember, is that it works in the other direction. Make a sacrifice in your 
quality of life, and the chances are you’ll quickly forget what you’re missing. 
Asthe psychologist Adam Alter notes 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/posteverything/wp/2016/03/02/you-may-think-youll-move-if-trump-wins-but-heres-why-you-wont-really-do-it/>
, that’s one reason most of the people threatening to leave the US if Donald 
Trump is elected won’t do so: we exaggerate the intensity and duration of the 
pain we’ll feel if a dreaded prospect comes to pass. That’s useful to remember 
when contemplating a life-choice that might threaten your material comfort: 
you’re almost certainly ascribing too much weight to that downside. It probably 
also follows that, living in New York, I should be less panicked by the thought 
of a Trump presidency. But I’m still working on that one.

oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com <mailto:oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com>
