
The big picture

A boost for Bremain (sorry, I fell for the alliteration) this morning, with 
news that Tory MP DrSarah Wollaston, previously a Brexit backer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/10/influential-backbencher-delivers-blow-to-david-cameron-by-backing-brexit>
, has now saidshe will vote for Britain to stay in the EU 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/09/dr-sarah-wollaston-defects-vote-leave-remain-campaign>
. The push that became a shove was, the former GP says, the claim by Vote Leave 
that quitting would free up £350m a week for the NHS – something she says 
“simply isn’t true”:

For someone like me who has long campaigned for open and honest data in public 
life I could not have set foot on a battle bus that has at the heart of its 
campaign a figure that I know to be untrue.

If you’re in a position where you can’t hand out a Vote Leave leaflet, you 
can’t be campaigning for that organisation.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzv8%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzv8%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6d971dcb39110c79224ba8556969e1e6afc56a0%2F1312_161_3054_1833%2F3054.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%20morning%20briefing%3A%20a%20defector%2C%20a%20debate%20and%20a%20new%20midnight%20deadline&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzv8%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EU+referendum+morning+briefing%3A+a+defector%2C+a+debate+and+a+new+midnight+deadline&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzv8%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6d971dcb39110c79224ba8556969e1e6afc56a0%2F1312_161_3054_1833%2F3054.jpg>
 Sarah Wollaston said she could not campaign for Vote Leave. Photograph: Martin 
Godwin for the Guardian 
In an article for the Times (apparently not yet on the website but see it here 
<https://twitter.com/suttonnick/status/740656888401039360>), Wollaston adds:

 The Leave campaign has redrawn its battle lines around immigration for the 
final weeks of the campaign and looks increasingly indistinguishable from Ukip.


Does the defection of one MP matter much? David Cameron is certainly pleased 
<https://twitter.com/David_Cameron/status/740656927462596609>. Responses from 
the leave side range fromcritical 
<https://twitter.com/montie/status/740664088427167744> to dismissive 
<https://twitter.com/oflynnmep/status/740630480110915585> to conspiracy theorist
 <https://twitter.com/RaheemKassam/status/740661104511209472>. Perhaps, though, 
it suggests – as the c12% of undecided voters might confirm – there are people 
who have been waiting to hear the arguments before they settle in a camp. The 
very idea!
— Sarah Wollaston MP (@sarahwollaston) June 8, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/sarahwollaston/status/740675339609870336> 
Of course I understand that politicians are not allowed to change their minds 
but real people do
 <https://twitter.com/sarahwollaston/status/740675339609870336> 
Don’t expect any floor-crossing this evening as ITV hosts a referendum debate 
that is actually a debate 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/12/robert-peston-vote-leave-mad-slur-eu-referendum-debate>
 featuring, for remain, Scottish first ministerNicola Sturgeon, Tory energy 
secretaryAmber Rudd and Labour’s shadow business secretary Angela Eagle; and 
for leave, ConservativesBoris Johnson and energy minister Andrea Leadsom, and 
Labour’sGisela Stuart. ITV’s Julie Etchingham moderates again.

Related: EU referendum live: Tory MP defects to remain over Vote Leave's 
'untrue' NHS claims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/09/eu-referendum-live-wollaston-remain-vote-leave-sturgeon-johnson>

Expect: questions on a second Scottish referendum 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/08/david-cameron-raises-risk-scotland-leaving-uk-after-brexit>
; disputes over that £350m figure; Tory leadership speculation; some sort of 
joke from Johnson about being the only man on the stage as if that isn’t 
(reversed) absolutely the normal state of affairs for every single woman in 
politics.

And after the debate, please don’t all rush at once to register to vote before 
the all-new midnight Thursday deadline. MPs will vote earlier in the day to 
allow the 48-hour extension to the registration deadline, following thecrashing 
of the official website 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/08/jeremy-corbyn-calls-eu-referendum-voter-deadline-extension>
 as the original cut-off point approached on Tuesday night.

Pro-Brexit Tory MP Bernard Jenkin and Leave.EU funder Arron Banks have both 
warned that that if the result of the referendum were to be close, the decision 
to extend the deadline could be challenged by a judicial review. But the 
Electoral Commission said it supported the extension.

You should also know:

 * Tony Blair and John Major will campaign together today in Northern Ireland. 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-eu-referendum-36486016> 
 * George Osborne says voting for Brexit means embracing Nigel Farage’s 
divisive vision. 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/08/voting-to-leave-the-eu-means-embracing-farages-mean-and-divisive-vision-of-uk>
 * Uncertainty over the EU referendum has driven the biggest fall in the 
number of 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/09/eu-referendum-uk-housing-market-house-buyers-decline-inquiries>
people trying to buy a property since the financial crisis. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/09/eu-referendum-uk-housing-market-house-buyers-decline-inquiries>
 * Citigroup warns staff of Brexit jobs risk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/08/citigroup-warns-staff-brexit-jobs-risk-eu-referendum-london-belfast>
, while Brexit supporterLord Bamford, chairman of JCB, writes to his 6,000 
employees to say there is “very little to fear” from leaving the EU 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/news/brexit-boost-as-business-billionaire-votes-to-leave-dlfm5lqb5>
. 
 * Oxford University’s Migration Observatory says the introduction of an 
Australian-style points-based immigration system will not guarantee that net 
migration will be reduced to the tens of thousands. 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/09/no-guarantee-points-based-system-reduce-net-migration-experts-warn>
Poll position

No fresh polls today. Enjoy the silence.

Diary

 * At 8.15am, Labour’s Andy Burnham gives a speech in Manchester warning that 
the referendum should not be seen as a single issue protest vote. 
 * At 9am London mayor Sadiq Khan, Alan Johnson, Yvette Cooper and Harriet 
Harman roll up for a Labour In event at the Shard. 
 * Former prime ministers Tony Blair and John Major head to Northern Ireland; 
chancellorGeorge Osborne is in Scotland. 
 * From 8pm to 10pm, it’s the ITV referendum debate: Boris Johnson and Nicola 
Sturgeon are the headliners.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzv8%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzv8%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F45b77565ab69f172396740812898d904d5387c67%2F0_55_4560_3052%2F4560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%20morning%20briefing%3A%20a%20defector%2C%20a%20debate%20and%20a%20new%20midnight%20deadline&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzv8%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EU+referendum+morning+briefing%3A+a+defector%2C+a+debate+and+a+new+midnight+deadline&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzv8%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F45b77565ab69f172396740812898d904d5387c67%2F0_55_4560_3052%2F4560.jpg>
 Boris Johnson on the EU referendum campaign tour. Photograph: Andrew Parsons/PA
 * At 8.30pm, the Oxford Union hosts a referendum debate with Michael Howard, 
Michael Heseltine, Gisela Stuart, Alex Salmond and Yvette Cooper (again). 
 * At 10.30pm Question Time on BBC1 has Eddie Izzard, Nigel Farage, Hilary Benn
,Chris Grayling and Allison Pearson on the panel.

 * And at midnight – have I mentioned this? – voting registration CLOSES. 
Read these

Nicholas Vinocur and Tara Palmeri in Politico 
<http://www.politico.eu/article/france-plan-for-a-bloody-brexit-eu-referendum-consequences-europe-hollande-david-cameron/>
 say France will not play nicely in the event that Britain votes to leave the 
EU:

The French push is focused on convincing the remaining EU countries to unwind 
all treaties and agreements binding the UK to the bloc quickly, so the divorce 
is sealed by withdrawing subsidies, re-evaluating trade relationships sector by 
sector, denying British supervisory bodies EU recognition in areas like 
financial services, and establishing new immigration rules, to name just a few 
levers …

France would not be acting out of spite, officials said, and has no interest 
in setting off a tit-for-tat war of punitive measures. But as a core EU member, 
sources said it had a responsibility to strengthen the bloc and deprive anti-EU 
parties – not justthe FN 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/14/france-french-prime-minister-promises-tackle-danger-front-national>
 but also the likes of Geert Wilders’ Party for Freedom in the Netherlands – of 
a chance to use Britain as a shining example of what life can be after the 
European Union.

The Spectator 
<http://www.spectator.co.uk/2016/06/the-six-best-reasons-to-vote-in/> pits 
Matthew Parris and Daniel Hannan against each other to give their best reasons 
to vote In or Out (I’m going to let readers assume which of them argues which 
case). A taster:

 Europe has become a proxy for people’s sense of powerlessness.


Ask yourself, though, who the ‘we’ are who would be ‘taking back control’. The 
‘we’ used by Brexiteers is menacingly unspecific. Some of the ‘we’ want much 
less regulation, some want much more, some want different. The collective ‘we’ 
can only survive the first few yards of this journey – from now until 24 June. 
After any decision to leave, that sense of purpose would fragment.

‘Europe’ has soaked up for us a million gripes about the modern world: a proxy 
and convenient target for a national irritability which, were Europe to be 
removed, would not go away.

Baffling claim of the day

The Telegraph leads today 
<https://twitter.com/suttonnick/status/740646581725220864> with the news that 
“Thatcher minister quits Tories in Brexit row”. The minister isSir John Nott, 
the row is that he says he won’t renew his party membership until Cameron is 
replaced as leader, and the baffling bit is thatthe article says 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/06/08/margaret-thatchers-defence-secretary-sir-john-nott-suspends-tory/>
 Nott “is understood to have voted for Ukip in European elections” in 2014 
anyway.

Celebrity endorsement of the day

Former US president and potential First Dude-in-waiting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2015/nov/06/president-hillary-clinton-bill-first-dude-jimmy-kimmel-video>
Bill Clinton, writing in the New Statesman (again, apparently not online yet; 
the morning briefing is just too darned ahead of itself), cites the “future 
properity and peace” of Northern Ireland as a reason to vote remain:

 Britain is a leading representative of Europe throughout the world … I hope 
you will stay.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzv8%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzv8%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7da1603cc40a495f990c509f05a486651dcc9933%2F0_0_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%20morning%20briefing%3A%20a%20defector%2C%20a%20debate%20and%20a%20new%20midnight%20deadline&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzv8%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EU+referendum+morning+briefing%3A+a+defector%2C+a+debate+and+a+new+midnight+deadline&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzv8%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7da1603cc40a495f990c509f05a486651dcc9933%2F0_0_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Bill Clinton, with freshly minted Democratic presidential candidate Hillary 
Clinton. 
The archbishop of York, John Sentamu, has come to the same conclusion, writing 
in the Telegraph today 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/06/08/our-commitments-to-our-european-partners-cannot-be-lightly-cast/>
:

Not all decisions should be made purely on the basis of ‘What’s in it for us?’ 
It is also significant, therefore, that a far higher percentage of young people 
wish to stay in the EU than older people; it is they, principally, who will 
have to live with the consequences of the decision that we take on June 23.


The day in a tweet
— Michael Deacon (@MichaelPDeacon) June 8, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/MichaelPDeacon/status/740679249342959616> 
Remain supporters may be gloating about the Sarah Wollaston defection now, but 
just you wait till Grassroots Out unveil Cameron tomorrow
 <https://twitter.com/MichaelPDeacon/status/740679249342959616> 
If today were a book ...

It would be Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil. Or Tom’s Midnight Garden. 
Or Midnight Express. Anything with midnight in it, basically. MIDNIGHT. Got 
that?

And another thing

Would you like to wake up to this briefing in your inbox every weekday? Sign up
here 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/31/eu-referendum-morning-briefing-sign-up>
!
