
The BBC has turned to Gary Barlow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gary-barlow> in its hunt for the next 
Saturday night hit as he attempts to find a new Take That to take part in a 
Mamma Mia-style stage musical.


Let It Shine will be presented by Graham Norton and The Great British Bake 
Off’s Mel Giedroyc.

With distinct echoes of BBC1’s Andrew Lloyd Webber shows such as I’d Do 
Anything – also fronted by Norton – the new show will put together a group to 
join new stage show The Band, featuring the music ofTake That 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/take-that>.

The musical has been created in association with Barlow and his Take That 
bandmates Mark Owen and Howard Donald.

Related: BBC's Countryfile Diaries to be rolled out across the seasons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/16/bbcs-countryfile-diaries-to-be-rolled-out-across-the-seasons>

The BBC will hope it will help fill the hole left by another of its Saturday 
night talent shows, The Voice,which it lost to ITV 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/nov/23/itv-the-voice-simon-cowell-x-factor>
.

BBC1 has struggled to come up with new Saturday entertainment formats 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/08/bbc1-ratings-war-the-voice-final-prized-apart-tumble>
, with flops includingcelebrity gymnastics show Tumble 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/aug/11/bbc1-tumble-fell-flat-on-its-face>
 and big-budget adventure gameshowPrized Apart 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/aug/04/bbc-emma-willis-prized-apart-axed>
.

Culture secretary John Whittingdale has criticised BBC1 for not being 
distinctive enough 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/10/distinctive-bbc-the-night-manager-john-whittingdale>
. It remains to be seen if the Barlow show will pass this test.

It is at least not a bought-in format, like The Voice, which prompted much 
criticism of the BBC by MPs, and will be made in-house byBBC 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Studios.

It may also attract some of the criticism levelled at Lloyd Webber’s Saturday 
night shows forBBC1 <http://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc1>, which also 
included Any Dream Will Do and Over The Rainbow.

Critics said the BBC was serving Lloyd Webber’s commercial interests by 
devoting a sizeable chunk of its Saturday night schedule to a programme about 
one of his shows.

Actor and theatre director Kevin Spacey was among the most prominent critics, 
saying the Lloyd Webber shows unfairly distorted the West End theatre market.

Related: Kevin Spacey criticises 'unfair' BBC talent shows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/mar/31/bbc.television2> 

“I felt that was essentially a 13-week promotion for a musical – where’s our 
13-week programme?” Spacey said in an interview in 2008 in which he said they 
were “crossing the line” and “unfair”.


Unlike the Lloyd Webber shows, the Take That musical will start out as a 
touring production. The BBC has no commercial stake in the stage show.

Contestants do not have to be lookalikes to have a hope of winning because the 
show is a story which features Take That songs, rather than the story of Take 
That.

The show may also pose a few interesting diversity questions for the BBC, 
including whether women can take part (the band is expected to be all-male).

Barlow said: “Back in 1989, we were just a group of normal guys from 
Manchester who came together to become Take That.


“The secret to our success was that each of us brought something different to 
the group and that the five of us had real chemistry.”

He added: “Now with Let It Shine we’re looking for people from all walks of 
life to form another unique group who can recreate that magic.

“If you think you’ve got what it takes, we want to see it.”

Over eight weeks of competition, Barlow and three mentors will be looking for 
talented individuals to form a new group exuding Take That’s showmanship and 
stage presence.

Co-presenter Norton said he was looking forward to helming the forthcoming 
series.

“The combination of the BBC, everyone’s favourite band and Saturday nights 
made this an offer I simply couldn’t refuse,” he said.

Norton added: “If I wasn’t a part of Let It Shine I know I would be watching 
it at home – this way I just get the best seat in the house.”

Giedroyc, who will soon be back on screen co-hosting The Great British Bake 
Off with Sue Perkins, said Let It Shine will be “utterly spectacular”.

“This show brings together so many of the things I love – singing, dancing, 
Gary Barlow and Graham Norton. What’s not to love?”

Giedroyc continued: “I can’t wait to meet the singers and see the performances 
which I know will be utterly spectacular.

“If you know someone who’s got the moves, whether they already sing in the 
shower or on the stage, we want to see them.”

Charlotte Moore, BBC controller of TV Channels and iPlayer, said: “BBC1’s new 
Saturday night show will bring families together to celebrate Britain’s love of 
musical theatre, combining singing, performance and dance in a hotly contested 
search to find a new group.

“Masterminded by Gary Barlow, our hosts will guide viewers through eight weeks 
of unmissable competition, all to win a dream place in a new stage show.”
