
The annoying portmanteau word “wantrapreneur” describes the (equally annoying) 
phenomenon of the person who’s constantly talking about the startups they want 
to launch – “like Airbnb, but for goats! Or for hats!” – without ever doing 
anything about it. This syndrome goes far beyond the tech world, as you can 
deduce by comparing the number of your friends who are “working on” a novel or 
screenplay to the number who’ve written one. But I hadn’t seen the problem 
clearly until the other day, when I encountered the illustratorKazu Kibuishi 
<http://boltcity.com/>’s term for it: “idea debt”. You run up an idea debt, 
Kibuishi’s fellow artist Jessica Abelexplained 
<http://observer.com/2016/02/imagining-your-future-projects-is-holding-you-back/>
, when you spend “too much time picturing what a project is going to be like, 
too much time thinking about how awesome it will be… and too little time 
actually making the thing”.

Just as the accruing interest on a credit card makes it harder and harder to 
get back on your feet financially, idea debt impedes action. The more glorious 
and detailed the pictures in your mind, the more daunting it feels to start 
making them real.

The underlying hazard here is that merely thinking about a task feels subtly 
like you’re doing something constructive about it. This doesn’t only hamper 
ambitious creative projects, but mundane errands, too: mentally chewing over 
items on your to-do list feels vaguely productive, yet really wastes time. I 
love theanti-procrastination advice 
<http://ask.metafilter.com/252250/Whats-the-1-change-youve-made-to-improve-your-time-management-skills#3663672>
 of the blogger and libraries activist Jessamyn West: start including the time 
you spend thinking about tasks as part of the time it takes to do them. “Some 
emails, by the time I’ve written them, I feel like I’ve spent five days 
not-writing them, and the damned things only took five to 10 minutes to write,” 
West observes. “Now I try to make the task itself take (less) life time by 
doing it closer to when I [first] think about doing it.”

Related: Can you make your own happiness? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/05/can-you-make-your-own-happiness>

An especially sneaky form of thinking as a substitute for doing is “deciding”, 
since it seems so bold and courageous. (“I’m the decider!” George Bushfamously 
declared <http://www.cnn.com/2006/POLITICS/04/18/rumsfeld/> – making the point, 
however clumsily, that deciding means running the show.) Yet a decision alone 
changes nothing. As Gregg Krech writes in his bookThe Art Of Taking Action 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/feb/06/art-of-taking-action-philosophy-oliver-burkeman>
, external reality remainsexactly the same after your decision to ask someone 
out, to write a book, or leave your job. What matters is “creating ripples”, as 
he puts it – actions, however tiny, that alter things in the world outside your 
head.

Generosity is a striking case in point. Acting generously is both morally 
right and happiness-inducing: what’s not to like? Yet I’ve lost count of the 
times I’ve decided – truly, sincerely decided – to donate to a charity, thank 
someone, or offer to help them… then done absolutely nothing at all. (By 
contrast, I rarely procrastinate over typing a sarcastic tweet.)Joseph Goldstein
 <http://www.dharma.org/joseph-goldstein>, the meditation teacher, describes 
his personal “generosity practice”: to just do the generous things he thinks 
of, as soon as possible, even if doubts or counter-arguments arise. Most of us 
probably don’t need to become kinder people; we just need to be better at the 
part where we do a damn thing about it.

oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com <mailto:oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com>
