
I am drawn to research on reducing the risk of dementia. A family history of 
two grandparents, two uncles and a father who all had dementia will do that to 
you. But this is not just about me. The number of adults with Alzheimer’s 
disease will rise from 26.6 million today to 106.2 million by 2050. If the 
onset of Alzheimer’s disease was delayed by a year, the world would have 9.2 
million fewer people with the condition.

Related: Fish oil could help prevent mental health problems in those most at 
risk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/aug/11/fish-oil-could-help-prevent-mental-health-problems-psychosis>

Likely contenders for preserving cognitive ability include exercise and 
dietary changes (eg oily fish or other sources of long-chain omega-3 
polyunsaturated fatty acids). So how fortunate that last week the Journal of 
the American Medical Association (Jama) published two randomised controlled 
trials and an editorial on theeffects of fish-oil supplements 
<http://jama.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?articleid=2429713> and exercise 
<http://jama.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?articleid=2429712>. In the US alone, 
fish oil and other supplements are part of a $1.2bn industry 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/business/economy/claims-that-fish-oil-boosts-health-linger-despite-science-saying-the-opposite/2015/07/08/db7567d2-1848-11e5-bd7f-4611a60dd8e5_story.html)>
. So should you be helping share prices of supplements rise, take up brisk 
walking or just accept cognitive decline?

The solution

The jury is still out, and likely to be so for some time. Neither study found 
a benefit in either the omega-3 fatty acids or an exercise programme (the 
latter did show some improvement in executive functioning – the ability to 
organise, apply ideas and problem-solve, but only in people over 80). The 
fish-oil study was in people with an average age of 73 - so the intervention 
might have been too late - and looked at supplements rather than foods high in 
omega-3 fatty acids. Research usually finds that supplements aren’t as 
effective as proper food.

Research usually finds that supplements aren’t as effective as proper food

The exercise study may not have prescribed energetic enough activities and 
many of the participants were well educated, a factor known to protect against 
loss of brain power. Dr Sudeep S Gill, the author of the editorial in this 
week’s Jama, says that these recent research findings shouldn’t make us 
nihilistic, except about taking supplements,where the evidence is consistently 
negative <http://jama.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?articleid=2429694>.

No single study is going to provide the answers on dementia. Gill has more 
faith in otherresearch showing the preventative powers of a Mediterranean diet 
<http://archinte.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?articleid=2293082> (containing 
olive oil, nuts, fresh fish and fruit and vegetables 
<http://www.mayoclinic.org/healthy-lifestyle/nutrition-and-healthy-eating/in-depth/mediterranean-diet/art-20047801>
). Such a diet may work by reducing blood pressure, keeping the heart healthy 
and perhaps reducing the risk of dementia through preserving a good blood 
supply to the brain. Gill says that overall the evidence from many different 
types of studies suggests we should keep active and eat healthily throughout 
our lives. But if you think this means it’s too late to change in middle age, 
Gill would disagree. He told me emphatically: “I’m not sure it’s ever too late 
to derive some benefit from modifying your lifestyle.”
