
I received an email from a friend 18 months ago that read, “Looks like you’ve 
been getting up to no good in Iraq.” It was a joke, and it’s not the first one 
I’ve heard. In fact, the fuss around my first name has been intense for about a 
year.

I always loved my name. When I was growing up in Devon in the 1990s, it seemed 
so special: nine out of 10 times when I introduced myself, I would get a 
positive reaction and people would ask where it was from. I would tell them my 
parents stumbled upon it before realising the connection to the Egyptian 
goddess. I’ve never met anyone else called Isis before. It was what made me 
different.

Now I dread telling people my name. No one says anything too bad, usually, but 
it’s the fact that people have to mentionIslamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> as soon as they meet me that gets to 
me. It’s a bad way to start.

I’m trying not to let it affect me, but I can’t help it. You hear your name 
and you get this visceral reaction. Reading the news, I am bombarded with 
headlines like The War On Isis and The Case For Bombing Isis, and it feels as 
if they’re talking about me. Funnily enough, my sister is called Sersei, like 
theGame Of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/series/game-of-thrones-episode-by-episode>
 character Cersei, and she has been getting a lot of flak about it, too. But 
not on the same scale.

Related: What I’m really thinking: the teenage amputee 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/13/teenage-amputee-interview> 

I would be so relieved if the name Daesh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/shortcuts/2014/sep/21/islamic-state-isis-isil-daesh>
 finally caught on – it’s what I use when talking about them, and I insist that 
people around me use it, too. I just want people to remember the positivity 
that my name used to have, and reclaim it from Daesh – they don’t deserve to be 
called Isis.

• Tell us what you’re really thinking – email mind@theguardian.com 
<mailto:mind@theguardian.com>
