
How should one behave when there is a celebrity at the next table? Rule number 
one: identify your star correctly. It is important to realise that Jack 
Nicholson looks familiar because he is Jack Nicholson, not because he is some 
old guy you think you know. So he won't be interested in your chitchat about 
local bin collections because you believe him to live three doors down. So get 
a grip. Under no circumstances must you act like a ditz or a stalker, even if 
you are. Consider the case of my correspondent who was so starstruck at seeing 
Heather Mills in a Sussex restaurant that he went over to her table and said: 
'Hello, Stella.' That went down like a cup of cold vegan sick, as you might 
imagine.

In Tom's Kitchen recently, a friend said to me: 'I think I know that Japanese 
guy over there. Doesn't he work on the sushi counter at Umu?' I turned around 
to see Johnny Depp eating a salad. Three seconds later she would have been 
telling him how much she loved his chirashizushi, while he would have assumed 
she had forgotten to put her teeth in.

The default position is to pretend that you are unaware that a celebrity is in 
the restaurant, while - of course! - surreptitiously studying their every move, 
wrinkle, mouthful, date, choice of footwear, depilatory arrangements, outfit 
and whether or not he or she looks better in real life than on the big screen. 
Then all this information must be relayed back to your own dinner date in a 
hurricane of stage whispers that suggest you have emphysema in your right lung 
and a loud hailer in your hand. Look at her lollipop head! Isn't he a midget! 
Check out those dudelsacks, are they real? And so on and so forth until the 
coffee arrives or the celebutant departs, whichever happens first. That's 
certainly what I do. Note that it takes good espionage skills to process and 
impart such celebrity data while appearing to be innocently staring into space 
and eating lobster spaghetti. When Madonna and Gwyneth Paltrow were having 
dinner at Locanda Locatelli the other week, I asked a waiter why he was calling 
an ambulance. 'Because you look like you're having a stroke,' he replied. 
However, once he wiped the bubbles of tomato sauce from my mouth everyone was 
happy.

There can be such a thing as celebrity overload; a sugar rush of stars that 
can quite put your off your salmon fishcakes. A recent Ivy lunchtime netted 
Myleene Klass and baby, Jeremy Kyle, Lenny Henry, Duncan from Blue, that bitchy 
queen from Dancing on Ice and lots of men with highlights that looked like 
Bobby Gee from Bucks Fizz but weren't. The only thing to do in such 
circumstances is to accept that you are the biggest star there, order a mineral 
water and salad, pop on your shades and tell Myleene to stop bloody staring.

Elsewhere, when trying to impart the news to your date that Bono/Amy/Nigella 
has just walked into the restaurant, it is standard procedure to dip your right 
ear towards your right shoulder, push your eyebrows towards your skull and make 
darting movements with your eyes. This should instantly sound the alert that, 
no, the waiter has not poured boiling soup into your lap, but Someone Famous 
has arrived. On no account say: 'Don't turn around now, but Keira Knightley is 
sitting right behind you.' Their heads will spin faster than the screwtop on a 
hen-night bottle of sauv blanc. Also, you must never, ever do The Meerkat, 
which means standing up to get a better look at the stars on the other side of 
the restaurant. Do you really want to risk public humiliation to see Ashley and 
Cheryl eating chips or Posh complaining about a microscopic dot of butter on 
her steamed vegetables?

The golden rules are these. If a celebrity appears at the next table, keep 
your cool. Do not send over a bottle of champagne and start crying about how 
brilliant they were in that episode of The Bill when the budgie was kidnapped. 
Never approach them at the table, or get out your mobile and start taking 
pictures. Remember that a restaurant is never an appropriate place to ask for 
an autograph. If you are desperate, you could approach them at the door as they 
are leaving, but accept that you risk arrest; and always be discreet. It may be 
the greatest moment in your life, but remember that, for them, it's just lunch.

Three restaurants for celebrity-spotting

Tom's Place

1 Cale Street, London SW3

020 7351 1806

Just along the road from Tom's Kitchen you will find its glam, fishy little 
sister, Tom's Place. This eco-friendly, star-studded chippie only uses 
sustainable species. Even the chef, Tom Aikens, is no stranger to the pages of 
Hello!

Locanda Locatelli

8 Seymour Street, London W1

020 7935 9088

Eat artichoke gnocchi among a high-octane concentration of royalty, celebrity 
and the occasional good old home-baked mediocrity (me). Pay special attention 
to the very handsome waiters. Almost dishy enough to make your forget that Tony 
Blair is at the next table.

The Three Chimneys

Colbost, Dunvegan, Isle of Skye

01470 511 258

Even Rick Stein has made the pilgrimage to this remote outpost of gastronomy 
on the wild shores of Skye. More important, Myleene, Jeremy, Lenny and the gang 
haven't. Expect crab with cucumber and dill, local oysters and a shellfish 
bisque heaving with lobster and langoustine.

Â·These restaurants and hundreds more are reviewed on Jan's website
areyoureadytoorder.co.uk <http://areyoureadytoorder.co.uk/>
