
Statistics are everywhere – from Brexit 
<http://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2016/may/16/lies-damned-lies-and-brexit-statistics>
 toBritain’s Got Talent. 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/apr/13/britains-got-talent-returns-with-10m-viewers>
 The way these numbers are presented – or manipulated – shape our understanding 
of the world. Just this month, a misleadingrepresentation of data on local 
elections 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/09/why-that-chart-demonstrating-jeremy-corbyns-election-success-is-misleading>
 caused a furore after being shared widely on Facebook.

It’s important to equip your students with the skills to understand and 
interrogate figures so they can work out what they really mean. Here are some 
ideas on how you can make statistics add up in your classroom:

Primary

Younger pupils need to master the basics before thinking about representations 
of numbers. Thissimple worksheet 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/22971/Maths-Resource-----Stem-and-Leaf-Plot>
 fromPrimaryLeap <http://primaryleap.co.uk/> uses a “stem and leaf” approach to 
breaking numbers down. The first digit (or digits) is the stem, and the other 
is the leaf. So in 45, for example, the stem is 4 and the leaf is 5. The 
resource introduces the concept, then asks pupils to complete a series of 
activities to show their understanding of how it works.

Related: How to teach ... graphs and data handling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/teacher-blog/2014/jul/14/how-to-teach-graphs-data-handling-lesson-ideas>

The basis of statistics is percentages so it’s crucial your class understands 
what these are and how they are calculated. Thisstudent-friendly resource 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/22758/The-Percentages-Pack> 
fromTeaching Packs <http://www.teachingpacks.co.uk/> uses a group of penguins 
to explain how percentages work, before consolidating knowledge with a series 
of colourful images – such as a sky filled with balloons and a series of 
building blocks – with a test at the end.

Once your class has got the hang of the numbers, they can start gathering 
their own data to create statistics. Thisfun activity 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/22972/Statistics-How-well-do-you-know-your-friends>
 fromTeachit Primary <http://www.teachitprimary.co.uk/> asks students to 
undertake a survey of their classmates, looking at characteristics such as eye 
and hair colour, and siblings. They can then create questions for a new survey 
and use the results to track trends in the group.

For a real-world application of statistical analysis, try this colourful poster
 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/10970/World-Food-Day-statistics-graphic-poster-from-ActionAid>
 fromActionAid <https://www.actionaid.org.uk/>. It explores the number of 
people in the world who go hungry each day due to poverty – estimated to be in 
one in six – and looks at the shocking levels of food waste.

And for a look at how statistics can be used to add power to an argument, try 
thislesson based on Guardian articles 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/893/Lesson-6-----The-power-of-statistics-and-graphs>
. It teaches students how to craft a piece of persuasive writing with a punch 
by presenting numbers to back up their case, and a final task challenges them 
to write an article to stop the demolition of the school to build a new road.

Secondary

Statistics don’t have to be dull – in fact, they can take students to other 
galaxies, as thisresource 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/22580/Galaxy-Statistics> 
from theRoyal Greenwich Observatory <http://www.rmg.co.uk/royal-observatory> 
proves. It asks students to look at the shapes and colours of different 
galaxies to work out their distribution in the universe, while exploring the 
key concepts of appropriate sample sizes and overcoming personal bias.

For a more down-to-earth exploration of how statistics can be used, try this 
resource aboutcrime maps 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/16803/Crime-mapping--from-Digimaps-for-schools>
. It introduces the online data that is stored about crime across the country 
and gets students to summarise the results for their area in a short article. 
Using these skills, they can then create their own version of crime maps using 
statistics about littering in the school.

Sticking with issues of public interest, this fact sheet 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/15408/Smoking-Statistics-Who-Smokes-and-How-Much-----ASH-fact-sheet>
 from anti-smoking charityAction on Smoking and Health <http://www.ash.org.uk/> 
details the national trends in the harmful habit from 1974 to 2012. It breaks 
the data down by age, gender and profession – so you could get your class to 
create visual representations of changes for each group, or use the figures to 
analyse the effectiveness of moves to reduce smoking in society.

Related: How to teach… fractions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/teacher-blog/2013/oct/28/teaching-resources-fractions>

Give older students an in-depth guide to presenting statistics with this lesson
 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/1417/Representation-of-data>
. It focuses on how to classify and tabulate data, and understand variables, 
before teaching students how to turn data sets into histograms, frequency 
polygons and stem and leaf diagrams.

And finally, for a word of caution about analysis, try this Ted talk  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sxYrzzy3cq8>on how statistics can be 
misleading. It exploresSimpson’s paradox 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Simpson%27s_paradox>, in which a trend appears 
in two sets of data, but disappears when both are combined. Presenter Mark 
Liddell explores real-life examples of misinterpretation as a result of this, 
including the UK study that appeared to show smokers living longer than 
non-smokers, and an analysis of the death penalty in the US, which missed the 
racial bias in sentencing.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
