
My love of nature began with the simple but satisfying act of feeding the 
ducks. On a cold winter’s day sometime in the early 1960s, my mother drove me 
down to the river Thames on the edge of London, handed me a stale loaf of 
bread, and watched as I flung pieces haphazardly towards a flock of wildfowl.

Yet something wasn’t quite right. Among the usual mallards and mute swans I 
noticed some smaller, darker birds, with strange white bulges on their 
foreheads. It was then that I turned to my mother and – with a three-year-old’s 
single-minded curiosity – asked the question that would change my life for 
ever. “What are those funny black ducks?”

At that age, you think your parents know the answer to everything. But even 
though my mother had spent much of her childhood as an evacuee in rural Devon, 
she had never taken any real interest in nature.

Fortunately, instead of fobbing me off, she recalled that somewhere on our 
bookshelves was a small brown book that might contain the answer. When we got 
home, she dug out The Observer’s Book ofBirds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/birds>. Inside its dog-eared pages I 
discovered that they weren’t black ducks at all, but coots.

At this point, my fascination with birds might have come to an end. But 
something about this little book captured my attention and I started to study 
its contents in forensic detail. My lifelong passion had begun. I should 
confess that I have no memory of this ever happening. In the absence of 
tangible evidence I rely, as my pre-digital generation must, on family folklore.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tnm7%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tnm7%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0ebab0cc54bbeb4f1afd6585cbfab8063bc403d%2F0_278_2922_1753%2F2922.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%20make%20a%20living%20out%20of%20the%20birds%20and%20the%20bees%2C%20thanks%20to%20Mum&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tnm7%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I+make+a+living+out+of+the+birds+and+the+bees%2C+thanks+to+Mum&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tnm7%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0ebab0cc54bbeb4f1afd6585cbfab8063bc403d%2F0_278_2922_1753%2F2922.jpg>
 Stephen Moss’s mother, Kay. Photograph: Courtesy Stephen Moss 
Whatever the initial impulse, a love of birds was now part of my life. 
Throughout my childhood I spent much of my time watching birds or reading about 
them. And although I took a break during three years at Cambridge University – 
where more typical youthful pursuits temporarily took over – I did then return 
to birding, continuing as if I’d never left off.

After university I joined the BBC, where I met the legendary Bill Oddie 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/mar/27/bill-oddie-my-family-values>
. We talked about making a series on birdwatching: not the polished “wildlife 
films” of the famous Natural History Unit, but something rougher and more 
realistic.

Finally, we got our chance and Birding with Bill Oddie was born. A decade 
later, we launchedSpringwatch <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b007qgm3>. 
Meanwhile, I had started writing my monthlyBirdwatch column for the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/series/birdwatch>, and the first of 
many books on birds and wildlife.

Somehow, by my late 30s, I realised that I had done what I had never intended 
to do: turned my childhood hobby into my career.

I was lucky to be in the right place at the right time, when the British were 
finally beginning to appreciate the natural wonders on their doorstep. But I 
was doubly fortunate that my mother – who remained more or less indifferent to 
birds and birding – had supported and encouraged me during those crucial early 
years.

At first, this meant trailing around the local gravel pits after my 
schoolfriend Roger and me, two eight-year-olds in hot pursuit of great crested 
grebes. I still recall watching a mother grebe with her humbug-striped chicks 
nestled among the feathers on her back, frantically searching for her third, 
temporarily lost, offspring.

Later, my mother drove me, along with my lifelong birding companion, Daniel, 
to birding sites around the west London suburbs. Against her better judgment, 
she even allowed us to cycle to the New Forest, even though we were barely in 
our teens. Years later, she confessed that she had been terrified every moment 
I was away.

Soon, I wanted to go to places where I could see some really unusual birds. 
Top of my list werered kites 
<https://www.rspb.org.uk/discoverandenjoynature/discoverandlearn/birdguide/name/r/redkite/>
.

These graceful, motorway-loving raptors may be commonplace now, but in 1975 
they were still mythically rare. That long, hot summer we drove for miles along 
the steep, narrow, hedge-lined lanes of mid-Wales. Then, on the third day of 
searching, we finally caught up with this beautiful bird.

Hot and thirsty, we decided to celebrate with a drink at the nearest pub, only 
to discover that in those benighted days, most of Wales was “dry” on a Sunday. 
She never forgave them.

Our autumnal visit to the Scilly Isles coincided with a force nine storm, 
causing much hilarity as we attempted to see a trio of buff-breasted sandpipers 
– rare birds blown across the Atlantic from North America – on the local golf 
course.

Many years later, my mother gave me Bill Oddie’s famous Little Black Bird Book 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/bill-oddie-s-little-black-bird-book.html>, 
inscribed: “To Stephen, with fond memories of walking backwards over the golf 
course in a gale! We had some wonderful times, love Mum.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tnm7%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tnm7%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F491b4c8257ebb8db3cba86f0e9665bb3e35c16f5%2F191_446_4575_2745%2F4575.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%20make%20a%20living%20out%20of%20the%20birds%20and%20the%20bees%2C%20thanks%20to%20Mum&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tnm7%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I+make+a+living+out+of+the+birds+and+the+bees%2C+thanks+to+Mum&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tnm7%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F491b4c8257ebb8db3cba86f0e9665bb3e35c16f5%2F191_446_4575_2745%2F4575.jpg>
 Stephen, aged eight, with sparrows. Photograph: Courtesy Stephen Moss 
Yet although my nature-filled childhood might sound like something out of an 
Enid Blyton story, it was anything but. My mother was the only single parent in 
our prim and conventional suburban world. Indeed, such was the make-do-and-mend 
attitude of her lower-middle-class, postwar generation, that I was the only 
child in my class who didn’t have two parents still married to one another.

The reluctance of our friends and neighbours to allow an attractive single 
woman to take part in their social lives meant that she never went out, and 
never had a serious relationship. She worked, read, did the Telegraph crossword 
and tended to her garden. When she did get time for a break from work and 
domestic duties, and could have pursued interests of her own, she took me out 
to watch birds.

In her mid-50s – roughly the same age I am now – my mother retired. Only then, 
as she became more and more confined to home, did I realise I should have done 
more to encourage her to develop her own hobbies and interests, instead of 
helping me to pursue mine.

Like the Queen and Sir David Attenborough, my mother was born in 1926. But 
while they are celebrating their 90th birthdays this year, she is not. She died 
almost two decades ago, aged just 70. She did live long enough to see my first 
two children, David and James, my first published book and the first series of 
Birding withBill Oddie <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/bill-oddie>.

To my eternal regret, though, she died a few days before I met my wife, 
Suzanne, and so never saw my three younger children: Charlie, George and Daisy. 
I now wish she could sit with us in our Somerset garden, watching buzzards 
wheeling overhead. I wish she could come along on those lazy summer afternoon 
walks across the Avalon marshes, where we see bitterns and great white egrets, 
as well as the more commonplace – but for me still very special – coots and
great crested grebes 
<https://www.rspb.org.uk/discoverandenjoynature/discoverandlearn/birdguide/name/g/greatcrestedgrebe/>
.

I wish that she could see how happy and fulfilled I am, having taken that tiny 
spark of childhood curiosity and built it into a life intrinsically connected 
with the natural world. A life filled with unexpected joys, delights and hope 
for the future – for that is what a love of nature brings.

Do I have regrets? Yes, many. I wish that she had discovered a lifelong 
passion of her own, to enjoy in her well-earned retirement. I wish that she had 
continued to share my joy in my family and my work. Above all, I wish I could 
thank her properly for what she gave me. But I am also very proud of the woman 
with whom I enjoyed such special times and who helped make me the person I am 
today.

• Wild Kingdom: Bringing Back Britain’s Wildlife by Stephen Moss, is published 
by Vintage, £16.99. To order a copy for £11.89, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/385179/s/wild-kingdom/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846
