
Tea, cake and equality 

The Women’s Institute <http://www.thewi.org.uk/> raised a cup of tea in 
celebration of its club’s centenary last Wednesday. Across the UK, many of the 
organisation’s 212,000 members were out in force for the occasion: inOxford 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-oxfordshire-34256012>, 300 women took to 
the streets with celebratory banners and a new branch was opened in the city, 
while inGwent 
<http://www.southwalesargus.co.uk/news/13765495.PIC_SPECIAL__Hundreds_of_Gwent_women_celebrate_centenary_of_WI/>
, more than 700 members gathered at different venues to mark the milestone 
birthday with – what else? – a tea party.

The organisation previously celebrated with the Queen back in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jun/04/womens-institute-wi-100-pleasingly-bolshie>
 and members visited Parliament for the first time on Thursday, where, as well 
as sharing aspecially made fruit cake  
<http://www.edp24.co.uk/news/norfolk_woman_is_charged_with_cooking_the_celebration_cake_for_wi_s_celebrations_1_4236268>
with MPs, the WIunveiled a report 
<http://www.thewi.org.uk/__data/assets/pdf_file/0009/145854/The-WI-at-100-Final.pdf>
 detailing the views of its members on matters including family life, work and 
the environment.

While 95% of the 5,000+ women surveyed recognised that life has improved 
immeasurably for women over the past 100 years, the report also underlined the 
many inequalities that women still face. Of those polled, 84% said they find it 
difficult to balance family responsibilities with work and 79% also believe 
that being a stay-at-home mother is not valued in today’s society. Despite the 
WI having campaigned for equal pay since 1929, 70% of women do not believe 
women are yet equal to men in the work place and 82% believe men and women are 
judged to different standards. Marylyn Haines Evans, vice chair of the National 
Federeation of Women’s Institutes and chair of public affairs, said:

This report shows that despite the significant societal, technological and 
cultural changes of the last 100 years, women are still demanding greater 
equality and fighting for the issues that are important to them and their 
families … Moving into our next century, it is crucial for us to work with all 
our members to preserve traditional skills and learn new ones and to empower 
all our members to campaign for change in the areas that they see as important.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cg9v%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cg9v%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F18%2F1442587287043%2F28eb9a3f-3b90-46c9-8034-7861d1b5beee-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reason%20to%20be%20cheerful%3A%20the%20first%20hundred%20years%20of%20the%20Women's%20Institute&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cg9v%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reason+to+be+cheerful%3A+the+first+hundred+years+of+the+Women%27s+Institute&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cg9v%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F18%2F1442587287043%2F28eb9a3f-3b90-46c9-8034-7861d1b5beee-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Jessica Biel: ‘I didn’t know what was going on inside my own body.’ 
Photograph: BFAnyc.com/Rex Shutterstock 
Sex ed with Jessica Biel


New mother Jessica Biel this week revealed that, despite being in her early 
30s, she had no idea what to expect when trying to get pregnant after she and 
husband Justin Timberlake decided to try for a baby two years ago.

“Suddenly I realised I really didn’t know what’s going on inside my own body. 
It was shocking,”said Biel 
<http://www.glamour.com/inspired/2015/09/actress-jessica-biel-and-activist-saundra-pelletier-on-womens-health>
, who found herself thinking: “I’ve been on the pill for so long; how hard will 
it be to get pregnant?” And so, she teamed up with Saundra Pelletier, activist 
and founder of the nonprofit organisationWomanCare Global 
<http://www.womancareglobal.org/>, whose mission is to provide access to 
reproductive health solutions for women and girls around the world. Together 
they will be launching a series of sex education videos aimed at making sure 
“every woman knows how her body works” and covering everything from puberty to 
contraception. You canwatch the trailer here 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?t=4&v=QkBNOH3ysoc>. 


 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cg9v%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cg9v%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F18%2F1442587091961%2F5ff302fe-4f07-419a-93df-7177f16771b3-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reason%20to%20be%20cheerful%3A%20the%20first%20hundred%20years%20of%20the%20Women's%20Institute&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cg9v%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reason+to+be+cheerful%3A+the+first+hundred+years+of+the+Women%27s+Institute&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cg9v%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F18%2F1442587091961%2F5ff302fe-4f07-419a-93df-7177f16771b3-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Ashley Graham models her lingerie collection at New York fashion week. 
Photograph: Thomas Concordia 
#IAmSizeSexy

The catwalk hasn’t always had a good rep when it comes to promoting positive 
body image, but Ashley Graham, a Canadian-born model who has becomethe face, 
body and voice for “plus-size” women of late, did her best to change that this 
week. A UK size 16, Graham used New York fashion week to showcase hernew 
lingerie line 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2015/09/16/plus-size-model-ashley-graham_n_8144178.html?utm_hp_ref=uk-style&ir=UK+Style>
alongside a group of other women, all of whom defied the usual model 
stereotypes.

Graham has always rallied against the term “plus-size”, arguing that it is 
used to refer to women who wear anything over a UK size 12, which is, of course,
most women 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/womens-blog/2013/nov/06/debenhams-size-16-mannequins-diversity?CMP=fb_gu>
. Graham used the hashtag#IAmSizeSexy 
<https://instagram.com/explore/tags/iamsizesexy/> to promote her underwear 
show, and also pushed her message home with the unveiling of a new campaign for 
US clothing retailer Lane Bryant:#PlusIsEqual 
<http://www.salon.com/2015/09/15/lane_bryants_plusisequal_campaign_selling_you_empowerment_one_outfit_at_a_time/>
.

Abolishing the Eighth Amendment

A group of leading Irish artists, writers, musicians and film directors has 
thisweek launched a petition 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/news/social-affairs/leading-irish-artists-call-for-repeal-of-8th-amendment-1.2352493>
 calling for the Irish government to repeal the Eighth Amendment of the 
Constitution, which gives effect to the ban on abortion in the country. Since 
the amendment was implemented in 1983,more than 150,000 women 
<http://%22the%20state%20acknowledges%20the%20right%20to%20life%20of%20the%20unborn%20and%2C%20with%20due%20regard%20to%20the%20equal%20right%20to%20life%20of%20the%20mother%2C%20guarantees%20in%20its%20laws%20to%20respect%2C%20and%2C%20as%20far%20as%20practicable%2C%20by%20its%20laws%20to%20defend%20and%20vindicate%20that%20right.%22%20since%20the%20amendment%2C%20more%20than%20150%2C000%20women%20have%20travelled%20abroad%20from%20ireland%20for%20an%20abortion./>
 in Ireland have travelled abroad in order to have an abortion.

Actor Cillian Murphy <https://www.theguardian.com/film/cillian-murphy> and 
authors Edna O’Brien and Anne Enright areamong those who have signed the 
statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/15/irish-stars-call-for-abortion-reform>
 which states:

[The amendment] is a key source of Ireland’s failure to reach international 
human rights standards and of the state’s failure to meet its obligations to 
vindicate women’s human rights.”

The petition backs a wider movement from the Abortion Rights Campaign 
<http://www.abortionrightscampaign.ie/> and coalition of pro-choice groups 
across Ireland to abolish the eighth amendment. Next Saturday will mark the 
fourth annualMarch for Choice <https://www.facebook.com/events/176807265789074/>
 in Dublin held by the ARC.

ICYMI

Carey Mulligan attacks ‘sexist film industry’ ahead of Suffragette release 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/18/carey-mulligan-attacks-sexist-film-industry-ahead-of-suffragette-release>

‘There’s no stigma’: why so many Danish women are opting to become single 
mothers 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/sep/14/no-stigma-single-mothers-denmark-solomors>

Angela Eagle’s extra title due to Labour ‘women row’ 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/14/labour-shadow-cabinet-angela-eagle-extra-title-women-row>

Monica Bellucci: ‘I’m not a Bond girl, I’m a Bond woman’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/17/monica-bellucci-james-bond-spectre-bond-woman>
