
Um, so, you know how I definitely wasn’t doing London?

I did London. 

It was absolutely brilliant and I loved every minute of it. 

Of course, when offering out my advice on how to run a good marathon, I 
wouldn’t necessarily recommend deciding to do it 36 hours beforehand, having a 
one day taper and wear brand new shoes to do it in, but it turns out that’s the 
way to have an absolute blast. Myself and the fabulousShaun 
<https://twitter.com/Raworthontherun?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 formed a pacing team (available for hire, will run for cake) for our friend
Sophie <https://twitter.com/Raworthontherun>, and helped her run a brilliant 9 
minute PB, in 3 hr 35min. Along the way I took in every moment of this 
wonderful race, in a way that’s just not possible when you are focussed on your 
own goal and your own race. Parts of it sent goosebumps down my arms, parts 
moved me almost to tears.

I don’t know what it is about London - we spend most of the year resolutely 
avoiding eye contact, passively-aggressively shuffling around each other on the 
tube - but give us a major sporting event and the cynicism just vanishes. Total 
strangers hugging runners in need, cheering their lungs out for people they’ve 
never met before and never will see again. It’s bloody wonderful.

I could ramble for hours (may still be on slight runner’s high) about the 
highs and the even highers but I’ll spare you. So just, instead, a massive 
shout out to all the marathoners yesterday, and of course all the other racers 
around the world. With apologies for the London bias, though, a huge well done 
on brilliant PBs - particularly to BTL regular David on a stunning 2h 47min, to 
my clubmates Julia (3 hr 3min) and Meriel (3 hr 2min) and Gordon (2 hr 53min, a 
near 7 minute PB which given the age of his son, and the resulting sleep 
deprivation, probably ought to have another 5 minutes knocked off). Guys, you 
all rock. Right, now where’s my cake?
