
I know I’ll never be one of you. The playground is still mainly a woman’s 
world and, as hard as I try, I’ll never fit in. I’ve given it my all. 
I volunteer for cake sales, help out in the classroom, accompany the children 
on day trips. When we chat, I talk about the issues that affect your lives, the 
hobbies you enjoy, the topics you find interesting. Nothing from my life, 
whether stereotypically male or otherwise, enters the conversation. I have 
assimilated completely in a single-minded effort to fit in. But to no avail.

At best, I’m tolerated. You’re all friendly enough, happy to say hello and 
engage in a bit of small talk, but when your real friends arrive, I’m slowly 
edged out of conversations. I watch as you disappear on coffee mornings, ignore 
the fact that you’re all meeting up for lunch, smile fixedly as you talk about 
your nights out together. I don’t want to be “one of the girls” – I never 
expected that – but a bit of solidarity wouldn’t go amiss. I’m a stay-at-home 
parent like you. My days are like yours. If you feel you need a break from the 
routine, maybe it’s possible that I do, too?

Related: What I’m really thinking: the independent cafe barista 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/19/what-im-really-thinking-independent-cafe-barista>

As disappointing as it is, I don’t blame you. I’m an aberration around here, I 
accept that. There are other dads on the school run now and then, but they 
appear only occasionally. I’m an ever-present, a statistical outlier, a 
peculiarity in your world.

But it’s a shame. I’m all right when you get to know me. If you took the time, 
you might find that I’m worth more than a smile, a “hello”, a brief chat. And 
maybe you’d realise that a stay-at-home dad isn’t a lot different from a 
stay-at-home mum after all.

• Tell us what you’re really thinking – email mind@theguardian.com 
<mailto:mind@theguardian.com>
