
In east London, a sniffy butler is welcoming 12 diners into the 16th century. 
“Ah, Lord Norrington! Greetings!”, he proclaims to a giggling woman in a floral 
dress. “Sunglasses indoors, my lady? It works for you,” he smiles at a 
leather-jacket-clad attendee, before rolling his eyes and harrumphing: “It 
doesn’t seem stupid at all.” Around him are dangling lace curtains, pictures of 
dead Elizabethans and a vase of roses complete with dry ice that submerges the 
table in a rolling fog. “Dinner is served!” he announces. At which point, a 
haughty aristocrat leaps out and startles the diners half to death.

This is immersive dining – specifically, a project called Chambers of Flavours 
<http://www.chambersofflavour.co.uk/>, by theatre-cum-cookery crew Gingerline 
<http://www.gingerline.co.uk/>. Over the past eight months, they have fed about 
17,000 guests – sometimes on a gondola, sometimes shoving them into a gigantic 
machine that looks like something from 80s kids’ TV programme Bertha. In this 
instance, they are taking them on a tour of theatrical sets (or “parallel 
dimensions”), where actors serve up a different themed course in each room.

We are thrown into a forest to hunt for birds’ nests containing little salad 
bowls, given cocktails while a sailor reads stories in a desert island scene 
(the “ocean” was a giant ballpit full of blue balls), and served dessert in an 
astonishingly impressive recreation airplane by a drag queen flight attendant 
flight attendant who performed a full song-and-dance number along the aisle. To 
watch diners shooting down the slide at the end of the experience was to watch 
people utterly dumbfounded. Some stood shell-shocked. Others seemed to go weak 
at the knees. Most were beaming.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jqpp%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jqpp%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91c474ce1f37dead6ef91d4aeed968a635ed9eb2%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20whole%20restaurant's%20a%20stage%20in%20the%20world%20of%20immersive%20dining&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jqpp%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+whole+restaurant%27s+a+stage+in+the+world+of+immersive+dining&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jqpp%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91c474ce1f37dead6ef91d4aeed968a635ed9eb2%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Making a song and dance ... aboard the Chamber of Flavours’ aircraft for 
dessert. Photograph: Graeme Robertson for the Guardian 
Immersive food experiences are becoming more widespread – perhaps 
unsurprisingly, after the growth of immersive theatre in the past 20 years. And 
these kind of events are wildly popular. When theatrical foodie crewNot What 
They Seem <http://www.notwhattheyseem.com/> turned the old Guardian building in 
Farringdon, north London, intoa two-floor recreation of David Lynch’s Twin Peaks
 <http://www.notwhattheyseem.com/the-owls> – featuring a meal in the show’s 
Double R Diner – every one of their 5,000 tickets sold out within a week, and 
despite extending the run to allow 9,000 people in, they still had requests 
(which they rejected) to take the project on tour around the world. That kind 
of success is particularly interesting given that immersive dining events 
operate under the publicity equivalent ofomertà: guests are sworn to secrecy 
and begged not to post photos online. The press are banned from taking 
photographs or mentioning specific details – making them almost impossible to 
cover.


“I think the secrecy is a big part of the appeal,” offers Kerry Adamson, 
co-founder of Gingerline. “It builds tension and excitement.” It also means 
that their primary source of ticket sales is a mailing list of hardcore 
devotees. After all, most immersive dining experiences expect diners to hand 
over cash without so much as telling them what they’ll be eating – you might 
worry that you could have shelled out for a five-course feast of Spam fritters. 
“Yeah, it does tend to attract open-minded diners,” Adamson admits. “But we 
have also developed a reputation for doing things well.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jqpp%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jqpp%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec21379cf04e165816b58874cfd17f7e8493119a%2F766_827_4219_2532%2F4219.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20whole%20restaurant's%20a%20stage%20in%20the%20world%20of%20immersive%20dining&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jqpp%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+whole+restaurant%27s+a+stage+in+the+world+of+immersive+dining&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jqpp%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec21379cf04e165816b58874cfd17f7e8493119a%2F766_827_4219_2532%2F4219.jpg>
 ‘The food’s an adventure.’ Photograph: Graeme Robertson for the Guardian 
That reputation largely comes from the quality of their food. “We get people 
coming back time and again for the cooking,” says Alice Hodge ofArt of Dining 
<http://www.theartofdining.co.uk/>, one of the most respected immersive dining 
companies. Her business partner and head chef, Ellen Parr, trained at Moro, and 
her inventive dishes range from beef and mushroom massaman tea to 
Vietnamese-style salad with barbecued ox heart. “There are five senses and we 
try to stimulate them all,” offers Gingerline’s Suz Mountfort of an event that 
goes so far as to pump rooms full of rosemary fragrance to enhance the 
experience and flavour of the lamb dish on offer. A typical Gingerline dish 
might be gazpacho with truffle-infused tapioca pearls or basil-topped chocolate 
sand next to profiteroles filled with green tea and mango coulis. “The food’s 
an adventure, too,” smiles Adamson.

Logistically, creating a kitchen in what is essentially a theatrical set is no 
mean feat. “We’ve had to put kitchens into tiny spaces under the stairs, or do 
our plating up in corridors,” chuckles Hodge. She’s up to the challenge though, 
having spent a few years collaborating with the National Trust to feed people 
in unusual spaces (including the servants quarters at 17th-century stately home 
Ham House). “We’ve had a few grumpy chefs along the way, but for diners there’s 
just something magical about eating in those spaces.” And then there’s the 
theatrical element. In a way, immersive dining experiences are on to a winner 
before their guests have eaten a mouthful. People love a kooky venue and being 
immersed in surreal theatrical worlds – witness the likes of Secret Cinema’s 
£70 film screeningswith actors playing movie characters in the buildup and 
which sell out every time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/apr/15/28-days-later-secret-cinema-bloodthirsty-attack-wallet>
.

“It’s true: there’s something about the immersive world that makes people go 
absolutely wild,” says Louise Orwin, the brains behind the Twin Peaks dining 
experience, The Owls Are Not What They Seem. “We caught so many people having 
sex in corners,” she adds. “I think the mindset you get into taps into 
something from our childhood psyche,” offers Mountfort. “Everyone wants to find 
Narnia – this is sort of the closest you can get as an adult.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jqpp%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jqpp%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5bbf093b86faad8cb67a47a9f0576142bf8b4bcf%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20whole%20restaurant's%20a%20stage%20in%20the%20world%20of%20immersive%20dining&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jqpp%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+whole+restaurant%27s+a+stage+in+the+world+of+immersive+dining&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jqpp%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5bbf093b86faad8cb67a47a9f0576142bf8b4bcf%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Fun in the ballpit at the Chamber of Flavours. Photograph: Graeme Robertson 
for the Guardian 
Immersive dining isn’t for everyone, though. “We’re constantly working against 
that reaction of ‘Oh god – whatever next?’” says Orwin. “But so many companies 
misuse the word ‘immersive’ that I think people can be suspicious of the 
genuinely good events.” Also, given an emphasis on communal dining, these 
aren’t the kinds of events for people who would rather keep themselves to 
themselves. “For people who enjoy it, the interaction’s magical,” says Hodge. 
“We get whole tables of people swapping numbers. We’ve had emails from people 
telling us they met their boyfriend at our night.” There you have it: they 
don’t just do theatre. They don’t just do dining. Sometimes, they even do 
matchmaking.
