
A visit to a small hospital in northern Ghana changed Mahama Nyankamawu’s life 
forever. “It was dark, they had no electricity and the medicines they had had 
all gone bad,” recalled the 40-year-old, who went to the hospital after a car 
accident in 2014.

The experience inspired Nyankamawu to create Volta, a company that builds 
solar power projects for health clinics, schools and farms across Ghana.


Volta’s customers pay for 25% of the capital costs upfront, and the rest via 
monthly payments over two years. None of Nyankamawu’s customers have ever 
missed a payment, Nyankamawu said.

“Our model works best when it’s a substitute for people who are already using 
diesel generators,” he added. “They’re saving up to 45% on their costs by 
switching to solar.”

I met Nyankamawu at the Clean Energy Ministerial 
<http://www.cleanenergyministerial.org/News/tag/43051/CEM7> in San Francisco 
earlier this month, an annual gathering of energy leaders from 23 countries and 
the European Union. The meeting marked the first time the ministers met since 
more than170 countries signed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/video/2016/apr/22/world-leaders-sign-paris-agreement-on-climate-change-video>
 the Paris climate agreement to limit the global temperature rise to under 2C, 
a goal that won’t be met without strong domestic policies that give the 
businesses incentives to invest in a low-carbon future.

I often hear criticisms that businesses, which account for most 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/nov/20/90-companies-man-made-global-warming-emissions-climate-change>
 of the manmade emissions that are causing global warming, aren’t doing their 
part to keep the rising temperatures in check.Surveys 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/may/21/climate-change-carbon-disclosure-project-mind-science>
 andanecdotal evidence  
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/apr/02/corporate-america-climate-change-fight-epa>
show that many corporate leadersdon’t see their role 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/jan/15/katherine-garrett-cox-ceo-major-corporations-denying-climate-change>
 in this global effort.

Related: Small is beautiful: the community solar projects taking on big energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/dec/08/australia-community-solar-energy-project-take-on-the-big-energy-companies>

But that’s not what I have seen. A growing number of companies are turning to 
renewable energy to reduce their carbon footprint. I am impressed with 
entrepreneurs like Nyankamawu and other business leaders who work on making 
renewable energy affordable and accessible. And they represent progress. 
Putting money in renewable energy, whether through power purchase agreements 
with big solar and wind farms in the US, or tiny household-sized solar projects 
inAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, was a rarity even just 
five years ago.

Many Fortune 500 companies 
<https://www.cdp.net/CDPResults/CDP-USA-climate-change-report-2015.pdf> 
recognize a direct connection between climate change and their financial 
wellbeing. Earlier this month, a half-dozen major companies, including TD Bank 
and Interface, joined RE100 <http://there100.org/>, a coalition of businesses 
that are switching to 100% renewable electricity. The shift has been especially 
strong in the US, where largecorporate buyers contracted a record 3.2 gigawatts 
<http://www.utilitydive.com/news/the-corporate-green-team-utilities-partner-to-meet-renewables-demand-from/419611/#.V1Gb3YX4NwA.mailto>
 of renewable energy last year, nearly 20% of the 16.4 gigawatts of renewables 
added to the US electric grid overall. That means tens of thousands of workers 
rely on solar and wind power to do their jobs, and that number will only go up.

One of the most impressive efforts I heard at the San Francisco meeting came 
from Lisa Jackson, who leads Apple’s environmental and social initiatives. 
Jackson talked about the company’s effort to use solar and wind energy to run 
its own global operations and the factories in China that make its iPhones and 
iPads, including a plan to bring online 2,000 megawatts of green energy there. 
The company wouldwork with its suppliers 
<http://www.apple.com/pr/library/2015/10/22Apple-Launches-New-Clean-Energy-Programs-in-China-To-Promote-Low-Carbon-Manufacturing-and-Green-Growth.html>
 there to build those projects.

Some of the most compelling stories came from Africa. Home to the world’s 
fastest growing population 
<https://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/Publications/Files/Key_Findings_WPP_2015.pdf>, the 
continent is a key front in the Paris climate agreement’s quest. In Tanzania, 
Off-Grid Electric allows homes and small businesses to install solar systems 
and pay for them via mobile phone payments. Off-Grid says it’s currently 
installingmore than 10,000 solar units 
<http://www.greentechmedia.com/articles/read/Off-Grid-Electric-Raises-45M-in-Debt-For-African-Micro-Solar-Leasing-Platf>
 every month in Tanzania and Rwanda, and recently raised $70m from San 
Francisco-based DBL Partners 
<http://www.pv-tech.org/news/off-grid-electrics-africa-electrification-push-attracted-us70-million-inves>
 and other investors to help hire more staff and expand operations.

Related: Energy reform: will Mexico's newest revolution boost renewables – or 
just fossil fuels? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/jun/02/mexico-oil-companies-reforms-gas-hydrocarbon>

More businesses will switch to renewable energy if they are able to finance 
it. We saw a record$329bn 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/company/clean-energy-investment/> in global clean 
energy investment last year, but that falls short of the estimated$1tn that 
will be needed <http://www.ceres.org/issues/clean-trillion> every year through 
2050 to help achieve the 2C goal. A major emission producing country such as 
India, which aims toinstall 175 gigawatts 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-02-28/india-to-quadruple-renewable-capacity-to-175-gigawatts-by-2022>
 of wind and solar power by 2022, will need anestimated $200bn 
<http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/news_ext_content/ifc_external_corporate_site/news+and+events/news/helping+india+reach+its+energy+goals>
 to reach that milestone. The country attracted $10.9bn in clean energy 
investments 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-01-14/renewables-drew-record-329-billion-in-year-oil-prices-crashed>
 last year, according to Bloomberg New Energy Finance.

There is one group of investors who could help fill that gap, but they have 
yet to value renewable energy investments: institutional investors. They manage 
public pension, insurance and other funds that are worth trillions of dollars. 
These investors are dipping their toes in clean energy in US and Europe but 
remain on the sidelines inemerging markets 
<http://ensia.com/voices/how-institutional-investors-can-alleviate-climate-change-while-boosting-the-global-economy/>
, which they consider particularly risky.

Michael Liebreich, founder of Bloomberg 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/bloomberg> New Energy Finance, likened the 
challenge of fighting climate change to climbing Mount Everest: “We’ve just 
reached base camp.”

 No doubt, getting to the top of the mountain will require huge participation 
from the business community globally.

The window of time to summit is now – and they’ll need to move quickly.
