
You don’t need an indulgent recipe or a special occasion to enjoy Président’s 
range of luxurious cheese and butter. From completing a delicious picnic to 
making a tasty toastie – or baking a beautifully buttery cake – Président’s 
brie, camembert, emmental and butter are fridge staples for everything from 
simple snacking to culinary creativity.

Related: Get outside and savour the summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/savour-the-moment/2016/jun/10/get-outside-and-savour-the-summer>

The number one cheese brand in France, Président uses time-honoured traditions 
and a blend of knowledge, flavour and culture to make its products. Président 
is a family-owned dairy business founded in 1933 in Laval, in the Loire Valley. 
The specialty cheeses and butter Président creates and sells in the UK are 
steeped in French artisanship and tradition.

The creamy, buttery brie goes well simply with crackers, or can be savoured 
when paired with champagne or sparkling wine, or a light red such as gamay. The 
camembert is bold and rich, but creamy enough for everyday menus. Président 
emmental has a sweet and nutty flavour that makes it perfect for snacking, 
cooking and entertaining and the butter, the most popular in France, is made 
from high-quality creams in the heart of Normandy. Try the classic unsalted 
butter block for cooking, baking and spreading on toast, as well as turning 
jacket potatoes and freshly baked bread into a delicious treat.

Over the next five months, to celebrate the everyday pleasure brought to you 
by Président, look out for the Savour the Moment series. You can pick up expert 
tips and guides on everything from the best new books and films to making the 
most of your free time, to the freshest new recipes, alfresco inspiration and 
entertaining ideas for everyday occasions. Plus, you can find out more about 
the heritage of Président and the provenance of its products.
