
The staffing crisis in schools is being exacerbated by an exodus of newly 
qualified teachers who are “flocking abroad” to work in the rapidly growing 
international sector, including branches of England’s elite public schools, it 
has been claimed.

Sir Michael Wilshaw <http://www.theguardian.com/profile/michael-wilshaw>, who 
is the chief inspector of England’s schools, warns that the country is facing a 
“teacher brain drain” at a time whenschools across the country are already 
struggling to fill vacancies 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/teacher-shortages> amid rising pupil 
numbers.

Lured by enticing offers of competitive, tax-free salaries, free accommodation 
and a warmer climate, teachers are taking their hard-earned qualifications to 
the Gulf states, the far east and beyond, where there is growing demand for a 
“traditional” English education, says Wilshaw.


In turn, schools in England are increasingly having to look overseas to 
recruit their own staff – from countries as diverse as Jamaica, Canada, South 
Africa and Australia – in order to get sufficient teachers in front of classes.

In his regular monthly commentary as head of the schools watchdog, Ofsted 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted>, Wilshaw writes: “Anyone 
regularly perusing the job vacancy pages of the education press cannot help but 
notice just how many of our elite public schools are busy opening up 
international branches across the globe, especially in the Gulf states and the 
far east,” he says.

Related: Long hours, endless admin and angry parents – why schools just can’t 
get the teachers 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/feb/01/schools-teachers-classroom-crisis-stress-grind>

“Two years ago, there were 29 of these overseas franchises. At the end of 
2015, there were 44 and the number will rise again in the coming months with 
several new campuses scheduled to open soon.


“Famous institutions like Harrow, Marlborough, Shrewsbury and Brighton College 
– to name just a few – are clamouring to meet a growing demand for a 
‘traditional’ English education among the burgeoning middle classes of these 
countries as well as the increasing number of British ex-pats who have 
relocated there.”

It’s part of a worldwide boom in international schools 
<http://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/feb/16/five-myths-teaching-international-schools>
 – many of which follow a British-style curriculum and use the English language 
– which is fuelling demand for UK-trained teachers. In 2014-15 an estimated 
100,000 full-time teachers from the UK were working in the international 
sector, “making us the world’s biggest exporter of teaching talent”, says 
Wilshaw.

And it will only get worse, he says, with research by the International School 
Consultancy <http://www.iscresearch.com/> suggesting that the number of 
international schools is expected to almost double from 8,000 now to more than 
15,000 by 2025.


To address the teacher recruitment and retention crisis, Wilshaw once again 
called forfinancial incentives 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/dec/01/use-golden-handcuffs-to-keep-teachers-in-state-schools-says-ofsted-chief>
 to ensure trainees start their teaching career in areas where they are needed 
most. “As far as I’m concerned, that means Barnsley not Bangkok, Doncaster not 
Doha, and King’s Lynn not Kuala Lumpur.”

He continued: “Is it fair that the offspring of overseas oligarchs are 
directly benefiting from UK teacher training programmes at the expense of poor 
children in large parts of this country?

“Is it unreasonable to ask someone who has been trained in our system to make 
a contractual commitment to teach in that same system for the first few years 
of their career?

“I would, therefore, once again urge policymakers to consider the idea of some 
form of ‘golden handcuffs’ to keep teachers working in the state system that 
trained them for a period of time.”

Teachers’ leaders welcomed Wilshaw’s intervention, and made their own 
suggestion that the government should write off teachers’ university tuition 
fees as an incentive to keep newly qualified teachers in English state schools.


Leora Cruddas, director of policy at the Association of School and College 
Leaders, said: “The idea of ‘golden handcuffs’ to keep teachers in this country 
for a period of time is an interesting one which deserves more examination.

“Our view is that more needs to be done to incentivise teaching as a career. 
We would suggest that government undertakes to write off, over a period of 
time, the undergraduate tuition fees of students who become teachers, as long 
as they remain in the state system in this country during that period.”

Russell Hobby, general secretary of the school leaders’ NAHT union, said: “The 
government must look at why some teachers are choosing to work abroad at a time 
of shortages in the UK.

“Pay flexibilities do not work when schools have insufficient funds 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/nov/20/budget-pressures-forcing-schools-in-england-to-cut-staff-survey-finds>
 to use them; enforced pay freezes are making starting salaries uncompetitive. 
Excessiveworkload <http://www.theguardian.com/education/teachersworkload>, 
poorly planned change and constant criticism drive out experienced teachers.

“We don’t need golden handcuffs to keep trained teachers in the UK. We just 
need to treat them with respect. It has the advantage of being cheaper, as well 
as being the right thing to do.”


A DfE spokesperson said: “As part of our drive to achieve educational 
excellence everywhere, we want all schools to be able to recruit high-quality 
teachers. It is disingenuous to suggest our approach is not working – despite 
the challenge of a competitive jobs market, the proportion of trainee teachers 
with a top degree has grown, faster than in the population as a whole, and 
there are more teachers overall.

“But we are determined to continue raising the status of the profession. 
That’s why we’re investing hundreds of millions in teacher recruitment, backing 
schemes likeTeach First 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/jan/14/why-is-teach-first-scheme-so-controversial>
 and theNational Teaching Service 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/nov/02/plans-recruit-elite-teachers-under-performing-schools-national-teaching-service-ebaac>
 to get great teachers where they are most needed, and why we’ve given schools 
unprecedented freedom over staff pay, to allow them to attract the brightest 
and the best.

“The number of former teachers returning to the classroom has increased year 
on year – further evidence of the popularity of the profession – recent 
research shows that the number of teachers leaving the profession to work 
abroad is 1%.”
