
The big picture

David Cameron might not want to face fellow Conservatives 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/12/robert-peston-vote-leave-mad-slur-eu-referendum-debate>
 in debates over Britain’s future but today he’ll issue a statement with 
politicians usually found on the opposite side of the Commons, teaming up with 
Labour’sHarriet Harman, Lib Dem leader Tim Farron and Green party leader 
Natalie Bennett to label the Brexit campaign a “con-trick”.

Related: EU referendum live: Cameron teams up with rivals to accuse Leave 
campaign of 'con-trick' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/06/eu-referendum-live-cameron-harman-leave-campaign-con-trick>

Together they’ll accuse Leave campaigners – including the prime minister’s own 
party chumsMichael Gove and Boris Johnson – of producing “contradictory 
statements” about Britain’s economic future outside the EU, saying the 
Brexiteers have put forward 23 different positions on the alternative to the 
single market.

While it’s all about putting party loyalties aside for the sake of the country 
for some, for others it’s – as theTelegraph puts it this morning 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/06/05/david-cameron-intensifies-tory-civil-war-by-uniting-with-leaders/>
 – “ intensify[ing] the Tory civil war”. AsLord Tebbit told the paper:

 I think it’s dangerous for the leader of the Conservative party to give 
greater credence to minor parties such as the Greens and the Lib Dems.


It just makes them look as though they are major political players and as 
though they are leaders of national parties.

Ouch.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kf9j%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kf9j%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F743bbd797db1b4fe6448842accd8aadc455f2101%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%20morning%20briefing%3A%20Leave%20threatens%20%C2%A32.4bn%20bill%20for%20Britain&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kf9j%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EU+referendum+morning+briefing%3A+Leave+threatens+%C2%A32.4bn+bill+for+Britain&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kf9j%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F743bbd797db1b4fe6448842accd8aadc455f2101%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Liberal Democrat leader Tim Farron: watch out for burns. Photograph: Murdo 
Macleod for the Guardian 
Jeremy Corbyn, the Labour leader, has said he will not share a platform with 
Cameron, but rejected criticism that his support for Remain has not been 
full-throated:

We’re not giving a blank cheque to the EU. We want a Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> where there is solidarity of 
socialist parties, trade unions, people who want to see a decent society, 
welfare state, NHS, full employment, decent rights at work.

The chancellor, George Osborne, is on a two-day trip to Belfast and Newry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/06/george-osborne-brexit-northern-ireland-economic-shock-hardened-border>
 to encourage voters to turn out for Remain in Northern Ireland – reportedly 
the most pro-EU part of the UK.

The Leave campaign is also out in force again with the by-now familiar 
cross-party group of Johnson, Gove and Labour MPGisela Stuart in 
Stratford-upon-Avon to argue that theUK will face a £2.4bn bill 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/06/05/boris-johnson-british-taxpayers-will-be-hit-with-a-shock-24billi/>
 after the referendum to fill a black hole in EU coffers.

Vote Leave says a “backlog of unpaid bills” has left the EU with a £19.4bn 
debt and that Britain – responsible for 12.57% of the EU budget – would need to 
cover £2.4bn of that.

Labour’s Chuka Umunna said the claim was “nonsense”:


 Our special status in Europe means we are protected from paying in to 
eurozone bailouts, we have already cut the EU budget and we have a veto over it 
in future.


Ukip leader Nigel Farage – no cosying up between him and the official Vote 
Leave campaign – has beeninterviewed in the FT 
<http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/45eb0802-2a6c-11e6-bf8d-26294ad519fc.html?ftcamp=published_links%2Frss%2Fworld_uk_politics%2Ffeed%2F%2Fproduct#axzz4AlbkWDq5>
, and says a Brexit would be just the first step in the disintegration of the 
entire EU.

You should also know:


 * Trade union leaders have called on their 6 million members to vote Remain 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/05/uk-trade-union-leaders-call-on-6m-members-to-vote-against-brexit>
. Read their letter to the Guardianhere 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/05/trade-union-members-should-vote-to-stay-in-the-eu>
. 
 * Pound falls in Asia trade as Brexit fears mount. 
<http://www.bbc.com/news/business-36457426> 
 * The Bank of England has begun preparations for potential Brexit. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/05/bank-of-england-brexit-preparations-uk-banks>
 * John Major has slammed “court jester” Johnson and “pythons” Gove and Iain 
Duncan Smith. 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/05/john-major-nhs-risk-brexit-pythons-johnson-and-gove>
Poll position

This morning a YouGov poll for ITV’s Good Morning Britain will put Leave in 
front on 45% and Remain on 41%, according toovernight reports 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-britain-eu-poll-idUSKCN0YR101>.

Sunday’s Observer/Opinium poll 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/04/poll-eu-brexit-lead-opinium> 
also registered a nosing-ahead for the Brexit camp, with Leave on 43% and 
Remain on 40%:

The poll suggests the remain camp has lost four percentage points in the last 
two weeks, during whichBoris Johnson and Michael Gove have relentlessly 
campaigned on the theme of immigration.

The leave campaign appears to have picked up three percentage points. The 
potential in the leave campaign’s strategy is reflected in responses suggesting 
that two in five voters (41%) cite immigration as one of their two most 
important issues when deciding how to vote … Half of the 2,007 people surveyed 
said they believed immigration would be under better control if the UK did 
leave the EU .

A Daily Telegraph survey 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/06/05/eu-referendum-telegraph-subscribers-say-they-back-a-brexit/>
 of 19,000 of its subscribers has found over two-thirds of them (69%) will be 
voting to leave the EU. And 42% would like to see Leave champion – and 
Telegraph columnist – Johnson as the next prime minister. Readers’ top concern 
was not, however, immigration (51% said this was “very important”) but the 
“sovereignty of the British parliament” (71%).

Diary

You could spend the whole day listening to politicians argue the pros and cons 
of the EU, if that’s your bag. (And if it is: welcome! You’ll fit right in 
here.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kf9j%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kf9j%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce91b390bfadee818c30e7789cba009d8bfdf066%2F0_266_5498_3300%2F5498.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%20morning%20briefing%3A%20Leave%20threatens%20%C2%A32.4bn%20bill%20for%20Britain&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kf9j%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EU+referendum+morning+briefing%3A+Leave+threatens+%C2%A32.4bn+bill+for+Britain&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kf9j%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce91b390bfadee818c30e7789cba009d8bfdf066%2F0_266_5498_3300%2F5498.jpg>
 Victoria Derbyshire hosts an all-female panel on the pros and cons of Brexit 
on Monday morning. Photograph: Jeff J Mitchell/Getty Images 
 * At 9am, Victoria Derbyshire hosts an EU referendum debate in Manchester, 
broadcast on BBC2 and the BBC News channel. It’s an all-female panel – a rare 
sighting in the campaign so far – of Labour MPYvette Cooper, Lib Dem Baroness 
(Sal) Brinton, Ukip MEP Jane Collins and Conservative MP Suella Fernandes. 
 * Labour frontbenchers Angela Eagle and Hilary Benn are going to Vote Leave 
HQ to petition them over which workers’ rights would be lost in a Brexit. 
 * At 9.30am in Looe, Cornwall, former environment secretary Owen Paterson 
makes a speech on fishing policy and the benefits of Brexit.

 * From 10am in Stratford Upon Avon, Leavers Boris Johnson, Gisela Stuart, 
Michael Gove and John Longworth – who quit as the director general of the 
British Chambers of Commerce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/06/john-longworth-resigns-as-commerce-boss-over-brexit>
 over his views on the EU – talk about the risks of remaining. 
 * Meanwhile, David Cameron, Labour’s Harriet Harman, Lib Dem leader Tim Farron
 and Greens leaderNatalie Bennett put the case for staying, in a separate event.
 * At 1pm, Tory MP Julian Brazier and Labour defence shadow Emily Thornberry 
debate the EU at the Royal United Services Institute. 
 * Then at 2.30pm there’s another referendum debate, this time hosted by 
thinktank ResPublica in London and featuring former Lib Dem leaderLord Ashdown, 
Labour MP Emma Reynolds, John Longworth (again), Tory MEP Daniel Hannan and 
others. 
 * And at 7.30pm Hilary Benn pops up again, this time to be interviewed by 
Andrew Neil on BBC1. 
Read these

OK, it’s unlikely you’ve not heard Boris Johnson expounding on Brexit, but he’s
in the Telegraph today 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/06/05/you-must-vote-to-leave-the-eu-or-wake-up-with-the-worst-hangover/>
 warning that Britain risks “the worst hangover in history” on 24 June:

You were about to strike your own small but vital blow for freedom and 
democracy – when you suddenly bottled it. You swerved; you shied; you jibbed; 
you baulked. You screwed up your eyes in the polling booth and you found 
yourself momentarily oppressed by the sheer weight of the Remain propaganda – 
all that relentless misery about this country and its inability to stand on its 
own two feet.

For reasons you secretly know were nonsensical, you decided to go for what the 
gloom-mongers had told you was the safer option. Nose held, eyes screwed tight, 
you voted for Remain. And now you understand why you feel that sense of 
morning-after shame and abject remorse: because the burble from the TV is 
informing you that Remain have won. Yes, by the narrowest margin you – and 
fellow last-minute swervers – have helped to keep us locked in the back of the 
minicab, with a driver who barely speaks English, going in a direction we don’t 
want to go.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kf9j%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kf9j%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faebf64ee553f1bd808ae9221f54c0a73d6f3595a%2F0_189_2321_1391%2F2321.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%20morning%20briefing%3A%20Leave%20threatens%20%C2%A32.4bn%20bill%20for%20Britain&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kf9j%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EU+referendum+morning+briefing%3A+Leave+threatens+%C2%A32.4bn+bill+for+Britain&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kf9j%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faebf64ee553f1bd808ae9221f54c0a73d6f3595a%2F0_189_2321_1391%2F2321.jpg>
 Boris Johnson: worrying about a potential hangover. Photograph: John 
Stillwell/PA 
In the Times 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/comment/deciding-which-way-to-vote-is-sheer-agony-d695c3gzq>
,Clare Foges, erstwhile speechwriter to David Cameron, reminds us that not 
everyone knows which way they’ll vote:

 As for the Leavers’ economic case, to quote Sarah Palin on Obama, it seems to 
amount to a lot of ‘hopey changey stuff’. There is a kind of derring-do, 
Dangerous Book For Boys spirit about Britannia unchained and going it alone. 
Won’t it be glorious? Yes, well the Charge of the Light Brigade was glorious in 
its own way.

On Remain-leaning days I fear the country charging into a field of economic 
disaster, a shredded flag aloft.


An editorial in the Financial Times 
<http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/f9bc7492-2986-11e6-8b18-91555f2f4fde.html> says 
businesses need to speak up on the dangers of Brexit:

A wider diversity of pro-EU voices is urgently needed. This places a special 
responsibility on business leaders.Signing letters about the dangers of Brexit 
<http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/0db34b2a-0622-11e6-9b51-0fb5e65703ce.html#axzz4Al2DwYCP>
 is not enough – every CEO ought to be speaking directly to their employees to 
spell out the personal consequences of leaving …


The EU referendum <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> has 
split the Conservative party, polarised the country and stoked 
anti-establishment politics, but it has also encouraged democratic debate. 
Politicians must respond with facts and sound arguments. In an age of 
anti-politician sentiments, it is incumbent on business leaders to speak up, 
too. There is no more pressing issue for business than the UK’s membership of 
the EU. To stay silent would be grossly irresponsible.

Baffling claim of the day

Peter Mandelson emerges today to give a speech saying a vote to Remain would 
see an end to “grandiose, mellifluous bullshit”. While it’s hard to argue 
against voting for that, one can only assume he’s mixed up the EU with utopia.

Celebrity endorsement of the day

At the South Bank arts awards in London on Sunday evening, Elaine Paige broke 
with the culture club by saying she was likely to vote to leave the EU:


I’m of the feeling to leave, but I’m probably a minority in the arts when I 
say that.

The day in a tweet
— Patrick Wintour (@patrickwintour) June 5, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/patrickwintour/status/739562339427594240> 
Expect Remain this week to strengthen economic case by switching from 
macro-economics to named businesses that will up sticks if a Brexit.
 <https://twitter.com/patrickwintour/status/739562339427594240> 
If today were a nursery rhyme ...

It would be I Can Sing a Rainbow <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nRTdq0VsLGQ>
. Red and yellow and pink and green, purple and orange and blue. It might be a 
Tory civil war, but it looks pretty.

And another thing

Would you like to wake up to this briefing in your inbox every weekday? Sign up
here 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/31/eu-referendum-morning-briefing-sign-up>
!
