
An increasing number of companies are setting up on the ground projects 
designed to improve conditions for workers in their supply chains and alleviate 
poverty – a trend reinforced by the UNsustainable development goals 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive>
. But without the support of government, it’s hard for businesses to make 
significant breakthroughs and long term change.

Businesses have been working for years in the Dominican Republic, for example, 
to improve the pay and conditions of banana workers – many of whom areHaitian 
immigrants <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/may/28/fair-trade-food>
 living in makeshift slums. They made progress through signing up to 
certification schemes and their own projects, but it took the government 
agreeing to allow Haitian banana workers toapply for legal status 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/feb/06/lidl-sustainable-bananas-commitment-workers-dominican-republic-supermarket-prices>
 – giving them access to health insurance and bank accounts – to start to 
tackle one of the biggest issues.

Equally, in Bangladesh’s garment industry, improving the low wages and working 
conditions of workers can only be done if fashion brands and governments work 
together. H&M haspreviously expressed frustration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/nov/25/h-m-living-wage-textile-workers-bangladesh-cambodia>
 with governments for a lack of action on developing a living wage.

While some argue that governments shouldn’t work with companies, others 
recognise the ability of partnerships to advance development in their countries.

Related: Development needs business but we must be free to criticise | 
Jonathan Glennie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/09/development-needs-business-but-we-must-be-free-to-criticise>

Join the discussion

Join a panel of experts in the comments section of this page on Wednesday 25 
May, 2-3pm BST. Points for discussion will include:

 * How can business work best with governments? 
 * What are some examples of successful business and government collaborations?
 * What are the main challenges and sticking points, for example in deciding 
who to work with, and overcoming anti-private sector attitudes?

Panel

Nicolas Mounard, CEO, Farm Africa. <http://www.farmafrica.org/>

Erik Simanis, consultant <http://eriksimanis.com/> on corporate growth and 
innovation.

Sahba Sobhani, technical advisor, Business Call to Action 
<http://www.businesscalltoaction.org/>.

Amanda Gardiner, vice president of sustainability and social innovation at 
Pearson <https://uk.pearson.com/>.

Darian Stibbe, executive director, The Partnering Initiative 
<http://thepartneringinitiative.org/>.

Andrew Jenkins, coordinator of BRAC <http://www.brac.net/>’s research units 
around sustainability impacts of development projects

Leave a question now

Loading... 