
‘A chance to attract a wider cohort of potential recruits’

Melanie Weatherley, chief executive, Walnut Care

Although it is a challenge, the advent of the “national living wage 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-living-wage-nlw/national-living-wage-nlw>
” can also be seen as a positive influence on the adult social care sector in a 
number of ways.

The majority of frontline staff are paid at or very close to the statutory 
legal level. An increase of 50p per hour is significant to many workers. This 
still doesn’t adequately reflect the value of the work they do, which requires 
compassion and dedication as well as an increasing level of skill and knowledge 
as care becomes more complex. But for many, particularly those employed in 
homecare with itsvarying wages 
<http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog/2015/jan/07/care-work-minimum-wage>
, it will help them earn enough to meet the basics of life, and continue to do 
the job which many of them love.

Related: Life as a care worker: my time is worth less than £5 an hour 
<http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog/2015/jan/07/care-work-minimum-wage>

Social care <https://www.theguardian.com/society/social-care> employers, 
particularly in homecare, often struggle to attract staff with the right 
attitude to deliver high quality care. Increased national hourly rates are 
likely to lead to a reduction in the number of staff employed in shops and 
restaurants, as productivity increases and technology is introduced. The impact 
of the national living wage on the hospitality and retail sectors could provide 
opportunities to attract staff who might not have considered care as a career.

Employees with experience in retail or hospitality have many transferable 
skills in communication and customer service, and may be looking for the 
satisfaction of providing an excellent experience that care work can offer. As 
a sector we need to grasp this chance to attract a wider cohort of potential 
recruits, reducing the need to rely on expensive agency staff.


For many organisations providing care commissioned by local authorities, the 
introduction of the new wage gave rise to concerns about how the additional 
costs could be met within already challenging financial constraints. And as 
local authorities grappled with the question of charging asocial care council 
tax precept 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/20/osborne-plans-to-allow-2-council-tax-rises-to-plug-social-care-holes>
, adult social care – often a sector that feels unnoticed and unvalued – has 
been subject to a higher level of interest and scrutiny. Care organisations 
working more closely with elected council members, who will need to assure 
their constituents that the precept is money well spent, can be an opportunity 
to raise the profile of social care locally and explore new ways of 
collaborating to improve quality and sustainability.

‘Care providers pushed to the brink of survival’

Mike Padgham, chair, Independent Care Group

On the face of it, the introduction of the national living wage is a good 
thing that few could argue against. It does, after all, help people earn a 
better wage, particularly in sectors where pay has been historically low. 
Social care is one of those sectors and nobody could argue that care workers, 
who do a tough and demanding job at anti-social hours, all year round, do not 
deserve to be paid fairly.

Why, then, is the introduction of the national living wage going to have such 
a cataclysmic effect on social care, pushing some care providers to the very 
brink of survival and leaving care provision in doubt and jobs under threat?

The answer is simple: poor timing and a generation of under funding. For far 
too many years, social care has been the Cinderella sector, never quite getting 
the recognition or the funding that it deserves.

Across the country, a huge proportion of care, provided in people’s own homes 
or in residential homes or day care centres, is commissioned by local 
authorities and health trusts. Starved of resources themselves, these 
commissioners have driven down the fees they pay social care providers, using 
the strength of their bargaining position to do so.

The result has been a price paid for care that never fairly represents the 
true cost of providing that care. So providers have been squeezed and the pay 
they have been able to offer diminished. This has created a depressed sector 
where staffrecruitment and retention has been poor 
<http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2014/dec/10/adult-social-care-recruitment-retention>
.

Related: What difference will the national living wage have on social care 
workers? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/careers/2016/apr/01/what-difference-will-the-national-living-wage-have-on-social-care-workers>

The economic downturn has exacerbated this situation, as councils and health 
trusts found themselves under even greater financial pressure.Some £5bn has 
been cut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jun/04/1bn-further-cuts-to-social-care-will-hit-tens-of-thousands-say-experts>
 from local authority social care budgets alone since 2009-10. The Health 
Foundation estimates a£6bn funding gap 
<http://researchbriefings.parliament.uk/ResearchBriefing/Summary/CDP-2016-0025> 
in social care by 2020, while the Local Government Association estimates the 
new wage will add£1bn to that 
<http://www.local.gov.uk/media-releases/-/journal_content/56/10180/7386419/NEWS>
. A consortium of large providers predicted that9,000 care homes could close 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/news/politics/article4606148.ece> as a result of 
the new wage.

For providers, the national living wage is another huge cost increase to face, 
with very little recognition of its impact from commissioners or the 
government. The 2% precept for councils to spend on social care won’t scratch 
the surface. It arrives at a time when providers are also facing amassive, 
unfair increase in Care Quality Commission fees 
<http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/mar/10/care-quality-commission-cqc-inspection-fees>
.

In addition, the speed at which the new wage has been introduced left 
providers with very little time to prepare. In its haste, the government forgot 
about the impact it would have on social care. In other sectors, such as 
hospitality, companies can put up their prices. But with little apparent 
movement on fees from commissioners or government, social care providers have 
no room for manoeuvre and the future looks bleak.

The government must support social care, most significantly by merging social 
care and NHS funding for a true cradle to the grave service. Otherwise the 
losers will be vulnerable people and the providers they rely upon.

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
