
Boris Johnson <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> does not seem to 
understand the difference between fact and fiction, Chris Patten, the former 
Conservative party chairman, has said.

Lord Patten told BBC Newsnight on Friday that Johnson made up stories and 
repeatedly changed his mind, and that after theEU referendum 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> he needed to be tested in a 
“proper” cabinet job so that people could establish “whether there is something 
behind all the jokes”.

Johnson, the Conservative MP and former mayor of London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/21/boris-johnson-blond-wants-lead-country>
, has faced a barrage of criticism since he started acting as the lead 
campaigner for Vote Leave. It has focused on the accuracy and appropriateness 
of his comments about the EU, but in some respects Patten’s comments are the 
strongest yet from a fellow Tory, because he depicted Johnson as untrustworthy.

Patten said: “Boris just makes it up as he goes along, and you come across 
people like that. There’s a sense in which you can’t call Boris a liar. I think 
he’s one of those people in life who simply doesn’t really understand the 
difference between fact and fiction.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jmt9%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jmt9%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6819d9ebce7b1b89de26221609a77e87466eac0%2F0_214_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boris%20Johnson%20'does%20not%20know%20fact%20from%20fiction'%2C%20says%20Chris%20Patten&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jmt9%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boris+Johnson+%27does+not+know+fact+from+fiction%27%2C+says+Chris+Patten&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jmt9%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6819d9ebce7b1b89de26221609a77e87466eac0%2F0_214_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Boris Johnson is surrounded by Vote Leave and Vote Remain activists. 
Photograph: Dominic Lipinski/PA 
“If he’ll make a good joke by saying something, or if he can write a newspaper 
article by referring to Hitler and theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>, he does it, and he doesn’t think about 
it, but he’ll be saying the opposite in a few months’ time.”

Patten, who became a European commissioner after losing his Commons seat and 
is now chancellor of Oxford University, also said that “one thing that is 
absolutely dependable is that, anything that Boris says, you can find him 
saying the opposite weeks or months ago”.

Patten suggested Johnson should be given a job like health secretary following 
the 23 June vote, so he could show whether he can be a serious politician.

In his interview Patten also took a swipe at Michael Gove, the pro-Brexit 
justice secretary. When it was put to him that the two leading figures on the 
remain campaign, David Cameron and George Osborne, and the two leading figures 
on the leave side, Johnson and Gove, were all Oxford graduates, Patten 
commented: “I’m proud of two of them. I’m not sure about the other two, 
particularly since their regard for the truth seems to be Alan Clark-like. They 
do seem toeconomise on the vérité 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/27/the-guardian-view-on-the-leave-campaign-show-some-respect-for-truth>
.”

Patten also said it would be “fall-on-your-sword time” for Cameron if remain 
lost the referendum, meaning he would have to quit as prime minister.

