
Once famous as a student hangout for those after a cheap vodka-fuelled night 
out, in the space of two years bar chainRevolution 
<http://www.revolution-bars.co.uk/> has undergone just that.

In 2013, the firm drafted in a new CEO and from then on temporarily closed a 
bar every fortnight. At each one, they retrained all staff, often hired a new 
general manager and put it through a redesign using paints and fabrics to 
lighten the venues; all powered by a £200,000 cash injection. With the new look 
bars now all open for business, the chain has moved upmarket and currently 
boasts 60 spacious bars offering a range of food and a complex cocktail menu.

Driven by a belief in the opportunity of a rapidly changing market, the 
company has reaped the rewards of the transformation. Its profits surged by 40% 
in the two years before it went public,launching on the stock market a year ago 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/newsbysector/retailandconsumer/leisure/11417599/Revolution-to-return-to-the-stock-market.html>
. The company now has no debt.

“With Revolution, it was time to have a revolution,” says its chief executive 
Mark McQuater without batting an eyelid.

“It was time – given the locations we had and the core platform for trading – 
to expand it in order to get the performance of the business better matched to 
the market opportunity..

“And that’s what we did. We went through one enormous set of wholesale changes 
that the customers frankly have been delighted about. It wasn’t just a physical 
transformation, the whole thing was transformed.”

McQuater is seated under the high ceilings of a Revolution bar in the City in 
London, which is housed within the former Midland Bank, complete with its 
vaults, in a room reserved for private parties. In Bristol, the bar is in the 
equally grandiose surroundings of the city’s old fish market, while the 
Manchester bar is housed in the spacious railway arches of the Deansgate locks.

“In order to sell food, bars need to be very attractive. You need to be able 
to see what you’re eating, to see that it’s clean. It’s got to be a pleasing 
environment. You need table service and an appropriate range of drinks to go 
with it. All of that has to change.”

The success of the turnaround has allowed the firm to open new branches , 
including six Revolucion de Cuba bars, a spin-off brand – more upmarket still – 
that offers Cuban food, dancing, live music and plenty of rum.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t6yd%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t6yd%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa06c3955f90a9cf446465a3a64be1deefa0c2b34%2F526_0_4048_2430%2F4048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mark%20McQuater%3A%20'With%20Revolution%2C%20it%20was%20time%20to%20have%20a%20revolution'&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t6yd%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mark+McQuater%3A+%27With+Revolution%2C+it+was+time+to+have+a+revolution%27&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t6yd%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa06c3955f90a9cf446465a3a64be1deefa0c2b34%2F526_0_4048_2430%2F4048.jpg>
 Revolution launched its IPO one year ago on the London Stock Exchange. 
Photograph: Revolution 
Key to the transformation, he says, is that the business has moved with the 
market. The pub and restaurant industry has undergone its ownrevolution in the 
last decade 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jul/02/must-pubs-serve-food-to-survive>
. Every day, four pubs are closing as consumers increasingly go out to eat, not 
drink. Less than one in ten visits to the pub are now for drinking alone. In 
order to survive, the great British public househas had to become a one stop 
shop 
<http://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/mar/31/george-osborne-business-rates-revolution>
 for breakfast, lunch and dinner and increasingly, bars seem to be following 
suit.

“Customers have changed a lot,” says McQuater. “You can’t look back and say 
‘oh that worked in 2003’ because the market has moved on and what customers 
want is something very very different. Food has become more affordable, 
especially if you’re a tactical shopper. People are very busy. Work has gone 
up. The world is moving at a faster pace.”

His advice for small businesses in the industry today is to make the most of 
the market opportunity: “It’s an excellent time as customers are looking for 
exciting new and innovative options in their leisure experiences,” he says.

After establishing a career in the industry as the managing director of JD 
Wetherspoons and founding the Barracuda pub group, McQuater was brought into 
Revolution three years ago to guide the transformation. Looking back, he says 
the process has taught him two lessons: move fast and focus on quality products.

“You’ve got to move with speed,” he says. “We could have changed 40 bars and 
taken five years over it … The planning end was very complex – probably the 
most complex I’ve ever seen. We had very complex planning tools in place - 
complex Gantt charts to bring components together. Those teams literally moved 
from turnaround to another turnaround to another.”

“Premiumisation” has been behind the creation of their new menu. McQuater 
recruited a head of food innovation and sends design teams abroad twice a year 
– often to New York and Spain – in search of new product ideas. They have 
returned with American craft beers, new cocktails, craft cider from Barcelona 
and designs for their own sauce. Gone are the days of budget shots – now the 
entry level beer is Amstell and the cheapest vodka Stolichnaya. He says the 
students still come in, but they are now generally the working students at the 
higher end of the market.

“As long as you give them value for money, customers will be prepared to spend 
more than you would think. Having too narrow a product range can limit sales, 
having too large can limit efficiency and confuse the customer - it’s about 
getting that absolutely right. By pursuing premiumisation, the spend per head 
has gone up, the sales have gone up, the margins have gone up. It’s the 
opposite of a supermarket discount approach.”

But more than anything, McQuater puts the success “100% down to the staff” – 
the chain has created 300 new jobs within the last year.

“A business is like a sports team, you need a really good mixture of people 
with complementary talents. There has been heavy research and an awful lot of 
people involved: people who are artistic, who are good with atmosphere, with 
design, with music. They bring different ideas to the table.

“It’s the same bars in the same locations. But they are materially more 
commercially successful because they are matched to what customers are looking 
for in 2016.”

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
