
Luciana Berger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/04/luciana-berger-mental-health-crisis-minister>
, the shadow minister for mental health, has announced that she may seek her 
party’s nomination to stand as the powerful new mayor of Liverpool, becoming 
the latest prominent Labour MP to consider quitting Westminster to run one of 
Britain’s major cities.

The Liverpool Wavertree MP told the Liverpool 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/liverpool> Echo that she was seriously 
considering a run at the job of metro mayor, which will carry a package of new 
powers over housing, education and planning, once a devolution deal struck as 
part of George Osborne’s “northern powerhouse” project comes into force.

She said: “I’ve been flattered by people across the Liverpool 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/liverpool> city region approaching me in recent 
days, encouraging me to put my name forward as a candidate for the new position 
of metro mayor.

“This role – covering a new area including Halton, Knowsley, Sefton, St Helens 
and Wirral, as well as the city of Liverpool – is vitally important for the 
future success of the region.

“I will be consulting with family, friends and members of my constituency 
Labour <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party in the coming days, 
before reaching a decision on whether to put my hat in the ring.”

Liverpool Walton Labour MP Steve Rotheram is also said to be thinking about 
putting himself forward.

Whoever is chosen as Labour’s candidate would be expected to have a good 
chance of winning in the city, where the party polls strongly. If Berger were 
to quit Westminster to take up the new role, she would followSadiq Khan 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/sadiq-khan>, who has stepped down from his 
Tooting seat after winning the London mayoralty.

Andy Burnham <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/andyburnham>, the shadow 
home secretary and former health secretary, has said he is thinking about 
running for mayor of Greater Manchester, which has also received its own new 
powers under a deal nicknamed “devo Manc”.

The new metro mayors, which are a key part of Osborne’s plans to devolve power 
away from central government, are expected to be high-profile figures on the 
national stage.

But as Berger adds her name to the list of those considering one of these new 
roles, it will add to fears that the Labour party in Westminster could suffer a 
braindrain as ambitious politicians anxious about the party’s ability to win 
back power in 2020 look for fresh challenges elsewhere.

Berger has campaigned for better treatment for sufferers of mental health 
problems, particularly children, since joining Jeremy Corbyn’s shadow cabinet. 
She has also spoken out about the online abuse she has received as a Jewish 
Labour member – and backed Corbyn’s decision to appoint Shami Chakrabarti to 
carry out areview of antisemitism 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/29/jeremy-corbyn-sets-up-inquiry-into-labour-antisemitism-claims>
 in the party.

Elections for the new Liverpool metro mayor are due to be held next May. Joe 
Anderson 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/may/04/labour-joe-anderson-liverpool-mayor>
, the city’s current mayor, who was elected in 2012, and has been involved in 
negotiating the devolution deal to bring new powers to the city, is also 
expected to seek to be the Labour candidate.

Nominations close later this month, and local party members will vote on who 
the candidate should be.
