
A regional newspaper publisher is preparing to launch a new paid-for daily 
newspaper later this month.

From 20 June, the Carlisle-based CN Group <http://www.cngroup.co.uk/> will 
distribute a title called 24 - The North’s National across a swathe of the 
north west region, running south from the Scottish border county of Dumfries 
and Galloway to Preston, Lancashire.

Some 95% of the editorial content for the 40-page paper will be drawn from the 
Press Association <http://www.theguardian.com/media/press-association>, which 
issued the press release announcing the launch. The cover price for the 
Monday-to-Friday title has been set at 40p.

An inside source said: “It will be part Metro, part i, and it will serve a 
whole region untouched byMetro <http://www.theguardian.com/media/metro>. In 
newspaper terms, this is a disenfranchised area. The costs for CN are minimal 
so it’s a low risk experiment to test whether there is an audience.”

It is estimated that the circulation area, which includes much of Cumbria and 
Lancashire plus Hexham in Northumberland, Lockerbie inScotland 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> and down the M6 corridor to Preston, 
has a population of 1.15m adults.

Like Metro and the i <http://www.theguardian.com/media/i>, it will aim to be 
politically-neutral. A digest of national stories, alongside lifestyle features 
and celebrity gossip, will be supplemented by “regionally-focussed columns” and 
sport relevant to the area.

Football teams such as Manchester United, Manchester City, Liverpool, Everton, 
and Newcastle United will be covered along with Glasgow’s two major teams.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kvkb%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kvkb%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b65de454eebb8227a0cb032461355e387702eba%2F90_51_4200_5244%2F4200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=North%20West%20region%20to%20get%20a%20new%20paid-for%20daily%20newspaper&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kvkb%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=North+West+region+to+get+a+new+paid-for+daily+newspaper&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kvkb%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b65de454eebb8227a0cb032461355e387702eba%2F90_51_4200_5244%2F4200.jpg>
 24, a dummy version. Photograph: CN Group 
CN Group <http://www.theguardian.com/media/cn-group>, which publishes the 
North West Evening Mail and the Cumberland News, will capitalise on the 
established distribution of those titles through Menzies.

The content will have an online life too: ‘24’ national news sections will 
appear on the group’s websites.

Miller Hogg, CN Group’s chief executive, said the new paper “will fill a large 
gap in the regional market by providing a northern take on the national 
headlines.”

He said: “We see our purpose as serving the communities in which we operate, 
so it follows that CN Group should produce a national newspaper tailored to our 
patch.

 “Our collaboration with PA will ensure our readers receive only the highest 
quality journalism which delivers the facts devoid of spin.”

 PA’s managing director, Tony Watson, said the agency “will work closely with 
the editorial team at ‘24’ to provide a package of the news and content of most 
interest to its readers.”

‘24’ will be edited by Mike Haworth, who has previously held senior editorial 
positions at the Daily andSunday Express 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/sundayexpress> and the Daily Star.

 CN Group’s editorial director David Helliwell said: “After so much doom and 
gloom for the industry this is an exciting new development.

“We believe we have the right package of content and design, spiced with a 
distinctly northern flavour, to provide a viable alternative in the national 
newspaper market.”
