
Brexit would spell the end of David Cameron 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> and lead to a takeover by 
the hard right of the Conservative party, Labour’s deputy leader, Tom Watson, 
has said.

In a high-risk strategy, Watson said the Tories running the leave campaign – 
Boris Johnson <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris>, Michael Gove and 
Priti Patel – would pose a greater danger dangerous to workers’ rights and 
public services than Cameron.


“It’s not just [Boris Johnson], it’s Michael Gove 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove>, it’s Priti Patel, it’s those 
people on the hard right of the Tory party that will be in government if there 
is Brexit. That is the end of David Cameron if that referendum is lost. They 
will be the people paring down the deficit, dealing with the cost of Brexit. It 
is not unreasonable that we focus on Boris Johnson.”
Referendum explained: Conservatives 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/05/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=conservatives_brexit#>
Owen Smith, the shadow work and pensions secretary, added: “We are saying look 
at who is in charge of the Brexit campaign. These are people who are even more 
gung ho [than Cameron and George Osborne] about cutting workers’ rights, and I 
am tempted to say you ain’t seen nothing yet.”

They made their comments at an event flanked by Labour 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> activists wearing Boris Johnson 
masks and handing out copies of a “Tory Brexit budget”, predicting a VAT rise, 
an end to child benefit and other financial consequences of leaving the EU.

The decision to tell Labour voters that Brexit could end Cameron’s career is 
risky because they might be keen to kick out the current government and take a 
chance on who might replace him.

Cameron has sought not to make the EU referendum 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> about his premiership, 
insisting that he would stay on to lead negotiations in the event of Brexit, 
but it is widely believed he would face pressure to step down.

Labour has made a calculated decision that they need to gain the attention of 
their voters, given that polling suggests that up to half are unclear where the 
party stands on the EU.

In fact the party leader, Jeremy Corbyn 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>, the entire shadow cabinet, 
more than 95% of its MPs and the major trade unions are all united in favour of 
staying in the EU.

There are particular concerns in the remain camp that Labour’s pro-EU message 
might be ignored by party voters who feel more concerned about immigration than 
workers’ rights or international efforts to tackle climate change.

Yvette Cooper, the former shadow home secretary, told the same event that 
immigration was “not what this campaign is about. Brexit will not make a 
difference.”

Separately, Andy Burnham <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/andyburnham> 
said there was a “very real prospect” of Britain crashing out of the EU because 
the remain camp was failing to reach traditional Labour voters.


The shadow home secretary suggested the campaign needed to change its focus to 
appeal to voters in its northern heartlands rather than those in urban areas.

Related: EU referendum live: 'very real prospect' of defeat for remain, says 
Burnham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/10/eu-referendum-live-remain-prospect-defeat-itv-debate-boris-johnson>

“We have definitely been far too much Hampstead and not enough Hull in recent 
times and we need to change that. Here we are two weeks away from the very real 
prospect that Britain will vote for isolation,” he told BBC2’s Newsnight on 
Thursday.

Burnham later clarified that he had not been criticising Labour’s campaign, 
but his comments echo worries that are widely held across the party.

A spokesman for Burnham attempted to row back on the comments on Friday 
morning, saying: “Andy Burnham’s comments have been misreported. He was 
answering a question about Labour in general being ‘a coalition between 
Hamsptead and Hull’.

“He repeated his longstanding analysis that Labour in the last two decades has 
been too London-centric.”

Ed Miliband <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/edmiliband>, the former 
Labour leader, echoed Burnham’s points on Friday morning, saying the referendum 
was “in question” and arguing that Labour’s pro-EU message needed to be 
conveyed more strongly .

“So far not enough of our voters have heard we are for remain,” Miliband told 
BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “I want to say to Labour voters: this is not a 
midterm protest, this is not a super-byelection. I want to be in the EU because 
it will be better for social justice, better for workers’ rights and better to 
tackle climate change.

“We haven’t done enough yet. We’ve got to do more. The last general election – 
I thought that was important. This is even more important.”

He defended Corbyn’s stance of being sceptical about some of the EU while 
wanting to stay in, saying it was “close to the centre of gravity” on the issue.

Asked about immigration in the campaign, Miliband said: “Don’t crater our 
economy to try to deal with concerns about immigration. Look at what the 
independent experts are saying. Another two years of austerity. Right across 
the board they are saying it would be really bad for our economy.”

Two prominent Labour MPs, John Mann and Dennis Skinner, said on Thursday they 
would back the leave campaign. Mann said the EU was fundamentally broken and 
leaving was the only way to control immigration.

Skinner told the Morning Star: “My opposition from the very beginning has been 
on the lines that fighting capitalism state by state is hard enough. It’s even 
harder when you’re fighting it on the basis of eight states, 10 states and now 
28.”

Related: EU referendum morning briefing: what we learned from Sturgeon v 
Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/10/eu-referendum-morning-briefing-what-we-learned-sturgeon-johnson>

The tax and spending thinktank the Institute for Fiscal Studies has suggested 
that the economic instability that could follow a British exit from the EU 
would hit public finances.


 Miliband and Cooper, who is also a former Treasury minister, will publish a 
report called Boris’s Brexit Britain, predicting that public services would be 
cut and workers’ rights undermined if a British exit enabled the former mayor 
of London to unseat David Cameron.

“Britain is at risk of being taken over by the far right of the Conservative 
party, and Labour communities will be the victims. It’s a Thatcherite agenda, 
really,” Cooper told the Guardian.

“The leave campaign are trying to perpetrate what I can only describe as a 
fraud on the British people,” Miliband will say, accusing Vote Leave 
campaigners of “trying to disguise themselves in Labour clothes”.

Cooper will unveil a provocative campaign poster featuring Johnson and Gove 
gambling in a casino alongside a cigar-toting Nigel Farage.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kpac%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kpac%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a162a3c02d4082e538d6159c30625018f45df24%2F268_0_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%20would%20replace%20Cameron%20with%20Tory%20hard%20right%2C%20says%20Tom%20Watson&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kpac%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brexit+would+replace+Cameron+with+Tory+hard+right%2C+says+Tom+Watson&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kpac%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a162a3c02d4082e538d6159c30625018f45df24%2F268_0_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
 Britain Stronger In Europe poster featuring Michael Gove, Boris Johnson and 
Nigel Farage. Photograph: Britain Stronger In Europe 
The image is aimed at closely linking the senior Conservatives 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> Gove and Johnson with the 
more controversial – and remain campaigners hope, more toxic – figure of 
Farage, the Ukip leader.

In a live ITV debate on Thursday night, Amber Rudd, a Tory cabinet minister, 
Nicola Sturgeon, the Scottish first minister, and Angela Eagle, the Labour 
shadow business secretary, adopted this strategy as they launched a series of 
attacks on Johnson. Rudd said people should judge the leave camp by the company 
they keep with Farage, and claimed that the only numbers that Johnson cared 
about were No 10, suggesting he was after the prime minister’s job.

The chancellor, George Osborne, has taken a similar approach in recent days, 
as Britain Stronger In steps up its personal attacks on senior leave 
campaigners.

The chancellor singled out Farage on Thursday for representing a 
“mean-spirited, narrow and divisive” vision of Britain. He said this “tendency” 
was now coming to dominate the anti-EU campaign.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fboris-johnson-and-nicola-sturgeon-debate-the-eu-referendum-video-highlights&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fboris-johnson-and-nicola-sturgeon-debate-the-eu-referendum-video-highlights&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boris%20Johnson%20and%20Nicola%20Sturgeon%20debate%20the%20EU%20referendum%20-%20video%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fboris-johnson-and-nicola-sturgeon-debate-the-eu-referendum-video-highlights>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boris+Johnson+and+Nicola+Sturgeon+debate+the+EU+referendum+-+video+highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fboris-johnson-and-nicola-sturgeon-debate-the-eu-referendum-video-highlights&media=>
Boris Johnson and Nicola Sturgeon debate the EU referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jun/09/boris-johnson-and-nicola-sturgeon-debate-the-eu-referendum-video-highlights>
Speaking to reporters on a campaign visit to a Scottish farm with the Scottish 
Tory leader, Ruth Davidson, Osborne said: “The Nigel Farage tendency is taking 
over their argument and you’re increasingly getting this Farage vision of 
Britain, with all this talk of bodies washing up on the sea shores and women 
being at risk of sexual assault from migrants.”
