
There are too few NHS staff willing to take on the toughest leadership roles, 
and too few of those that dosurvive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/oct/07/nhs-leadership-in-crisis-as-running-hospitals-becomes-near-impossible>
. Successive reviews have exposed the failures in NHS leadership development, 
but progress in addressing them is a long way from matching the scale of the 
problem.

The review of NHS leadership 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/445738/Lord_Rose_NHS_Report_acc.pdf>
 by former Marks & Spencer executive chairman Lord Rose, published in June, 
pinpointed one of the central difficulties facing the health service – the 
organisation is committed to a vast range of changes but does not have 
sufficient management and leadership capability to deliver them.

The Rose review was followed within weeks by Ed Smith’s review 
<https://www.england.nhs.uk/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/improv-ldrshp-dev-rev-sept15.pdf>
 of centrally-funded leadership and improvement work. Smith, who has been 
appointed chairman of NHS Improvement, praised the quality of NHS Leadership 
Academy programmes, but his assessment of leadership work across the system was 
coruscating. He concluded the current approach is “remote, fragmented and 
unclear” and “difficult to access and navigate”.

Work intended to support clinical leadership came in for particular criticism, 
not least the fact that few people understood the improvement roles of clinical 
senates, strategic clinical networks and academic health science networks.

The Smith review called for all the national organisations to pull together to 
deliver leadership and improvement development which met the needs of theFive 
Year Forward View 
<https://www.england.nhs.uk/wp-content/uploads/2014/10/5yfv-web.pdf>, and which 
would in turn link up with the programmes in individual organisations.

Monitor – soon to merge with the NHS Trust Development Authority to form NHS 
Improvement – has always taken a tough line on leadership; whenever a 
foundation trust gets into difficulty Monitor looks at the quality of the board 
and the executive officers. Now NHS Improvement will be responsible for talent 
management across theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>, which means 
it will eventually have to pass judgment on its own protégés.

The working group pulled together from across the national bodies to lead an 
overhaul of leadership development is urgently identifying vacancies in crucial 
board-level posts in providers and commissioners and trying to find the talent 
to fill them. Its next priority will be to map where vacancies are likely to 
arise in the next six months, which will no doubt include places where it 
thinks the current leadership is not up to the task. In parallel it will 
identify people who are “ready now” and keen to take on these challenging 
roles, as well as people who could be ready soon with some development and 
support.

This work is a tactical quick-fix rather a long-term strategy, and NHS 
Improvement knows that in 2016 it will need to go much further – mapping out 
development routes that go all the way from graduate training to boards. It is 
a gargantuan task; judging by the present vacancy rate and attrition in the top 
jobs it will take several years to develop a sufficient supply of senior staff 
who are not only appointable but can survive more than two or three years.

Lord Rose recommended that senior managers should participate in accredited 
courses to ensure consistent experience and training. One of the first outcomes 
of the new talent drive is that Monitor, the NHS Trust Development Authority, 
NHS Leadership Academy and NHS Providers have launched a year-long accredited 
development programme for “aspiring chief executives”, delivering training 
which they claim will be world class. The first group begins this month, and at 
the end of the programme they will be assessed for suitability for the top 
post. The initial group will be small – just 14 participants. If it succeeds it 
will be expanded in subsequent years, and incorporate other executive roles.

The aspiring chief executives programme has three key strands: reshaping care 
systems to meet patient needs; engaging staff; and fulfilling the role of 
accountable officer for the organisation, with responsibilities such as money, 
governance and risk management. Mentoring by chief executives will be an 
important ingredient.

It stresses the importance of system leadership – encouraging future 
executives to see themselves as one of a group of leaders of the local health 
economy rather than just the head of their own organisation. The inspection and 
regulation regimes have yet to catch up with system leadership, but there is 
movement.

The same organisations are working on a programme to support new chief 
executives for their first two years in post. A key message from serving chief 
executives has been how unprepared they felt when they took up the role. This 
programme will provide both professional and personal support, shaped around 
the local challenges.

Beyond the national organisations there are many leadership programmes which 
deliver the quality, if not the quantity, the NHS needs, involving providers, 
deaneries, charities, think tanks and others.

One of the best is the King’s Fund’s five-week top manager programme 
<http://www.kingsfund.org.uk/leadership/leadership-development-senior-leaders/top-manager-programme>
, aimed at health and social care leaders from the public, private and third 
sectors, which has been running for 30 years.

Related: End the macho culture keeping women from the top of NHS 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/nov/10/end-the-macho-culture-keeping-women-from-the-top-of-nhs>

Bursaries and scholarships are there for a lucky few; for example, the 
Florence Nightingale Foundation 
<http://www.florence-nightingale-foundation.org.uk/> enables nurses and 
midwives to study in the UK and abroad to prepare for the most senior roles.

But despite many examples of outstanding leadership training for both managers 
and clinicians, the need vastly outstrips supply. NHS Improvement is faced with 
leading a talent drive that has to reach into every NHS body if the health 
service is to deliver the scale of reforms envisaged in the Five Year Forward 
View.

There needs to be the same sense of urgency around developing and keeping good 
leaders as there is around sorting out the money.

Join our network <https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/> 
to read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
