
It’s the small red lacquer signature on the glossy underside of a mask. It’s 
the delicate floral detail embroidered onto a karaori robe. It’s the tiny faces 
hand painted onto an ancient scroll.

The Art Gallery of New South Wales’s latest exhibition Theatre of dreams, 
theatre of play: nō & kyogen in Japan 
<http://www.artgallery.nsw.gov.au/exhibitions/theatre-of-dreams-theatre-of-play/>
 has just opened, and for many people it will be an opportunity to get up close 
and personal with significant objects from Japan’s oldest performing art form.

It’s the first exhibition of its kind in Australia, says curator Dr Khanh 
Trinh, who has been working on the project for three years. It’s also the first 
time many of the objects have left Japan.

Developed in the fourteenth century, nō and kyōgen plays tell traditional, 
often symbolic stories using masks and intricately designed costumes. Nō plays 
are usually based on historical stories while kyōgen are more light-hearted, 
everyday tales. They were originally performed by troupes of wandering 
performers but became the exclusive entertainment of choice for the military 
aristocracy - otherwise known as the shoguns - in the seventeenth century. 
Performances were finally opened to the public towards the end of the 
nineteenth century at the end of the Edo period, and despite various cultural 
challenges, it continues to flourish in Japan today.

There are very fixed performance rules with movement patterns, gestures, dance 
sequences and the use of masks and costumes clearly prescribed by the 
playwright. Yet despite its deeply traditional roots, it has continued to 
evolve through out its 600 year history. “Earlier plays tend to have fewer 
characters, the stories are flavoured with a Buddhist undertone, [while] plays 
written in the 16th and 17th century involve a greater ensemble of actors and 
tend to have more ‘actions’”, says Trinh.

There are more than 170 objects in the exhibition including masks, costumes, 
instruments and finely drawn paintings. Many are historically significant 
including masks from the 15th and 16th century, a time considered the peak of 
mask carving. “By this time, all types of masks known today were developed,” 
says Trinh. She points out the Hyakuman handscroll as a rare example of an 
illustrated nō play, one of only four known examples in existence. “The scroll 
in the exhibition is from the 16th century and is in superb condition.” There 
is also a compendium of nō plays, which contains fifty leaves depicting the key 
scenes from fifty popular nō plays.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4vx39%2Fsfb%23img-1&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4vx39%2Fsfb%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F16%2F1405480994251%2F1b834edb-76cc-4c3a-b031-5b24f43effdf-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=All%20in%20the%20details&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4vx39%2Fstw%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=All+in+the+details&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4vx39%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F16%2F1405480994251%2F1b834edb-76cc-4c3a-b031-5b24f43effdf-1360x2040.jpeg>
 An elaborately embroidered karaori robe on display in the AGNSW's exhibition 
Theatre of dreams, theatre of play: nō and kyōgen in Japan Photograph: Supplied 
All of the objects have been carefully preserved, often as family heirlooms 
and because of their delicate nature cannot be exhibited for more than six 
weeks at a time. Consequently the objects on exhibit will be swapped for a 
second set halfway through the exhibition period.

Trinh believes nō and kyōgen continue to fascinate audiences because the 
“plays revolve around many facets of human emotions such as jealousy, grief, 
desire, loyalty and speak to everyone regardless of gender, age or cultural and 
ethnic background”.

Sydney festival director Lieven Bertels has a personal interest in nō theatre. 
He first discovered it on a visit to Japan and although he initially found the 
stories difficult to understand, he was intrigued. He found the distinct rhythm 
particularly interesting. “You can feel all the anxieties and all the stress of 
a day’s work immediately evaporate when a Japanese audience goes into a nō 
play.” He went on to program one of the traditional plays when he was artistic 
coordinator for the Holland Festival.

He believes an exhibition like this allows audiences to connect with the 
intangible performing art form. “The objects themselves are really beautiful 
and you can appreciate the objects as objects but nevertheless these are 
objects that say something about … the performing art of nō and kyōgen.”

The exhibition will appeal to those who are interested in Japan and its arts 
and crafts, as well as its historical traditions, he says. “It really does 
allow us to look into the past of a country and tap into a tradition… To do 
this time travel here in Sydney rather than to have to go to Japan is quite 
unique.”

This content has been paid for and produced to a brief agreed with the Art 
Gallery of New South Wales whose brand it displays. Find out morehere 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>
