
I’ve always said that as a returning officer, running a successful election 
doesn’t necessarily enhance your career as a chief executive, but running one 
with significant mishaps is definitely career limiting.

This is ever more the case in an environment where the extent of the failure, 
culpability and accountability is measured in media volume rather than scale of 
failure and its relative impact.

Related: Who should carry the can for Barnet's voting blunder? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/may/13/barnet-chief-executive-andrew-travers-voting-blunder>

I’m sure I wasn’t alone in sparing a thought for Barnet’s returning officer 
and elections team 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/may/13/barnet-chief-executive-andrew-travers-voting-blunder>
 in May’s elections, when a number of voters were initially disfranchised after 
the wrong (ie, incomplete) registers were placed in ballot boxes and polling 
stations opened without full registers.

The matter was recovered within a few hours of polls opening, but by then news 
and social media was in full swing. Of course, one voter disenfranchised is one 
too many and is every returning officer’s worst nightmare.

Show me the returning officer who hasn’t faced a hiccup in the democratic 
process, and I would venture to suggest that he or she may not be that close to 
matters on the ground. I have had my fair share in the places I have worked, 
with some mistakes that could have been predicted and were caused, almost 
always, by human error. Thankfully, none were catastrophic or (touch wood) 
career-limiting.

Related: Referendum voting papers sent to some EU nationals by mistake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/02/referendum-voting-papers-sent-to-eu-nationals-by-mistake>

As with every election, success lies in the planning and checking. Plan, 
train, do it, check it and check it again. Have contingency plans in place. 
When things do go wrong, communicate, communicate and communicate some more. 
Say what’s gone wrong, what you are doing to fix it and what voters can do to 
help. Use the media and social media to communicate, helping to solve the 
problem, rather than adding to the problem, and do it immediately. Agility and 
fleetness of foot are the order of the day.

We are all in the throes of the UK’s largest ever referendum, so make sure 
your plans are in place and make sure your teams have all the resources they 
need to deliver a successful referendum.

Elections are, or should be, a whole council activity. Make sure there are 
appropriate checks. Those who do the work should not be the people who check 
the tasks are done correctly. Proper planning will ensure separation of duties.

Proper planning and checks are essential. Use the whole of the council to 
deliver the democratic process – it’s the returning officer’s right to 
accompany their personal responsibility and liability. And if things do go 
wrong, make sure you’re close enough to know immediately, act immediately and 
get your communication out immediately. Does your team know that you need to 
know, immediately?

Related: Sunderland sets its sights on first place in the UK's other election 
race 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2015/apr/27/sunderland-sets-its-sights-on-first-place-in-the-uks-other-election-race>

Since May I have rechecked our arrangements for the ballot. I’m sure I’m not 
the only returning officer to have done so. If you haven’t done it yet, then 
you should before 23 June. Here’s to a well-run, professionally deliveredEU 
referendum <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>. It’s what we 
do, and do well.

 Jo Miller is chief executive and returning officer of Doncaster council, and 
deputy spokesperson on elections and democratic renewal forSolace 
<http://www.solace.org.uk/>.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
