
"Through telehealth, it's not just the technology, it's the ability to 
redesign the service," Andrew Lansley told theNHS Confederation's annual 
conference <http://conference.nhsconfed.org/Pages/default.aspx> last week. The 
health secretary also praised other methods for providing healthcare remotely, 
including the 111 advice and out-of-hours services that are being extended 
across England.

Over the last few years, the Department of Health has run a large-scale test 
of telehealth, the whole system demonstrator programme 
<http://www.dh.gov.uk/health/2011/12/wsd-headline-findings/>, involving 6,200 
patients in 238 GP practices in Cornwall 
<http://www.cornwallandislesofscilly.nhs.uk/CornwallAndIslesOfScillyPCT/InformationForPatients/StayingHealthy/DirectorOfPublicHealthAnnualReport2010/HealthyAgeing/Telehealth.aspx>
,Kent 
<http://www.kent.gov.uk/adult_social_services/social_services_professionals/partnerships_and_projects/assistive_technologies.aspx>
 and theLondon borough of Newham <http://www.newhamwsdtrial.org/telehealth/>. 
It found benefits included a 20% cut in emergency admissions, a 14% reduction 
in elective admissions, and savings that, if replicated nationwide, could reach 
£1.2bn over five years. Astudy just published by the British Medical Journal 
<http://www.bmj.com/content/344/bmj.e3874> reports that those with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease, diabetes and heart failure who had access to 
telehealth under the programme similarly had fewer hospital and emergency 
admissions, as well as reduced mortality rates.

But Lansley made it clear that on this, as with other things, it will be up to 
localNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> organisations rather than 
central government to bring in change: "I believe this leadership will come 
from within the service, not be imposed from outside," he said in his keynote.

A conference fringe session on telehealth heard from Dr Shahid Ali, a Bradford 
GP who is providing exactly that kind of leadership. He has two monitors on his 
desk: one for accessing software such as patient record systems, the other for 
remote consultations, initially used with one care home in the surgery's patch. 
"There was a 70% reduction in the number of visits we had to make to that care 
home," he told the audience, while residents and managers loved it and doctors 
saved a great deal of travelling time. "We have now expanded it to all the care 
homes in the Bradford and Airedale area."

Ali, who is also the NHS National Commissioning Board's 
<http://www.commissioningboard.nhs.uk/> clinical lead for patients and the 
information directorate, sees remote consultations as just one part of 
reorganising general practice. His surgery has replaced clinics for individual 
conditions with blue and red clinics, which give those attending 30 or 60 
minutes respectively to discuss and set up self-care plans for all their health 
conditions – many have several, and dealing with the patient makes more sense 
than dealing with each of their conditions in separate sessions. Setting up 
self-care empowers patients, Ali said: "They love it, they want to have the 
responsibility to do that." They also visit their GPs and accident and 
emergency less, saving a surgery with 10,000 patients £1.5m a year, he added, 
freeing time for doctors and other staff to provide better care.

The surgery has also found ways to make life easier for both doctors and 
patients by sharing records electronically between GPs and consultants. "I have 
known people who have died waiting for an appointment. That system needs to 
change," said Ali. So the surgery shares records, allowing consultants to email 
a provisional opinion within 24 hours. This either triggers an urgent 
appointment, or reassures the patient that their condition can be managed in 
the community. As a result, patients do not see the need to go to A&E in the 
meantime, as they know they will get a swift response. "We will eventually 
change completely to that way of working," said Ali.

Ali said that technology will change medicine further, such as having 
consultations via smartphones – a technology already being used by private 
providerCircle Healthcare <http://www.circlepartnership.co.uk/> for internal 
management. Its chief executive Ali Parsa showed a conference session an app 
that cost £2,000 to develop and gives staff access to internal waiting time 
data, which Parsa said has helped reduce these times to near zero.

Ali said that it is time for the NHS to introduce substantial changes across 
the country. "We've done enough pilots," he said. "I'm sick of pilots. We need 
to scale this up." Clinical commissioning groups, which will take over primary 
care next April, should lead the way, he believes.

But he added a warning for those thinking that technology alone can solve NHS 
problem, with his changes ranging from high-tech ones like remote 
consultations, to low-tech ones such as the blue and red clinics. "This is not 
about the technology," he said. "The technology is there to support us, to help 
us move forward."

SA Mathieson is a senior analyst for public sector market intelligence service 
Kable <http://www.kable.co.uk>

This article is published by Guardian Professional. Join the healthcare network
 <http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/healthcare/start.php> to receive 
regular emails and exclusive offers
