
From the cotton farm to the clothing factory to the fashion show, the global 
apparel industry has more than its share of social and environmental problems.

Behind the images of beauty and style is an often dirty business that relies on
 water-intensive methods 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/dyeing-textile-sector-water-risks-adidas>
 and toxic chemicals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/26/greenpeace-finds-brands-like-north-face-using-toxic-chemicals-in-outdoor-products>
 in its factories, most of them in poor countries and hidden from view. While 
garment work has provided a pathway out of poverty – now in China, but earlier 
in the US and UK – no worker should be exposed to the unsafe conditions that 
led to calamities like in Bangladesh, where in 2013 the collapse of the 
structurally unsafe Rana Plaza building killed more than 1,100 workers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/apr/23/rana-plaza-factory-collapse-history-cities-50-buildings>
.

No company can solve such problems on its own. Yet an ambitious effort to 
bring the industry together to deliver sweeping changes has yet to deliver. The 
Sustainable Apparel Coalition (SAC), a global alliance of retailers, brands, 
suppliers, advocacy groups, labor unions and academics, aims to create “an 
apparel, footwear and home textiles industry that produces no unnecessary 
environmental harm and has a positive impact on people and communities”.

Four years ago, I took a close look 
<http://www.greenbiz.com/blog/2012/07/26/behind-scenes-sustainable-apparel-coalition>
 at the coalition’s promising beginning. Last month at the Copenhagen Fashion 
Summit, an industry gathering focused on sustainability, I caught up with 
apparel industry executives and their critics to see how much progress the 
industry group has made – and opinions are mixed.

To its credit, the coalition, launched in 2009 by Walmart and Patagonia, has 
brought together 175 members whose companies account for more than 40% of the 
global apparel industry. They have been building what they expect to be the 
principal driver of change in the industry: a set of three online tools, known 
as the Higg Index <http://apparelcoalition.org/the-higg-index/>, that measure 
the social and environmental impact of brands, manufacturing facilities and 
products. Companies are supposed to use the index to collect information from 
their own operations and their suppliers’, and all of it goes into a database 
that coalition members can use to evaluate suppliers. About 6,000 factories 
have provided information about their social and environmental impact.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kxx4%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kxx4%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78ad309a2857ff6608bd7e6463b19213c5e7ba69%2F0_0_4496_3192%2F4496.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Despite%20the%20Sustainable%20Apparel%20Coalition%2C%20there's%20a%20lot%20you%20don't%20know%20about%20that%20T-shirt&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kxx4%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Despite+the+Sustainable+Apparel+Coalition%2C+there%27s+a+lot+you+don%27t+know+about+that+T-shirt&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kxx4%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78ad309a2857ff6608bd7e6463b19213c5e7ba69%2F0_0_4496_3192%2F4496.jpg>
 Bangladeshi activists and relatives of the victims of the Rana Plaza building 
collapse take part in a protest marking the first anniversary of the disaster 
at the site where the building once stood on the outskirts of Dhaka on April 
24, 2014. More than 1,100 workers died in the world’s worst garment factory 
disaster. Photograph: Munir Uz Zaman/AFP/Getty Images 
But most coalition members have been slow to use the index, and there’s no 
evidence they are reducing – not merely reporting – their impact. A Higg tool 
designed to measure a product’s footprint – information such as the raw 
materials and energy used that might interest consumers – won’t be completed 
until next year. What’s more, none of the social and environmental data being 
collected is publicly available, at least for now. Companies aren’t even 
permitted to release their own Higg Index data.

Until the data becomes public, its value will be limited. Environmental and 
human rights groups that want to hold the industry accountable don’t have 
access to the information. Nor do investors, who worry about supply chain and 
reputation risks, have a reliable way to measure one company against another. 
Consumers who want to know how and where T-shirts or shoes are made will have 
to wait before they can use the data to learn whether those items are 
manufactured ethically. Right now, they get little information. Knowing, for 
example, that a shirt is composed of organic cotton or recycled polyester 
doesn’t say anything about the factory conditions where it was produced.

Related: What clothes can I wear to help save the planet?| Lucy Siegle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/05/what-clothes-can-help-save-the-planet-lucy-siegle>

Linda Greer, a senior scientist at the Natural Resources Defense Council, says 
the coalition is moving too slowly to collect Higg data and isn’t doing enough 
to prod companies to remedy problems that turn up. “I am quite surprised at the 
lack of uptake,” she says. “There are too many companies, even with high 
profiles, that are not circulating the forms to their suppliers.”


Several big companies, led by H&M and Target, have embraced the Higg tools, as 
has Patagonia. Others have been slow to use them, but the coalition declined to 
identify the laggards. Several major industry players, including fast fashion 
retailer Forever 21, have declined to join the SAC at all.

Nike says it hasn’t used Higg widely, not because it doesn’t support SAC’s 
effort but because of what Hannah Jones, its chief sustainability officer, 
describes as “technical, boring IT reasons”. Nike monitors its supply chain 
using its own software, Jones says.

“The vast majority are using some of the tools,” says Jason Kibbey, the 
coalition’s chief executive. “The scale and depth with which they’re using them 
varies widely.”

Several reasons explain why the index hasn’t been widely used. For one thing, 
it’s still under development. Building the Higg Index is a complex undertaking, 
Kibbey says. The coalition has to balance competing demands – making tools 
accessible and relatively easy to use, yet powerful enough to capture an array 
of environmental and social impacts from farms, factories and stores.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kxx4%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kxx4%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3daefb73d0471b838b5b76f8a840e25361d257ef%2F0_0_3476_2480%2F3476.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Despite%20the%20Sustainable%20Apparel%20Coalition%2C%20there's%20a%20lot%20you%20don't%20know%20about%20that%20T-shirt&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kxx4%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Despite+the+Sustainable+Apparel+Coalition%2C+there%27s+a+lot+you+don%27t+know+about+that+T-shirt&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kxx4%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3daefb73d0471b838b5b76f8a840e25361d257ef%2F0_0_3476_2480%2F3476.jpg>
 Employees work inside a garment factory in Mumbai, India. Some major brands 
have worked on reducing their environmental and social impact in manufacturing. 
But critics say there’s a lot more that needs to be done. Photograph: Danish 
Siddiqui/Reuters 
Brands also are resistant to spending the time and energy to gathering data, 
especially from their suppliers. Making a piece of clothing involves multiple 
suppliers, including: farmers who grow the raw materials; dye-and-finishing 
mills where environmental impacts are greatest; and cut-and-sew factories where 
garments are produced. But brands don’t typically deal directly with all those 
suppliers, and manydon’t bother to dig deep 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/nov/17/timberland-corporate-social-responsibility-walmart-google-ibm-general-mills-ups-jeff-swartz>
 into their supply chains.

Related: Natural dyes v synthetic: which is more sustainable? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/sustainable-fashion-blog/2015/mar/31/natural-dyes-v-synthetic-which-is-more-sustainable>

Several coalition members tell me they plan to make the index data public 
eventually. Kibbey says his members have not agreed when that information will 
become public.


In the meantime, individual brands have launched their own campaigns to 
address environmental and social challenges. Nike, for example, has invested in 
designing and making sneakers that use less material.H&M has improved 
<http://qz.com/380055/hms-sustainability-report-hides-the-unsustainable-reality-of-fast-fashion/>
 the dirty process of dyeing textiles and nudged its customers to recycle their 
clothes. Patagoniadiscovered slave labor practices 
<http://www.outsideonline.com/1999281/slaving-over-our-gear> among its 
suppliers and took steps to root them out.

But those efforts, while worthwhile, aren’t enough to reduce the enormous 
resource requirements of the fashion business and the waste it generates. In 
the US alone,10.5m tons of textiles 
<http://www.weardonaterecycle.org/about/issue.html> go to landfills each year. 
There’s lots of talk in the industry about the circular economy, but real 
progress has been scant.

Will the coalition ever achieve its lofty goal? That seems to be a big 
uncertainty, even from its members. Rick Ridgeway, a longtime Patagonia 
executive who has guided the coalition from the start, says it best: “The 
hypothesis is that putting better data into the hands of decision makers in the 
apparel value chains is going to result in better decisions. But that’s a 
hypothesis.”

He goes on: “Now the rubber is going to meet the road. Are companies, year 
over year, going to improve? Are they going to lower their impact? Are they 
going to benefit the people in the supply chain? We don’t know. I’m optimistic, 
but until that happens, the Sustainable Apparel Coalition is an unproven 
experiment.”
