
Q We recently bought a 200-year-old cottage with original square terracotta 
tiles laid straight on to mud/sand. They are worn, a few are cracked, and we 
think some have absorbed salts - in places they are almost cream. We have 
cleaned them, but would like to put a finish on them. We do not want to use red 
tile polish as that would change their character. Any help would be appreciated.
David and Yvonne Northcott

A Terracotta tiles have no sealing glaze (so they get dirty easily) and are 
very porous. So if they are laid on top of the wrong sand and cement mixture, 
salts seep through the tile creating a whitish bloom on the surface. Providing 
these tiles were laid some time ago, this problem won't persist, so you can 
clean the surface and the pores of the tile with a solution of concentrated 
phosphoric acid. Once dry, use a water-based sealant (not an acrylic sealer) 
that may need several layers to permeate. This will give the floor a light, 
durable sheen and allow moisture to transmit through the tiles - which is 
important as your home probably has no damp-proof membrane, so sealing it 
totally will cause damaging moisture to form elsewhere (www.tiledoctor.co.uk 
<http://www.tiledoctor.co.uk>).

Q We are contemplating a sisal carpet for our hall and stairs. Do you think it 
would be suitable for these areas?
Sonya Farey

A Traditionally used in rope making, sisal is incredibly strong, sustainable 
and very versatile. It is also available in probably the largest range of 
colours and styles of any natural flooring surface. While it is hardwearing and 
suitable for high-footfall areas, it can be difficult to clean. Unlike 
conventional carpets, you cannot use water to remove marks, and need a special 
natural-flooring care kit. This can be aided by using an eco-friendly stain 
protection finish called Intec, which is highly recommended. It will also help 
to use a thick doormat to remove any dirt from shoes as you enter. I advise one 
of two options for stairs: either a patterned sisal carpet (with the stain 
protection), which will help to hide marks and dirt; or a pure wool carpet, 
which will be easier to maintain

Â· If you have an interior design question for Oliver, email 
ask.oliver@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.oliver@observer.co.uk>
