
World governments have been urged to tackle air pollution in poorer countries 
by greening cities, reducing traffic and adopting better diets, and told that 
this will also rein in climate change, which global health specialists estimate 
will cause at least 250,000 additional deaths a year by 2030.

“It makes complete sense to tackle air pollution and climate change together,” 
said Maria Neira, director of the WorldHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Organisation’s (WHO) department of 
public health. “The solutions are the same. The major risk to health at the 
moment is air pollution. If we address this, the causes of air pollution will 
overlap and we will reduce climate change. It’s logical. It’s a win-win 
situation … The real costs of fossil fuels is seen in your lungs and your 
cardiovascular systems.”

The WHO has calculated that air pollution is one of the world’s biggest 
killers. Itleads to the premature deaths of close to 7 million people annually 
<http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/releases/2014/air-pollution/en/>, largely 
from heart disease and stroke, respiratory diseases and cancers.

Most of the pollution deaths occur in developing countries, both in rural 
areas, where people burn wood to cook on, and increasingly in traffic-choked 
Asian and African cities where pollution is reaching catastrophic levels. In 
Britain, an estimated50,000 people die prematurely of air pollution a year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/13/government-passing-the-buck-air-pollution-campaigners>
, mostly in urban areas.

Related: Those who contributed least to climate change are fighting for 
survival | Gyan Chandra Acharya 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/02/climate-change-paris-talks-those-who-contributed-least-fighting-for-survival>

According to the WHO, many of the most harmful air pollutants also damage the 
climate. Known asshort-lived climate pollutants 
<http://www.unep.org/ccac/Short-LivedClimatePollutants/Definitions/tabid/130285/Default.aspx>
, they include fine particles of black carbon, or soot, emitted from diesels 
and burning wood, and from ozone. They have major warming effects but remain 
only briefly in the atmosphere.

In a briefing this week at the Paris climate summit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/cop-21-un-climate-change-conference-paris>
, public health professionals urged countries to tackle the two great global 
problems together. “If countries tackled these and other short-lived climate 
pollutants, they could not just clean the air, they would also save lives and 
slow climate change significantly,” said a spokesman for theClimate and Clean 
Air Coalition <http://www.ccacoalition.org/en>, which is hosted by the UN 
environment programme <http://www.unep.org/> and made up of the governments of 
Bangladesh, Ghana, Mexico, Canada, Sweden and the US.

In a report, <http://bit.ly/1OKFYET> the coalition calculates that by adopting 
cleaner transport and other measures, countries could reduce air pollution 
deaths by 3.5 million a year and reduce global warming by about 20%, or 0.5C by 
2030.

“Reducing emissions of short-lived climate pollutants (SLCPs), which produce 
strong warming effects but persist in the atmosphere for periods ranging from 
days to decades, can provide health benefits in three key ways: directly from 
reduced air pollution and related ill-health; indirectly from reduced ozone and 
black carbon effects on extreme weather and agricultural production (affecting 
food security); and from other types of health benefits that are not associated 
with air pollution but may accrue as a result of certain SLCP mitigation 
actions, such as improved diets or increased physical activity,” the report 
said.

In a 2014 study 
<http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/134014/1/9789241507691_eng.pdf>, the 
WHO looked at the effects of climate change on selected causes of deaths, and 
concluded that approximately 250,000 additional deaths would be due to climate 
change every year between 2030 and 2050.

“Compared with a future without climate change, the following additional 
deaths are projected for the year 2030: 38,000 due to heat exposure in elderly 
people, 48,000 due to diarrhoea, 60,000 due to malaria, and 95,000 due to 
childhood undernutrition,” it said, noting that the total additional deaths did 
not represent a prediction of the overall impacts of climate change on health 
as they could not quantify several important causal pathways.
