
Mindfulness can have a significant impact for patients with mental and 
physical health problems, as well as those accessing social care services. Not 
only that, but there is growing evidence to suggest it can help professionals 
working in health and social care.

Jon Kabat-Zinn, professor of medicine emeritus and creator of the Center for 
Mindfulness in Medicine, Health Care, and Society at the University of 
Massachusetts medical school, wrote thatmindfulness is about attention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/20/mindfulness-mental-health-potential-benefits-uk>
, awareness and caring.

He added: “It is a way of being in wise and purposeful relationship with one’s 
experience, both inwardly and outwardly, with oneself and with others.”

A study published last year in the Lancet 
<http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(14)62222-4/abstract>
 slated mindfulness-based cognitive therapy (MBCT) as an especially effective 
treatment for those with depression. Developed from mindfulness, MBCT 
encourages individuals to pay more attention to the present moment, and is 
combined with cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT), specifically to try to help 
people who have recurring depression.

Mindful practice can also have a significant impact on key leadership 
qualities, including clarity, curiosity, courage, creativity and working with 
conflict. Some health and social care organisations have been offering it to 
healthcare professionals andsocial workers to deal with stress 
<http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/may/11/self-care-social-workers-mindfulness>
 and the demands of the job. Increasing thought is devoted to how it, along 
with compassion, can benefit both health professionals and patients.

How can health and social care professionals apply mindfulness? What 
techniques can be used for positive mental health and stress reduction while 
working? Is it effective to use mindfulness within health and social care for 
patients and service users? Are there any disadvantages? Is it for everybody? 
Join us on Thursday 19 May from noon to 2pm to discuss these questions and more.

The panel

Sonia Moratto, mindfulness-based advanced practitioner, Nottingham healthcare 
NHS foundation trust <http://www.nottinghamshirehealthcare.nhs.uk/>

Vidyamala Burch, co-founder, Breathworks 
<http://www.breathworks-mindfulness.org.uk/>

Yasu Kotera, academic lead for counselling and CBT, University of Derby Online 
Learning <http://www.derby.ac.uk/online/academics/yasuhiro-kotera>

Emma Roberts, managing director, Pause for Thought, team manager of Team New 
Wortley and guest lecturer on mindfulness at Bradford University

Hayley Gillard, wellbeing coach, chief executive of Self Care Compass and runs 
outdoor therapy workshops through social enterprise Wild Goose Wellbeing

Lucy Maddox, MBCT trained consultant clinical psychologist working with 
teenagers in theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> in Bristol

The live chat is not video or audio-enabled but will take place in the 
comments section (below). If you would like to feature on the panel or propose 
questions, please get in touch viasarah.johnson@theguardian.com 
<mailto:sarah.johnson@theguardian.com> or @GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/gdnhealthcare> (#GdnMindfulness) on Twitter.

Discussion commissioned and controlled by the Guardian, funded by the 
University of Derby

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
