
The devolution of £6bn of health and social care spending to Greater Manchester
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/01/greater-manchester-devo-health-social-care-budgets>
 (a move popularly known as “Devo Manc”) has divided opinion and made headlines 
since it was announced last year. Now, a new partnership of key health 
organisations,Health Innovation Manchester (HInM) 
<https://www.greatermanchester-ca.gov.uk/download/meetings/id/879/9a_annex_hinm_stakeholder_consultation+&cd=4&hl=en&ct=clnk&gl=uk>
 [pdf], aims to cut waiting times for new drugs, improve the city’s health 
record and put Manchester’s bioscience industry on the world stage.

But for all its vision and potential, the most startling aspect of HInM is its 
lack of profile both in the city and the NHS. Healthcare professionals and the 
public alike seem none the wiser about the partnership, despite the recent 
holding of a citizens’ jury to scrutinise HInM’s objectives.

HInM’s launch has been hampered by the recent loss of medical director Clive 
Morris to genomics company Inivata. His replacement is currently being 
recruited.

Stockport’s director of public health, Dr Stephen Watkins, says HinM’s key 
purpose is unclear. He also questions the power of commercial links to boost 
health, which he says has become something of a religion. “HInM needs to be a 
lot clearer about what they are going to do, so that people working towards 
healthcare improvement know how to access it,” he says.

Houston sees biohealth as its No 2 industry (next to rockets and space). 
That’s the ambition for Manchester.
Mike Burrows, Greater Manchester Academic Health Science Network 
The partnership, launched in September, involves Manchester Academic Health 
Science Centre,Greater Manchester 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/greater-manchester> Academic Health Science 
Network, the Clinical Research Network, Manchester Science Partnerships and 
Manchester Growth Company.

By harnessing the knowledge and expertise of partner organisations – and with 
the city’s 2.8m population acting as a honeypot for biomedicine companies 
looking to test products – the initiative could build world-leading 
infrastructure for clinical trials and health informatics.

The ideal, according to Mike Burrows, director of the Greater Manchester 
Academic Health Science Network, would be for Manchester to focus on biohealth, 
following the model of Houston, Texas: “Houston sees biohealth as its No 2 
industry (next to rockets and space). That’s the ambition forManchester 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester>. We can attract the best researchers 
and create an exciting environment for innovation. Innovation will then come to 
us to support investment in the city region.”

If successful, the concept of a “bioscience city” would concurrently tackle 
unemployment and poverty, both of which are closely linked to ill health and 
inequality.

Houston aside, HInM has a more pressing aim to address. People in the most 
deprived areas of Greater Manchester can expect to live 10 years less than 
those in the most affluent parts. Urgent action is needed to tackle 
cardiovascular disease, cancer, diabetes, drug and alcohol misuse and the high 
prevalence of obesity among adults and children.

HInM would facilitate research and investment, with priorities driven by the 
pressing needs of a large population that has some of thepoorest health in the 
country 
<http://healthierlives.phe.org.uk/topic/mortality/area-details#are/E08000003/par/E92000001/ati/102/pat/>
.



We have a health service that cannot service need ... we have to be rebels to 
find the way
Rowena Burns 
The £18m Stoller Biomarker Discovery Centre 
<http://sciex.com/about-us/press-releases/sciex-partners-with-university-of-manchester-to-develop-biomarker-discovery-centre-and-multi-omics-centre-for-precision-medicine>
, opening on 14 June, will be one of the biggest clinical proteomics facilities 
in the world, using mass spectrometry to find solutions to cancer, psoriasis 
and arthritis.

A joint research hub has also been set up, providing a one-stop shop for 
companies wanting to carry out research. This provides a single access point, 
and conducts ethical permission-run trials on the 2.8m population, avoiding the 
need to approach multiple individual trusts.

Integrated data is critical, but is a notorious bugbear for the NHS. Based on 
Salford’s success in setting up the NHS’s first integrated electronic patient 
record system, theDataWell informatics project <http://www.gmahsn.org/datawell> 
is being developed by Greater Manchester Academic Health Science Network. 
DataWell has (according to NHS insiders) been politically sensitive to set up 
but the aims to give local NHS organisations a secure way to share records by 
2017.

DataWell will link with the GM Connect system to bring together health and 
social care information. Other initiatives like theHealth eResearch Centre 
<http://www.herc.ac.uk/> and the Farr Institute <http://www.farrinstitute.org/> 
will work on health informatics to feed into the wider NHS.

Burrows says: “The primary aim when sharing data is that clinicians have the 
most up-to-date information on a patient turning up in front of them.”

He says data represents an invaluable resource for the city to sell to 
companies wanting to carry out clinical trials, but this cannot happen without 
individual patient consent.

The Salford Lung Study, whose results were reported in May 2016, is considered 
something of a micro-example of what HInM could achieve on a conurbation-wide 
scale. The study, the world’s first digitally enhanced randomised clinical 
trial of a drug for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, involved 2,800 
Salfordians and was sponsored by GlaxoSmithKline in collaboration with eight 
Greater Manchester organisations.

Related: Manchester health devolution gives local leaders the chance do better 
than Hunt and Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/apr/01/manchester-health-devolution-leaders-better-hunt-osborne>

Iain Buchan, professor of public health informatics at the University of 
Manchester, said: “The Salford Lung Study broke the mould of clinical trials by 
harnessing an approach to healthcare data and computing that focuses on 
populations, not hospitals or other organisations. It operates using NHS data 
to offer the trial resources to the right patients, at the right time in the 
right way.”

It is unclear whether HInM has acted as a catalyst for the significant and 
welcome advances made in data integration and precision medicine in Manchester, 
or has simply assisted its progress.


HInM’s chair, Rowena Burns, has a passionate belief in HInM to act as a game 
changer. “We have a health service that cannot service need and social services 
that cannot cope,” she says. “HInM includes all the pieces of the jigsaw to 
accelerate the journey from discovery to patient. We have to be rebels to find 
the way.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
