
Going back in time has never much appealed to me, what with the terrible 
sanitation, the outrageous social inequality, the casual violence – and, as if 
all that weren’t enough, the awful biscuits. God knows our poor, rickety 
ancestors could have done with a rich, crumbly teatime treat, but instead they 
had to put up with biscuits as hard as iron and as dry as dust, designed to 
last, rather than to please.

To achieve maximum longevity, these unfortunate items would have been baked 
two or three times, in order to dry them out and turn them into joyless rusks. 
Hence the name, which comes from the Latinpanis biscotus – twice-cooked bread. 
Most modern versions go into the oven just the once, but some of the most 
famous Italian biscotti, such as the Tuscan cantuccini, are still given a 
second blast of heat, making them ideal for dipping in coffee or wine – or, 
indeed, for giving as gifts, thanks to said long-life qualities.

Fat

Angela Hartnett 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/mar/14/panna-cotta-lemon-tart-steamed-pudding-recipes-angela-hartnett>
 and theRiver Cafe Classic Italian Cookbook 
<https://oxfordfood.wordpress.com/2009/10/17/not-really-a-disaster-biscuits> 
both start their biscuits with butter and sugar, the former beating them 
together until fluffy, rather like a cake, before adding eggs.Rachel Roddy 
<https://racheleats.wordpress.com/2009/11/30/monday-26th/>, Katie Caldesi 
<http://heinstirred.com/pistachio-and-dark-chocolate-cantuccini/> and Theo 
Randall <http://www.greatbritishchefs.com/recipes/biscotti-recipe> leave out 
the butter, which seems to be more traditional. Indeed, butter, much as I love 
it in every context, yields a richer flavour and crumblier texture reminiscent 
of the very un-Italian shortbread; the egg-only versions are crunchier and 
drier.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f47b%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f47b%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F473f447ebecbf998d28e6c88b79ee301b104d65d%2F0_549_3646_2187%2F3646.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20biscotti&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f47b%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+biscotti&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f47b%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F473f447ebecbf998d28e6c88b79ee301b104d65d%2F0_549_3646_2187%2F3646.jpg>
 Angela Hartnett’s rich, crumbly biscotti. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the 
Guardian 
The higher the proportion of dry ingredients to fat, the crisper the result. 
Like Roddy, in her book Five Quarters, and Randall, I’m a fan of assertively 
crunchy biscotti, which is good news, because a firm, dry dough is also easier 
to handle.

Randall whisks his eggs and sugar together until pale and voluminous before 
adding the flour, while Roddy and Caldesi simply stir the eggs into the dry 
ingredients, which seems to work just fine; in any case, I don’t think there’s 
much air left in the mixture after stirring in the flour and nuts.

The dry ingredients

All the recipes I use keep things simple when it comes to flour and sugar: 
plain and caster are standard-issue, although Hartnett calls for super-fine 00 
flour – the kind used for pasta – in her book Cucina. I can’t tell the 
difference, but no doubt customers at The Connaught, where she used to give 
them away as Christmas gifts, are more discerning. The River Cafe recipe also 
adds ground almonds, which impart a pleasant flavour, but seem to soften the 
texture of the biscuits slightly.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f47b%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f47b%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1abf6c48b0bccbe267ce6eeb8cd7736a9b96adc0%2F709_617_2925_1754%2F2925.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20biscotti&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f47b%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+biscotti&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f47b%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1abf6c48b0bccbe267ce6eeb8cd7736a9b96adc0%2F709_617_2925_1754%2F2925.jpg>
 ‘Assertively crunchy’: Rachel Roddy’s biscotti Photograph: Felicity Cloake for 
the Guardian 
Caldesi doesn’t specify the type of sugar in her Italian Cookery Course, so I 
try granulated. This gives the biscuits a slight sandiness that’s sweetly 
reminiscent of the illicitly scoffed trifle sponges of my childhood. Unless you 
were a similarly greedy little pig, however, you should probably stick with 
caster.

Every recipe I try uses baking powder, which causes the dough to rise slightly 
in the oven, giving the finished biscuits a lighter, more open crumb.

Flavourings

Biscotti are almost infinitely adaptable: whether you go for the classic 
cantuccini flavouring – almond – preferred by the River Cafe and Hartnett or a 
more modern chocolate chip and cranberry number is entirely up to you. Hell, 
there are even recipes for hash biscotti floating around online (although I 
won’t link to them).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f47b%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f47b%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbbef12e630bc561c61630ef71cadca8cc56a137a%2F144_564_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20biscotti&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f47b%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+biscotti&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f47b%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbbef12e630bc561c61630ef71cadca8cc56a137a%2F144_564_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
 Classic, almond-flavoured biscotti from the River Cafe. Photograph: Felicity 
Cloake for the Guardian 
Nuts are a popular addition. As well as the aforementioned almond (Hartnett’s 
skin-on versions stand out particularly well against the pale crumb of the 
biscuit), the River Cafe uses hazelnuts, Roddy pine nuts and Caldesi 
pistachios, the vivid colour of which makes her biscotti look particularly 
fetching when sliced. Whichever nuts you go for, it’s worth toasting them first 
to bring out their flavour, while coarsely chopping them, as Roddy suggests, 
facilitates slicing the biscuits. Caldesi also adds candied peel, which feels 
rather festive.

It’s a good idea to flavour the dough itself – hard and bland is not an 
attractive combination in a biscuit. The aromatic citrus zests used by Roddy, 
Caldesi and the River Cafe are perfect for this. The aniseed and fennel seeds 
used by Hartnett and Roddy add an intriguing – and very Italian – hint of 
menthol, although, as the latter notes, “it’s a distinctive, opinionated 
combination that tends to divide people”. I won’t be offended if you leave them 
out or swap them for something more to your taste – perhaps Caldesi’s vanilla 
extract.

Hartnett is the only one to include a pinch of salt, which is almost always a 
good idea when baking.

Shaping

Hartnett is also the only one to suggest piping the mixture on to baking 
trays, which proves impossible for me; it’s simply too thick. The River Cafe 
mixture, by contrast, is far too loose to form into the sausages that are much 
the easiest way to shape the dough. Rolling them in flour, as Randall does, or 
icing sugar, like Caldesi, makes the task even simpler.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f47b%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f47b%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd68392ba8f8774daf9e937b0c7cc57d558ce07a0%2F0_549_3646_2187%2F3646.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20biscotti&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f47b%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+biscotti&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f47b%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd68392ba8f8774daf9e937b0c7cc57d558ce07a0%2F0_549_3646_2187%2F3646.jpg>
 Pistachio is the nut of choice in Katie Caldesi’s biscotti. Photograph: 
Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Make sure you spread the sausages out well, because they will spread during 
cooking (Hartnett’s 3cm gap proves sadly insufficient in this regard, and I am 
forced to clumsily separate some of the conjoined twins with a carving knife).

Baking

The secret to biscotti success, according to my experience, is a hot oven. 
Puzzlingly, Randall, the River Cafe and Hartnett all cook them at 150C, which 
suggests to me a fundamental difference between professional and home ovens, 
since all three remain resolutely soft and doughy after the first bake. Roddy’s 
and Caldesi’s, put in at 200C and 180C respectively, are firm enough to slice.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f47b%2Fsfb%23img-6&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f47b%2Fsfb%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10d4ab347c9a30428da95c790a5349bfc975f2dc%2F0_310_3648_2188%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20biscotti&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f47b%2Fstw%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+biscotti&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f47b%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10d4ab347c9a30428da95c790a5349bfc975f2dc%2F0_310_3648_2188%2F3648.jpg>
 Theo Randall’s biscotti. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Don’t try to cut the biscotti sausages immediately – wait for them to cool and 
harden a little to avoid compressing them, a lesson I learned the hard way with 
Randall’s version. That said, heed Hartnett when she says “they need to be 
still warm so you can slice them”. Caldesi’s brief second bake – a mere 2–3 
minutes compared with Roddy’s 30 – leaves her biscotti too pale and soft for my 
liking. If you’d prefer not to break your teeth, however, reduce Roddy’s second 
bake to about 15 minutes. And don’t worry – they will firm up further as they 
cool.

(Makes about 30)

150g skin-on almonds (or other nuts or a mix of nuts and fruit) 250g caster 
sugar 1 tsp fennel seeds (optional) Grated zest of 1 unwaxed lemon 250g plain 
flour 1 tsp baking powder ¼ tsp fine salt 2 large eggs, lightly beaten Icing 
sugar or flour, to dust

Heat the oven to 200C/400F/gas mark six. Spread the almonds out on a baking 
tray and bake for about seven minutes. Allow to cool a little, then roughly 
chop.

Meanwhile, put 1 tbsp of the sugar in a mortar with the fennel seeds (if 
using) and bruise them together. Stir this, along with the zest, into the 
remaining sugar (if you’re not using the seeds, skip this step). Line a baking 
tray with greaseproof paper.

Mix the sugar with the flour, baking powder and salt, then stir in the eggs, 
followed by the almonds. Bring it all together into a dough.

Dust a work surface lightly with icing sugar or flour, then divide the dough 
into two. Roll into sausages about 5cm in diameter, then arrange well apart on 
the tray and flatten slightly. Bake for 20-25 minutes until golden and firm on 
the outside. Remove from the oven and leave to cool a little, reducing the heat 
to 150C.

Transfer to a chopping board and, using a bread knife, cut into diagonal 
slices about 1cm wide. Lay the slices on the baking tray and bake for a further 
20-25 minutes, or until golden, then turn over and repeat (they’ll probably 
need less time on the other side). Allow to cool, then store in an airtight jar.

Biscotti: streets ahead of Rich Tea, or dry as the desert and equally tasty? 
What’s your favourite flavour, and in what do you like to dunk them?
