
Protections guaranteeing individual freedom were dramatically expanded by the 
charter of fundamental rights of the European Union 
<http://ec.europa.eu/justice/fundamental-rights/charter/index_en.htm>, which 
came into force in 2009. Disputes over its interpretation are presided over by 
the European court of justice (ECJ) in Luxembourg.

Condemned by Boris Johnson as undermining British justice and sovereignty, the 
charter and court in effect incorporate many of the liberties balanced and 
enforced through the European convention on human rights. The convention is 
separately overseen by the Council ofEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> in Strasbourg, not the EU.

Pivotal cases involving the surveillance powers of state security agencies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/27/eu-judges-could-limit-uk-surveillance-powers-before-referendum>
, prisoners’ voting rights and the ability to wear a headscarf at work have all 
been considered by the Luxembourg court.

Disputes about gender discrimination 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2011/mar/01/ecj-insurance-ruling-gender-bonkers>
,holiday entitlement 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/dec/06/british-gas-holiday-pay-employment-tribunal>
 and whetherobesity constitutes a disability 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/dec/18/obesity-can-be-disability-eu-court-rules>
 have also been the subject of contentious hearings.

The ECJ’s expanding jurisdiction has become increasingly contentious during the
EU referendum <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> campaign as 
Eurosceptics have focused their disapproval on its powers. Cases are usually 
referred to Luxembourg by national courts seeking clarification of general 
principles.

Eleanor Sharpston QC, the British advocate general at the court, denied last 
month 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/apr/19/we-dont-decide-national-cases-ecj-veteran-swipes-away-eurosceptic-barbs>
 that Luxembourg decided national claims. “The national judges handle it,” she 
told the Guardian. “We answer the questions. We don’t decide the case.”

The faithful are well protected by the EU. The European commission president, 
Jean-Claude Juncker,reaffirmed this protection this month 
<http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-16-1670_en.htm>, saying: “Freedom of 
religion or belief is a fundamental right which is part of the foundation of 
the European Union.”

Three years ago, the EU approved guidelines 
<http://eeas.europa.eu/delegations/fiji/press_corner/all_news/news/2013/eu_guidelines_on_the_promotion_and_protection_of_freedom_of_religion_or_belief_%28june_24_2013_fac%29.pdf>
 which said the freedom to practise all religions, change religion or reject 
religion or belief were fundamental human rights. However, such statements have 
not prevented rising concerns about Islamophobia and antisemitism across Europe 
in recent years.
