
In the many countries I’ve visited over the past several years while 
researching conditions for people with disabilities, the one constant – and 
haunting – refrain I’ve heard from people with disabilities has been: “I am 
treated as less than human.”

It wasn’t hard to understand why they might feel that way when I saw a 
five-year old girl inGhana 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2012/10/02/ghana-people-mental-disabilities-face-serious-abuse>
 dressed in rags, with a heavy chain secured to a nearby tree clamped around 
her legs. This was her fate because her family believed that she was possessed 
by evil spirits, which is commonly associated with having a disability in many 
communities.

Many of the children that have been institutionalised will grow up and never 
leave these places.

Or when I met Agus 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2016/03/20/indonesia-treating-mental-health-shackles>
, a young man with a psychosocial disability (mental health condition) in 
Central Java, Indonesia. He spent four years locked in a sheep shed, barely 
able to stand or move, surrounded by the stench of human and animal waste.

I have just returned from Serbia 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2016/06/08/serbia-children-disabilities-neglected> 
where we documented that children with disabilities are often confined in 
institutions, sometimes taken there directly from the maternity ward on the 
advice of medical staff. Many of the children do not attend school or play with 
toys or other children. They just lie in bed all day without any stimulation or 
interaction. Instead of echoing with laughter and running, the halls of these 
“homes” for children are quiet, chilling. And many of the children there will 
never leave.

I was fortunate to be among the many advocates who participated in the 
negotiations on theinternational disability rights treaty 
<http://www.un.org/disabilities/convention/conventionfull.shtml> at the UN in 
New York. During that process, there was a sea change in the way people viewed, 
respected and engaged with people with disabilities. People with disabilities 
had a voice, and they were heard.

Ten years <http://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/CRPD/Pages/CRPD10.aspx> since its 
adoption, much progress has been made in so many aspects of the law and life, 
and people with disabilities in many countries are leading the fight for their 
rights.

At the same time, in many countries – both developing and supposedly developed 
– people with disabilities continue to be locked up in institutions, hidden out 
of sight or treated like animals. And stigma and discrimination play a central 
role.

Related: Live Q&A: How can we build momentum on global disability rights? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jun/14/live-qa-how-can-we-build-momentum-on-global-disability-rights>

Chances are you know someone with a disability. According to the World Health 
Organisation, 1 billion people – one in seven – have some form of disability. 
They are our classmates, relatives and friends, and they have the right to be 
treated the same as everyone else.

Yet, laws in dozens of countries prevent people with disabilities from 
deciding whom to marry, where to own a home, or what medical treatment they 
prefer. These are decisions that are often taken for granted by us, but in some 
places people with disabilities have this right handed over to a guardian, who 
makes all their decisions without consulting them.

Last week, people with disabilities and other advocates, diplomats, and 
friends of the disability community gathered again at UN headquarters in New 
York to exchange views on how theConvention on the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities <http://www.un.org/disabilities/convention/conventionfull.shtml> 
(CRPD) can be implemented and monitored. When it came into force 10 years ago, 
it was the first major human rights treaty of the 21st century – a watershed 
moment. The CRPD has now been ratified by 164 countries.


We need to see more people with disabilities in leadership and decision-making 
roles in governments and companies

To me, the treaty is far more than a legal framework. Yes, it sets out the 
right to equal access to education, freedom from torture, and the right to live 
with peers in the community. But even more critical is the convention’s 
potential to shift the way we think about disability.

It conveys that people with disabilities are not objects of charity, but have 
the same rights and dignities we all do.

The challenge of changing the mindset of millions around the world remains. To 
start, we need to see more people with disabilities in leadership and 
decision-making roles – in governments, companies and the entertainment sector.


In addition to amending discriminatory laws, governments need to make sure 
that disability rights are enforced through better monitoring and resources 
invested in rights-respecting alternatives to institutions and isolation cells. 
And people with disabilities themselves and their representative organisations 
should be involved every step of the way.

We need to keep in mind that disability does not discriminate – any one of us 
can join the disability community at any point in our lives. It’s not about 
them, it’s about us.

This week we’re focussing on the issue of disability rights around the world. 
Please get in touch with your experiences, comments and stories – email us at 
globaldevpros@theguardian.com, putting disability rights in the subject line, 
or add your experienceshere 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jun/08/the-moment-i-felt-excluded-because-of-my-disability-share-your-stories>
.


Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter. Join the conversation with the 
hashtag #DisabilityRights
