
• For the Daily Mail, Snapchat is high on the list of reasons why Britain 
(especially young Britain) is going to hell in a handcart. The messaging 
service was the topline and also in the frame inits report 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3524563/Two-teenage-girls-guilty-murdering-woman-39-battered-coffee-table-computer-printer-brutal-attack-home.html>
 on the murder of Angela Wrightson: “Slaughtered on Snapchat: that’s the social 
media site where two giggling girls aged 13 and 14 posted photos as they beat a 
woman to death” (a follow-up piece called them the “Snapchat killer girls”). 
Along with Twitter, Facebook and Instagram, “the new favourite, Snapchat” was 
named and shamed ina John Humphrys rant 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-3516575/Vanity-inanity-JOHN-HUMPHRYS-selfies-Twitter-dangers-mob-taking-social-media.html>
 in the Mail for infernally “sparking an urge in millions of users to 
manipulate social media as a platform to show off”. An article offering 
pre-exam tips for parents called it a ruinously “addictive” distraction that 
left kids incapable of concentration and learning. So Monkey was puzzled to see 
the paper named in Broadcast (together with the hipper likes of BuzzFeed and 
Vice) as one of 18 UK publishers “to have forged an official relationship with 
Snapchat”; that sounds not so much like supping with the Devil, in the context 
of the Mail’s coverage of it, as using his catering service.

• As well as a pioneering female architect, the late Zaha Hadid was also a 
sometime guest editor on Today and Monkey enjoyed stumbling ona blog 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/theeditors/2009/01/in_the_gutter_with_the_stars.html>
 written about that experience in 2009 by Peter Hanington (a former Today 
stalwart, who has just published a first novel drawing – sometimes 
mischievously – on his 14 years on the Radio 4 show):

“At one of our early meetings we sat at a tableful of prototypes for various 
Hadid projects currently in production.

Today programme: Ah, that’s beautiful. Is that the Abu Dhabi Performing Arts 
Centre?

Zaha: No, that’s a coffee pot.

Today: Oh. How about that – more kitchenware?

Zaha: No. That’s the Vitra Fire Station in Germany.

Today: Right. What about this? The Glasgow Transport museum?

Zaha: No, that’s a shoe. Are there any other producers who might want to work 
on my programme?”

• Profiling John Whittingdale 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/john-whittingdale> in Tatler, Quentin 
Letts adds valuably to our knowledge of the instincts that could guide the 
culture secretary when he finally takes the BBC, Channel 4 and press regulation 
out of his in-tray and makes the long-awaited relevant decisions. We knew that 
the cult sec was and is a heavy metal maniac, but the Tatler piece reveals that 
he “likes punk too, and spent many a night in his youth [he turned 17 in 1976] 
pogoing to bands promoting spiky-haired rebellion”. Monkey would be keen to 
hear from anyone with photographic or film evidence of a Winchester schoolboy 
resembling Whitto (whose hairstyle looks to date from his teenage years) 
pogoing at local or London gigs in punk’s 70s heyday, particularly if it was 
“Anarchy in the UK” that got him so sweaty; and naturally any images of him 
“gobbing” (spitting) or sporting a mohican, would be especially warmly 
welcomed, rewarded with Monkey merchandising and forwarded for possible 
negotiational use to Tony Hall and David Abraham.

• Whittingdale’s DCMS junior minister Ed Vaizey, meanwhile, deserves applause 
for sounding off last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/23/ed-vaizey-no-excuse-for-lack-of-diversity-in-british-orchestras>
 about diversity - they’ve “got to stop making excuses”, fumed the government’s 
culture commander and MP for Wantage as he urged orchestras to look for young 
talent that wasn’t white and middle class. But might it be time for him and his 
colleagues to stop making excuses too? Besides peer’s son the Hon Ed (47, ed St 
Paul’s and Oxford),the DCMS ministerial line-up 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-culture-media-sport>
 consists of Whittingdale (56, ed Winchester and UCL) and Baroness 
Neville-Rolfe (63, ed convent schools and Oxford), with another baroness in the 
form of Joanna Shields (53, ed in US). In gender terms, at least, the 
department isn’t doing badly; but three are toffs, all are white, all are 
heterosexual and all (although Tracey Crouch, 40, only just qualifies) are 
middle-aged. And then there’s the 10 Angry Men, plus one woman, of Jesse 
Norman’sDCMS select committee 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/culture-media-and-sport-committee/membership2/>
.

• Monkey will be heading on Thursday to Poldark: Anatomy of a Hit, a panel 
event <https://rts.org.uk/event/poldark-anatomy-hit> promising to tell the 
“inside story” of its success organised by the Royal Television Society (making 
the RTS look two-faced, as the Cornish drama was completelysnubbed 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/03/poldark-topless-scything-rts-bbc-aidan-turner-mark-rylance>
 in its recent programme award nominations). Not for the chance to see Ross and 
Demelza since the actors won’t be there, despite the shameless use of a topless 
photo of Aidan Turner to promote the love-in. No, the big attraction is 
BBC-to-ITV defector Polly Hill, who haschanged her job 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/08/itv-polly-hill-drama-kevin-lygo-sue-murphy>
 and reportedly doubled her salary since the RTS line-up including her - as the 
BBC executive who oversaw the hit show - was announced. ITV’s newly installed 
drama chief is bound to face tricky moments once the inevitable gushing gives 
way to questions from the audience, which might include whether it was only 
possible to adapt Winston Graham’s novels (again) because of the BBC’s 
un-ITV-like willingness to take risks; and whether, or how soon, Ross and 
Demelza might follow her to ITV, given that the series is made by Mammoth which 
the commercial broadcaster pointedlyacquired last June 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jun/01/poldark-producer-bought-by-itv> 
soon after Poldark’s first run ended.
