
Anyone who has ever made a reservation at a restaurant, then, for no good 
reason, failed to show up – it’s you we have to blame for the latest 
development in the restaurant world. The ticketing system Tock – where pay for 
your dinner when you book the table, in the same way that you pay upfront for a 
sporting event, theatre or gig – launched in the US at the end of last year. It 
is the brainchild of Nick Kokonas, the co-owner ofAlinea 
<http://website.alinearestaurant.com/site/>, Chicago’s “fun, emotional and 
provocative” (and, of course, hugely expensive) modernist restaurant. I 
wondered at the time whether it would ever find traction on British shores. And 
lo: theClove Club <http://thecloveclub.com/> in Shoreditch, east London, has 
just announced that next month it will be the first restaurant in the UK to 
adopt it 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/food-and-drink/news/the-clove-club-the-restaurant-where-you-will-prepay-for-your-food-10147596.html>
 for its £65 and £95 tasting menus.

I completely understand why restaurants would turn to Tock. In a business 
where margins can be squeaky-tight, the loss of a few tables every week to 
no-shows or what the biz calls “short-seating” – the practice of booking a 
table for a larger group than turns up – can mean the difference between profit 
and breaking even. I have spoken to restaurateurs who have bemoaned evenings 
when, of the 32 tables booked, only four have shown up.

Why does it happen? In big cities, concierges block-book for weeks in advance 
in case their wealthy overseas clients fancy dropping into the hard-to-get, hot 
tickets. Then there are the would-be diners who reserve three or four 
restaurants at a time, reckoning “we can decide which we fancy on the night”. 
Failing to cancel those bookings might not make a painful difference to the 
deep-pocketed big boys, but for the equally sought-after small independents, it 
can hurt badly.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F47b34%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F47b34%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F8%2F1428489147652%2F9080110d-b4b1-4c1b-b961-2d5dfb7427ef-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Would%20you%20pay%20for%20your%20dinner%20before%20you've%20eaten%20it%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F47b34%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Would+you+pay+for+your+dinner+before+you%27ve+eaten+it%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F47b34%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F8%2F1428489147652%2F9080110d-b4b1-4c1b-b961-2d5dfb7427ef-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Home-cured meat at the Clove Club. Photograph: Per-Anders Jorgensen 
But what do ticketing systems mean for us, the customers? Asking around throws 
up quite a hard core of resistance. The Clove Club’s Isaac McHale dismisses any 
intention of “surging” – that grasping practice used by the likes of Uber to 
hike their prices at peak times. Instead, he says off-peak bookings could be 
made more affordable – something that could work well for restaurant and diner. 
Any other incentives? “A true picture of availability,” he says. “Often 
restaurants have tables held for phone reservations, so you look online and it 
says full, but when you call they have a table.”

And what happens if you genuinely can’t make it on the night? McHale sees no 
reason why people can’t sell their tickets on, as you would with concerts or 
theatre. “But,” he continues, “I’m sure there will be situations where we can 
do something for someone.” They will also put measures in place to avoid the 
very real possibility of “scalping”, when the price shoots sky-high. And if the 
diner hates her pre-paid dinner? “It rarely happens … But if it should, we will 
seek to resolve any issues in exactly the same way we deal with it now.”

On the other side of the coin, Nick Gibson of the excellent Draper’s Arms in 
Islington, north London, is adamant that he will not be adopting Tock, no 
matter what. “I can’t contemplate a pre-pay system that treats every honest 
customer as a potential culprit.” He insists he is not knocking other 
restaurateurs’ actions, and acknowledges that his casual style of outfit is 
more likely to benefit from walk-ins than anyone at the upscale end of the 
business. “It’s just a shame when a tiny minority cause wholly unnecessary 
inconvenience and upset for a vast majority of good people,” he says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F47b34%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F47b34%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F8%2F1428489260442%2F6d0eaead-9d9b-4a4e-83f0-d9877a62f281-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Would%20you%20pay%20for%20your%20dinner%20before%20you've%20eaten%20it%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F47b34%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Would+you+pay+for+your+dinner+before+you%27ve+eaten+it%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F47b34%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F8%2F1428489260442%2F6d0eaead-9d9b-4a4e-83f0-d9877a62f281-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Brown butter-poached sea bass, spinach and oak-smoked roe. Photograph: 
Per-Anders Jorgensen 
Others are more bullish: “Simple rule,” says James Lewis of high-end Gauthier 
Soho. “If someone no-shows without explanation, they’re banned for life,” – a 
measure he says “works very well”. But then they have the luxury of a loyal and 
dedicated clientele of regulars, not something that many big-city restaurateurs 
can rely on.

I have no problem with Tock and its ilk, but then I’m a restaurant nut. I want 
interesting, independent restaurants not only to survive, but to flourish. 
After a recent tasting of the tiniest, most fragile cheese tartlets, served 
with intense duck broth scented with morels and ginger in a glass “seasoned” 
with ancient, raisiny bual madeira at the Clove Club, I’d happily shell out 
upfront for whatever it has to offer. McHale is adamant that it is in 
everyone’s favour, restaurant and diner: “Our system is more transparent, and 
ticket sales will allow us, as a small business, to plan effectively, reduce 
waste and work smarter.”

If it meant I could get a seat at Sushi Tetsu <http://sushitetsu.co.uk/> – 
impossible since the early days before word got out (damn you, Jay Rayner 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/jul/29/jay-rayner-restaurant-review-sushi-tetsu>
) – I’d be all over Tock like a rash. But for those less obsessed with their 
dinner, the jury’s still out. One thing is for sure: if some diners continue to 
abuse restaurants’ hospitality, the rest of us will wind up paying.
