
Globally, road injuries are the top cause of death 
<http://www.who.int/violence_injury_prevention/road_safety_status/2015/Executive_summary_GSRRS2015.pdf?ua=1>
 among people ages 15 to 29 – claiming upwards of a million lives a year. 
What’s more,90% <http://www.un.org/ar/roadsafety/pdf/roadsafetyreport.pdf> 
(pdf) of the world’s road deaths and serious injuries take place in low and 
middle-income countries, according to the United Nations (UN).


This global health emergency is finally starting to get the attention it 
deserves. We’re in the midst of the UN’s Decade of Action for Road Safety, 
which lasts until 2020; and in April, the UN General Assembly adopted a
resolution 
<http://www.who.int/violence_injury_prevention/media/news/2016/15_04/en> to 
improve road safety.

But Dr Kelly Henning, leader of the Bloomberg Global Road Safety Program at 
Bloomberg Philanthropies <http://www.bloomberg.org/about>, says there are two 
primary challenges to reducing road fatalities. First, despite recent efforts 
to raise the profile of road safety, the issue isn’t broadly appreciated. 
Second, progress requires several sections of government to work together. As 
she notes: “It is about health, but also involves [action from] traffic police 
and road engineers, so it requires a lot of political attention.”

Related: Road safety initiative helps Rwanda's motorbike taxis stay on the 
right track | Clar Ni Chonghaile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/28/safemotos-rwanda-motorbike-taxis-road-safety>

This isn’t new or surprising information. Back in 1998 
<http://www.ifrc.org/en/what-we-do/health/road-safety--a-major-concern>, the 
InternationalFederation of Red Cross and Red Crescent 
<http://www.ifrc.org/en/who-we-are/the-movement> (IFRC) pointed out the 
importance of global road safety. Recognizing that cooperative efforts must 
stretch beyond those between nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), the IFRC, 
the World Bank and the UK government’s Department for International Development 
created the Global Road Safety Partnership (GRSP <http://www.grsproadsafety.org>
) one year later.

“There needs to be a partnership between governments, civil society and the 
private sector,” says Dave Elseroad, the Global Advocacy and Grants Programme 
manager at the GRSP, hosted by the IFRC. “Many large corporations are good at 
road safety – they may have large fleets [of vehicles], [and] know about moving 
goods and services. The government has an important role in legislating; civil 
society is important, too, in ensuring road safety.”

Elseroad points to specific measures that can alter road users’ behavior and 
make things safer. Beyond seatbelt laws for front and rear seats, he notes that 
appropriate speed limits based on road usage – like when cars, buses, donkey 
carts, bicycles and pedestrians all share the same space – are crucial.

Also key: actually carrying out the law. Vietnam, for instance, successfully 
reduced its rates of death and serious injuries due to stronger enforcement of 
motorcycle helmet legislation. In 2007, the country was no stranger to traffic 
safety issues:roadway accidents 
<http://millionssaved.cgdev.org/case-studies/vietnams-comprehensive-helmet-law> 
killed about 14,000 residents, with 60% of those being motorcycle riders.

As described in Millions Saved: New Cases of Proven Success in Global Health 
<http://millionssaved.cgdev.org>, Vietnam’s motorcycle helmet laws, including a 
heavy fine for nonwearers that would cost a rider more than the price of a 
helmet, were introduced that same year. Prior to the legislation, few people 
wore them – and afterward, usage skyrocketed. What else helped spur use? A 
public awareness campaign, the creation of headgear more suitable for tropical 
climates and free helmets for children.

When Vietnamese police began to strictly enforce the new laws, the number of 
helmet wearers increased and the number of head injuries after accidents 
decreased. In just three months, according to data sampled from 20 hospitals 
around Hanoi, there was an 18% reduction in rates of death and serious injury – 
with 1,557 lives saved and 2,495 severe injuries prevented. By 2009, helmet use 
doubled to 95% of riders, according to a recentreport  
<http://www.bloomberg.org/program/public-health/road-safety>by Bloomberg 
Philanthropies, and remains at more than 90% today.

Related: Why motorcycle safety, meningitis vaccines and money transfers are 
signs of a global health revolution – podcast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/health-revolution/2016/apr/05/meningitis-vaccines-money-transfers-orphan-aids-helmets>

Other ongoing programs include those in Mumbai, India, where a range of road 
safety improvements are under way. The city was one of 10selected 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/mumbai/Bloomberg-to-give-Mumbai-Rs-100cr-for-road-safety/articleshow/46222538.cms>
 in 2015 to receive funding and support from Bloomberg Philanthropies to 
improve road safety. Mumbai is also taking stricter action on traffic 
violations, thanks to agovernment resolution 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/mumbai/Mumbai-traffic-police-net-over-109-crore-as-fine-from-97-lakh-offenders-in-5-years/articleshow/52457300.cms>
 issued 31 December 2015.

Today, Africa has one of the highest rates 
<http://www.who.int/violence_injury_prevention/road_safety_status/2013/report/factsheet_afro.pdf>
 (pdf) of road deaths, according to the World Health Organization (WHO). To 
that end, the NGOAmend <http://www.amend.org> uses customized programs to 
improve road safety in 12 nations across the continent. Amend’s executive 
director, Jeffrey Witte, says the organization has gotten results with 
seemingly small interventions, such as using reflectors on school bags.

“Children who are more visible are less likely to be hit,” Witte says. “We 
sell [the bags] at cost and work with partners who buy them – perhaps adding a 
logo – and give them away.” Some 75,000 of the sacks have been distributed in 
10 countries: Tanzania, Ghana, Senegal, Lesotho, Swaziland, Mozambique, 
Botswana, Malawi, Namibia and Zambia. But scaling up has so far not proved 
possible, Witte admits.

Despite challenges and drawbacks, road safety continues to improve all over 
the globe. “We know what works. It’s a matter of having the political will and 
getting on with it,” Elseroad says. As Henning puts it: “We are starting to see 
momentum.”

This content is paid for by the Center for Global Development
