
On 30 May, a special court in Senegal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/30/hissene-habre-trial-provides-model-for-international-justice>
 found Hissène Habré, former president of Chad,guilty of crimes against humanity
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/30/chad-hissene-habre-guilty-crimes-against-humanity-senegal>
, including torture and rape.


Habré was in power for just eight years – and what terrible years they were. 
An estimated 40,000 people were killed. Some were political opponents, but most 
were just people who sought a better life or expressed opinions that differed 
from those of the government.

At that time, I was a teenager, growing up in the capital, N’Djamena. It was a 
time of constant fear 
<http://www.news24.com/Africa/News/habre-had-power-of-life-and-death-20160209>; 
people disappeared in the night and we never saw them again. If you didn’t 
praise Habré, you could be reported to the security services as an enemy. High 
school students who demonstrated for basic rights were shot dead by the army.

Related: Hissène Habré trial provides model for international justice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/30/hissene-habre-trial-provides-model-for-international-justice>

Young men like myself were particular targets. As we sat outside in the 
evenings, glad to escape the stifling daytime heat, we kept a constant watch 
for the vehicles of army patrols searching for conscripts to fight Habré’s 
desert wars. Soldiers would give chase to likely prospects. I managed not to be 
captured and tortured during Habré’s reign. 

In 1990, Habré was ousted from power and escaped to Senegal with the loot that 
he had smuggled out of Chad,one of the world’s poorest countries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/may/21/chad-oil-revenue-share-discontent>
. Attempts to prosecute him for his crimes failed.

In 2001, the Senegalese court ruled that it did not have the jurisdiction to 
try Habré on torture charges. Although he was sentenced to death in absentia in
Chad <https://www.theguardian.com/world/chad>, he remained in his secure 
compound in Senegal.

It was not until 2013 that he was arrested, and his trial finally began in 
July 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/20/former-chad-dictator-hissene-habre-war-crimes-trial>
. Thelong arm of justice 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/04/chronicler-of-chad-tyrant-crimes-confident-justice-will-not-be-denied>
 indeed. Once the trial convened, however, the overwhelming weight of evidence 
presented by prosecutors enabled the court to reach its verdict. Some evidence 
was in the form of documents,discarded as rubbish by prison authorities 
<https://hrdag.org/content/chad/State-Violence-in-Chad.pdf> (pdf), listing the 
names and punishments inflicted upon detainees. But the most affecting and 
persuasive evidence came from69 torture survivors 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2016/05/hissene-habre-verdict-landmark-decision-brings-justice-for-tens-of-thousands-of-victims/>
. Sitting just feet away from the man who had attempted to destroy their lives, 
they described their ordeals.

I know how difficult this is, even in the privacy of a quiet room with a 
trusted confidant.Torture <http://www.theguardian.com/law/torture> is a 
constant in your life – it doesn’t end when you are freed. You relive your 
torture, through physical pain and the mental torment of flashbacks and 
nightmares. You carry the scars – not with pride that you have survived, but 
with shame that you survived while others did not. I salute the survivors who 
testified so courageously.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F30%2Fhissene-habre-chads-former-dictator-sentenced-life-in-prison-video-profile&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F30%2Fhissene-habre-chads-former-dictator-sentenced-life-in-prison-video-profile&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hiss%C3%A8ne%20Habr%C3%A9%3A%20Chad's%20former%20dictator%20gets%20life%20in%20prison%20%E2%80%93%20video%20profile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F30%2Fhissene-habre-chads-former-dictator-sentenced-life-in-prison-video-profile>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hiss%C3%A8ne+Habr%C3%A9%3A+Chad%27s+former+dictator+gets+life+in+prison+%E2%80%93+video+profile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F30%2Fhissene-habre-chads-former-dictator-sentenced-life-in-prison-video-profile&media=>
Hissène Habré: Chad’s former dictator gets life in prison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/may/30/hissene-habre-chads-former-dictator-sentenced-life-in-prison-video-profile>
But for those who suffered under Habré, his conviction is just one more step 
on the road to justice. He intends to appeal his conviction, a right denied to 
his victims. If the sentence is upheld, Habré will be jailed for life, but he 
will not be tortured or deprived of food or light, as his prisoners were.

While Habré may have been the driving force behind the horrors of those eight 
years, he did not act alone. He was supported by the army and security 
agencies, who benefited politically and financially from their actions. In 2015,
20 of the most high-profile abusers 
<http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/chad-20-officials-hissne-habre-dictatorship-jailed-life-following-torture-conviction-1493549>
 were convicted in Chad on charges of murder, torture and kidnapping. Others 
should also be charged, whether in Chad or in the countries where they now live.

And what of the countries who supported Habré because they regarded him as a 
counterweight to Libya’s Colonel Muammar Gaddafi? The people of Chad, 
sacrificed to an African power play, are owed a debt by the US and France. The
US secretary of state, John Kerry, has welcomed the verdict, 
<http://www.state.gov/secretary/remarks/2016/05/257811.htm> but calming words 
are not enough. No country, however powerful, should consider torture a 
sideshow to political expediency.

What about the survivors, those who were imprisoned and the families of the 
disappeared? Chad is a poor country and is hard pressed to provide basic 
services. It seems only right that some of thetrust fund to be established 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2016/03/24/chad-court-order-no-cash-ex-dictators-victims>
 from Habré’s stolen booty, together with other contributions, should be spent 
on providing survivors with the clinical and mental health services provided by 
Freedom from Torture, to help heal their wounds. A memorial to the victims 
would be a public testimony to their suffering.

Above all, the people of Chad need a full accounting of their past under 
Habré. What caused the violent repression? What happened to the prisoners and 
to those who disappeared? Who took the decisions, and by whom were those 
determinations carried out? For us, this is the beginning of a long road to 
healing ourselves.

• Kolbassia Haoussou is co-founder of Survivors Speak OUT 
<https://www.freedomfromtorture.org/survivor-voices/7225>, a network of torture 
survivors supported byFreedom from Torture <https://www.freedomfromtorture.org/>
