
On the night of 11 July, 1501, one Antonio Rinaldeschi staggered out of 
Osteria Fico, one of Florence’s notorious dives (which used to stand in Piazza 
Sant’Elisabetta, near the Duomo), having lost his cloak, literally, at cards. 
He noticed a fresco of the Annunciation on the wall of the ancient church of 
Santa Maria degli Alberighi, cursed the Virgin for his bad luck, picked up a 
lump of dung from the cobbles and lobbed it. The dung hit the Virgin smack in 
the face. Rinaldeschi had no luck at all that night: he was seen, reported to 
the Eight (Florence’s police), and hunted down. Almost lynched on his way to 
prison, he was tried for sacrilege and summarily hung from a window of the 
Bargello after repenting of his crime. The dung, meanwhile, had – so people 
said – been transformed into the shape of a rose on the Virgin’s cheek.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c6qx%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c6qx%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F8%2F1441735387808%2F52ffbea4-adcc-4a6f-a16d-520e72db2d93-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mucky%20strike%3A%20what%20happened%20when%20a%20Florentine%20gambler%20defaced%20the%20Virgin&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c6qx%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mucky+strike%3A+what+happened+when+a+Florentine+gambler+defaced+the+Virgin&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c6qx%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F8%2F1441735387808%2F52ffbea4-adcc-4a6f-a16d-520e72db2d93-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Spot the poo ... the rescued Annunciation fresco, in its over-the-top rococo 
frame. Photograph: Jeff Cotton 
Walk up Via del Corso, past fashion boutiques, shoe shops and bakeries, and 
you’ll find the baroque facade of Santa Maria de’ Ricci, built by the Ricci 
family to put things right after the sacrilege. The Annunciation, chiselled off 
the wall (the old church was demolished in the 1700s), sits above the altar, 
rather cowed by its huge rococo frame. Close by, Antonio’s crime and 
comeuppance are shown on a painted panel. Squint at the faded, damaged fresco, 
free your imagination and you might just see the rose on the Virgin’s cheek. 
Rinaldeschi’s story shines a slightly queasy light on the real Renaissance 
city, about life among the prostitutes, gamblers and drunks. But there’s 
redemption as well. The world of the people going about their business in the 
background of those great masterpieces of Renaissance painting, still 
whispering, faintly, from a relic of pigment and plaster.
• Philip Kazan’s latest novel, The Painter of Souls, is out now (Orion 
<https://www.orionbooks.co.uk/authors/detail.page?id=fqneBA4b3EP/3QqzmiuEsdvc0L-1y2jsy-VhZIbUOR/8O1tZK8jdBwtQDQ__>
, £13.99). To buy a copy for £11.19, including UK p&p, go to
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/303358/>
