
The two worst times for dicks on the New York subway: when the train car is 
empty or when it’s crowded. As a teenager, if I found myself in an empty car, I 
would immediately leave – even if it meant changing cars as the train moved, 
which terrified me. Because, if I didn’t, I just knew the guy sitting across 
from me would inevitably lift his newspaper to reveal a semihard cock, and even 
if he wasn’t planning on it, I sure wasn’t going to sit there and worry about 
it for the whole ride.

On crowded train cars I didn’t see dicks – I felt them. Pressing into my hip, 
men pretending that the rocking up against me was just because of the jostling 
of the train.

The first time I saw a penis on the subway, I was on the platform for the N 
train three blocks from my house in Queens, on my way to school. I was 12. I 
had just missed a train, so I was the only person there other than a man all 
the way at the other end of the platform. He was so far away that I could see 
only the outline of his shape, but soon I noticed his hand moving furiously – 
and that he was walking quickly towards me with his penis in his hand. I had 
always thought myself prepared for something like this; I knew I was supposed 
to yell or run, but I just stood there. I didn’t look away or turn around, and 
even though I felt my knees giving out, my feet felt strongly planted to the 
ground.

As another train started to pull into the station, he stopped midway down the 
platform and zipped himself up. The doors of the train opened and he walked on, 
normally. My feet still in the same place, I tapped a man in a suit coming off 
the car on the shoulder and asked for help in a small voice, but he didn’t stop 
moving. So I stood there. When the next train came, I got on, figuring I should 
get to school, but I got off one stop later, to call my parents from a station 
phone booth. I noticed that my hands and face had pins and needles.

***

It’s called the cycle of violence, but in my family, female suffering is 
linear: abuse is passed down like the world’s worst birthright, largely 
skipping the men and marking the women with scars, night terrors (and fantastic 
senses of humour). My aunts and my mom joked about how often it happened to 
them when they were younger: the man who flashed a jacket open and had a big 
red bow on his cock; the neighbourhood pervert who masturbated visibly in his 
window as they walked to school as girls. (The cops told them the man could do 
whatever he wanted in his own house.) “Just point and laugh,” my aunt said. 
“That usually sends them running.” Usually.

Of course, what feels like a matrilineal curse is not really ours. We don’t 
own it; the shame and disgust belong to the perpetrators. At least, that’s what 
the books say. But the frequency with which women in my family have been hurt 
or sexually assaulted starts to feel like a flashing message encoded in our DNA:
 Hurt. Me.

My daughter is five and I want to inoculate her against this. I want Layla to 
have her father’s lucky genes – genes that walk into a room and feel entitled 
to be there. Genes that feel safe. Not my out-of-place chromosomes that are 
fight‑or-flight ready.

This is the one way in which I wish she was not mine.

***

My dad assured me that no cop would ever arrest him for beating a man who 
flashes children

For months after the man showed me his penis on the subway platform, my father 
walked me up the stairs every morning to wait for the train. The booth worker 
let him through the gate without paying, after my dad explained what had 
happened. He gave him a bag of cherries from the tree that grew in our yard as 
a thank you every week.

As we were talking on the platform under the sun, I noticed an odd shape under 
my father’s jacket. He tried to distract me with a joke, but when I asked him 
about it a second time, he pulled up his shirt to show me a metal pipe sticking 
out of the top of his trousers. He assured me that no cop would ever arrest him 
for beating a man who flashes children. Today he tells me he knew that was a 
lie, but he brought the pipe with him anyway.

On the worst day – a few years later – I didn’t notice the man at all. The 
train was crowded; my mind was elsewhere. I was listening toA Tribe Called Quest
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/23/phife-dawg-tribe-called-quest-good-vibes>
 on my Walkman and thinking about how warm it was. When I stepped out of the 
subway, the sun hit my face and I was happy to be almost home. But when I 
started to put my hand in my back pocket, I felt something wet: I had made it 
the whole ride back without noticing that a man, whose face I would never see, 
had come on me.

I wiped my hand on the lower leg of my jeans and looked around to see if 
anyone had noticed. I walked the three blocks home with my backpack slung as 
low as possible, so that no one walking behind me could see what had happened 
or could think I had peed myself.

I peeled the jeans off when I got home and, even though most of the semen had 
landed on the pocket – giving me two, rather than just one, layers of 
protection – the skin on my ass was still damp from it. I ran the tub until 
there were two inches of scalding water along the bottom, squirted in some of 
my sister’s Victoria’s Secret vanilla-scented bath gel, and sat in it quickly, 
my shirt still on.

I wrapped a pink towel around myself when I stepped out of the tub and turned 
my jeans inside out before putting them in the laundry basket so my mother 
wouldn’t find out. I knew she would cry. I piled some sheets on top of the 
jeans to be safe.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jh85%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jh85%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9312db4f529be03b2c9ee88d4a7d7842dce92237%2F4_1582_6705_6250%2F6705.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jessica%20Valenti%3A%20my%20life%20as%20a%20%E2%80%98sex%20object%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jh85%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jessica+Valenti%3A+my+life+as+a+%E2%80%98sex+object%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jh85%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9312db4f529be03b2c9ee88d4a7d7842dce92237%2F4_1582_6705_6250%2F6705.jpg>
 ‘As soon as I got a chest, the taunts about my face stopped as boys became 
more interested in feeling me up than making me cry.’ Photograph: Chris Buck 
for the Guardian 
Later I would find out that the guy rubbing up on you in the subway isn’t just 
an asshole – he has a disorder. In the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders, the American Psychiatric Association describes “frotteurism” 
as “recurrent, intense, or arousing sexual urges or fantasies, that involve 
touching and rubbing against a nonconsenting person”. There are online forums 
for men – because, let’s be real, frotteurs are almost exclusively men – who 
rub on women and girls on the train, in bars, wherever they can do it while 
getting off unnoticed.

They have handles like “Bum Feeler” and “Rock Hard”, and share stories of 
their exploits and pictures of the women they have surreptitiously dry-humped. 
Some give advice, such as backing away occasionally, so your victim gets the 
impression that you’re working hard not to touch her and that any contact is 
the fault of the crowd.

“Women are forgiving if you can make it seem like this,” Rock Hard writes. 
“Almost like you can’t help it, not like you’ve preyed on them like a piece of 
meat.”

***

There was a large mirrored cabinet above the sink at the house I grew up in. 
If I pulled out all three of the doors, I could create a three-way mirror to 
look at my face from all possible angles.

I wrote in my diary at the time, I’m so ugly I can’t stand it. I have a big 
gross nose, pimples, hairy arms. I will never have a boy like me or a 
boyfriend. All of my friends are pretty and I will be the one with no one.

I was feeling that loneliness acutely at the time, because I was obsessed with 
a boy named Matt. Matt – the first in a long line of blond boys I would fall 
for – told me once that I would be so, so pretty if not for my big nose. All I 
heard was, he thought I could be pretty!

I started to measure my nose. First with my fingers, which I would try to keep 
the same distance apart as they were when they were on my face and then bring 
them over to my mother and her nose to demonstrate just how much bigger mine 
was compared with hers. She would insist that my nose was smaller – the kind of 
well-meaning parenting that just inspired fury and distrust. The nicest thing 
someone said to me was that a lot of people my age had big noses, and that I 
would eventually “grow into it”. The comment acknowledged that the ugliness I 
was feeling was valid and not some childish self-hatred. It was the only thing 
that gave me hope, the idea that my face would slowly morph into something more 
proportional than the monstrosity I was currently working with.

The thing about hating your face so intently is that it takes an extraordinary 
amount of care and attention. The obsession is almost contradictory, because 
you start to love the self-hatred a little bit. It becomes a part of your 
routine – you whisper, “I hate you” when you pass by a mirror, or you think it 
when trying on clothes or putting on makeup, acts that feel foolish at the 
time, because you know you’re not tricking anyone into thinking you’re 
beautiful. There’s nothing that you could pile on your body or face that would 
make it worthy.

But at least I could bear to look. A friend I lived with for a short while had 
an ID card for work that she was supposed to keep around her neck at all times. 
To avoid having to look at the picture of herself, she carefully cut a small 
piece of yellow paper into a square and taped it over her face. Later, I would 
find plastic bags of vomit hidden underneath her bed, wrapped in towels meant 
to mask the smell that eventually led to their discovery.

I was an ugly girl who became a sexy girl once my breasts grew in and I 
started telling dirty jokes

I started carrying a piece of paper with me that I would position over the 
bump on my nose when I looked in that three-way mirror to see what I might look 
like if it were gone. My father tells me my nose is part of my Italian 
heritage, that getting rid of it would be a slap in the face to our ethnicity. 
I tell him we’ll always have spaghetti. He is not convinced.

I imagined all of the things that would go right if I were just to have a 
smaller nose. I would have a boyfriend and the girls in school would stop 
making fun of me. That year, several girls would bring me to a playground to 
have a “talk” about why we could not be friends any more. Because I am too 
loud, because I agree with everything they say – desperate for approval in a 
way that is unseemly. We’re not trying to be mean, they say, it would just be 
better if you ate lunch somewhere else. I know if I looked more like them, with 
a small nose and long, light hair in braids and bows, I would not have to go to 
the building where the younger children are to eat lunch with my sister.

I find out from my male friends that there are cute girls, pretty girls, hot 
girls, sexy girls, and sometimes variations or combinations of all of the 
above. The worst to be is a fat girl or an ugly girl. I was an ugly girl who 
became a sexy girl once my breasts grew in and I started telling dirty jokes 
with abandon.

As soon as I “got a chest”, as my mom would say, the taunts about my face 
stopped as boys became more interested in feeling me up than making me cry. I 
started to forget about my face and mean girls, and focused on the things my 
body could do and inspire. During summer break, a male friend whom I had known 
since childhood put his hand on my breast as we watched a movie in the room 
over from our parents, saying nothing. I remained frozen, unsure what to do. 
Wasn’t he supposed to kiss me first? I was 11.

***

When I left junior high, I had what I thought seemed like a reasonably 
womanish body and improving makeup skills. I was optimistic that I could leave 
behind my reputation as the nerdy one of my friends. In my new school, a top 
school, full of maths and science aficionados, the girl with well-developed 
boobs was queen. I was being asked on a lot of dates. Proper dates to pool 
halls and movie theatres, lunches at a diner on the weekend or a walk to 
Central Park. I had boyfriends. Later, in between high school relationships, my 
male friends would jokingly/not jokingly ask to “talk business” with me – code 
for “Let’s negotiate how it’s in your best interest to suck my dick.” I turned 
them down, but was secretly pleased nonetheless. It hadn’t yet occurred to me 
that the boys my age would want to hook up for any other reason than they liked 
me.

At first I was thrilled to be in a class in my junior year of high school with 
a teacher whom I’ll call Mr Z. He was a well-known easy grader and kind of a 
joke in a sad-old-man way; he had what we suspected was a glass eye, a hard 
time keeping drool in his mouth as he spoke, and walked with difficulty. The 
kind of classes he taught were normally held on the sixth floor, but 
administrators made sure he was out of sight on the 10th.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jh85%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jh85%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feefd0396893ee2f1fbfbf21870ecbf3fd2eeb956%2F0_838_6652_8146%2F6652.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jessica%20Valenti%3A%20my%20life%20as%20a%20%E2%80%98sex%20object%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jh85%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jessica+Valenti%3A+my+life+as+a+%E2%80%98sex+object%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jh85%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feefd0396893ee2f1fbfbf21870ecbf3fd2eeb956%2F0_838_6652_8146%2F6652.jpg>
 ‘Pretending these offences roll off our backs is strategic – don’t give them 
the satisfaction – but it isn’t the truth.’ Photograph: Chris Buck for the 
Guardian 
On the first day of class, Mr Z told us that if anyone came in to observe the 
class – “an important-looking person” – we should raise our hand no matter what 
question he asked. “If you don’t know the answer, raise your right hand. If you 
do know the answer, raise your left. I’ll only call on you if you’re raising 
the left!”

Everyone looked around at each other, smirking.

Mr Z didn’t really teach as much as he showed movies like Braveheart, but one 
day he had an actual lesson. And though he almost never called on students, he 
called on me. “Come up to the board, Jessica.” He smiled, small bits of white 
spit accumulating at the corners of his mouth. “We all want to get a closer 
look at your shirt.”

He laughed, but the class was silent. I wasn’t really wearing a shirt but a 
brown bodysuit, which was popular at the time – it snapped at the crotch and I 
wore it with jeans baggy enough to see the cutout above my hips. I remember the 
way I slid sideways through rows of desks, my arms crossed over my chest. I 
don’t remember what I wrote on the board. I never went back to the class.

***

When I started at high school, I went from being one of the smartest kids to 
being a nominally good student without the same drive and pedigree as my cute 
and smart girlfriends. Their parents had gone to college, grad school even. 
They lived on the Upper West Side or in Park Slope, in apartments filled with 
books and paintings and cabinets full of alcohol. One friend had an entire 
floor of a four-storey park-side brownstone as their “room”. I lived in a house 
where once or twice a week my mom would go outside wearing yellow rubber gloves 
to clean up the used condoms that littered the sidewalk.

One of my best girlfriends was a lithe dancer who had professional head shots 
for when she did the occasional acting job. She was the kind of Wasp-y pretty I 
desperately wanted to be – the type of beauty that provoked starry-eyed crushes 
instead of ass slaps. She lived in a duplex apartment with a spiral staircase, 
and we bonded over our older boyfriends. The first time she came to my house, 
she remarked how much she liked my mom’s “uneducated” accent. “It’s cute!” she 
said, smiling as she helped herself to a soda from the fridge.

He asked if I wanted a good grade. Of course I did. Just give me a hug then, 
he said, opening his arms. I aced the class

That same year I was called to the board in Mr Z’s class, 1995, the school 
started investigating an English teacher for describing sex fantasies and his 
masturbation routine during class. He talked about having a dream in which he 
raped a maid who had his wife’s face. Another student said he asked her to play 
spin the bottle with him and later let her off writing an essay because she was 
“pretty”. He was suspended for a few months, and then four years later – after 
a different man, an assistant principal, was arrested for fondling and exposing 
himself to a freshman – he was suspended again. That first time, though, the 
feigned outrage in the school lasted as long as the newspaper articles did. We 
had a brief student assembly on the subject and moved on.

A few weeks before the semester was going to end, I ran into Mr Z in the 
hallway, and he pointed at me, smiling. He was wearing a striped shirt that was 
slightly discoloured in spots, and his belly was hanging low over his trousers. 
“I’ve been missing you!” he said as he walked up to me. He was breathing 
heavily, as if the walk down the hall had taken effort. He asked if I still 
wanted a good grade. I responded that of course I did.

Just give me a hug, then, he said, opening his arms. All I want is a hug from 
you.

I aced the class.

***

We know that direct violence causes trauma; we have shelters, counsellors, 
services. We know that children who live in violent neighbourhoods are more 
likely to develop PTSD. Yet we still have no name for what happens to women 
living in a culture that hates them.

When you catch a cold or a virus, your body has ways of letting you know that 
you are sick. But what diagnosis do you give to the shaking hands you get after 
a stranger whispers “pussy” in your ear on your way to work? What medicine can 
you take to stop being afraid that the cab driver is not actually taking you 
home? And what about those of us who walk through all this without feeling any 
of it – what does it say about the hoops our brain had to jump through to get 
to ambivalence? I don’t believe any of us walk away unscathed.

I do know, though, that a lot of us point and laugh. The strategy of my aunts 
and mother is now my default reaction when a 15-year-old on Instagram calls me 
a cunt or when a grownup reporter writes something about my tits. Just keep 
pointing and laughing, rolling your eyes in the hope that someone will finally 
notice that this is not very funny.

Pretending that these offences roll off our backs is strategic – don’t give 
them the satisfaction – but it isn’t the truth. You lose something along the 
way. Mocking the men who hurt us, as mockable as they are, starts to feel like 
acquiescing to the most condescending of catcalls: “You look better when you 
smile.” Because even subversive sarcasm adds a cool-girl nonchalance, an 
updated, sharper version of the expectation that women be forever pleasant. 
This sort of posturing is a performance that requires strength I do not have 
any more.

My daughter is happy and brave. When she falls down or gets hurt, the first 
words out of her mouth are always: “I’m all right, Mom. I’m OK.” And she is. I 
want her to be OK always. So while my refusal to keep laughing or making people 
comfortable may seem like a real fucking downer, the truth is that this is what 
optimism looks like.

Naming what is happening to us, telling the truth about it – as ugly and 
uncomfortable as it can be – means that we want it to change. That we know it 
is not inevitable. I want the line of my mother and grandmother, that world’s 
worst birthright of violations, to stop here.

• This is an edited extract from Jessica Valenti’s memoir Sex Object, 
published by Harper Collins at £16.99. To order a copy for £12.99, go to the
Guardian bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/417366/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846.

Comments on this article are pre-moderated and will only be visible after 
being approved by a moderator

