
David Cameron has offered to work on a cross-party basis to help areas 
struggling with the impact of immigration, as he was pressed by Labour’s 
leader, Jeremy Corbyn, to address voters’ concerns ahead of theEU referendum 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>.

The prime minister said he was considering bringing back a fund to help areas 
that had experienced a population surge, and that he wanted to find a way of 
stopping firms advertising only in other EU countries for migrant workers.
Brexit explained: £350 million 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/05/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=350_million#>
Cameron was asked for better measures to help areas feeling the pressure amid 
severe concerns in the remain camp thatLabour 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> voters might back Brexit because 
of worries about immigration.

Corybn said: “Many people in Britain are concerned about immigration and their 
local communities. Surely what communities need are practical solutions like 
the migrant impact fund set up byGordon Brown 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/gordon-brown>, when he was prime minister, 
to deal with the extra pressure on housing, schools and hospitals. Will you now 
concede that it was a mistake to abolish that fund, and will you work with us 
to reinstate it as a matter of urgency to give support to those communities 
that are facing problems [with] school places, and doctors’ surgeries?”

The prime minister said he would work with Labour and other parties to address 
the concerns of voters, but stressed that leaving the EU was not the right way 
to deal with unhappiness about immigration.

Cameron added: “In answer to the question about employment agencies that only 
advertise for overseas workers – we are looking at that to see if we can, and, 
we have announced this already, to see if we can ban that practice because we 
don’t believe that is right.

“Of course, the answer to so many of these questions is actually to make sure 
we are training, educating and employing British people and getting them the 
qualifications they need to take on the jobs that our economy is creating.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y8jy%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y8jy%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d88cae27afb43aee05cf8e28a6fadc38257fa86%2F691_140_1207_724%2F1207.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Cameron%20to%20look%20at%20'migrant%20impact'%20fund%20for%20stretched%20areas&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y8jy%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David+Cameron+to+look+at+%27migrant+impact%27+fund+for+stretched+areas&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y8jy%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d88cae27afb43aee05cf8e28a6fadc38257fa86%2F691_140_1207_724%2F1207.jpg>
 Labour’s leader Jeremy Corbyn during prime minister’s questions in the House 
of Commons on Wednesday. Photograph: PA 
“In terms of funds to help communities impacted by migration, we have a pledge 
in our manifesto, which we are looking forward to bringing forward, which [is] 
actually a controlled migration fund to make sure we put money into communities 
where there are pressures. Because, of course, there are some pressures and we 
do need to address them, and I’m happy we will be able to work on a cross-party 
basis to do that.”

The prime minister adopted a more hesitant and consensual tone than usual at 
what could conceivably be his last weekly sparring session at the despatch box 
against the Labour leader. There is no prime minister’s questions next week, 
the day before the referendum, and a vote to leave the EU could lead to his 
resignation. It would be more likely for Cameron to name a date for his 
departure later in the year to ensure a stable handover, but it is feasible he 
could resign on the spot, despite having insisted he would carry on and 
implement negotiations with Brussels.

Corbyn also pressed the prime minister on his failure to implement the second 
part of the Leveson inquiry, and over fishing quotas handed predominantly to a 
few companies.

In one question, the Labour leader took the opportunity to stress his party’s 
commitment to staying in the EU.

Afterwards, Angus Robertson, the SNP Westminster leader, was unusually helpful 
to Cameron, asking him to spell out for Scotland the consequences of a £30bn 
budget blackhole if the UK referendum led to a leave decision.

“Decisions to cut public spending in the UK budget do have an impact, through 
Barnett, on Scotland,” Cameron replied. “To anyone who says these warnings 
could be wrong or inaccurate – there were warnings about the oil price before 
the Scottish referendum. It turned out actually to be worse than the experts 
warned.”
