
Drones are making headlines all over the world, and it’s undeniable that their 
existence will affect businesses in the near future – both large conglomerates 
and SMEs. There’s even talk of using the technology to deliver organs to 
hospitals.

Just like automated cars are going to make a big difference to fleets and 
areas outside of transport, the introduction of drones will have a big impact 
on the wider business world. We’ve detailed the advantages and disadvantages of 
implementing the technology, and considered the range of industries that are 
likely to see changes in the coming years.

Delivery

Large-scale companies that cover a lot of ground are considering using drones 
for delivery purposes. Amazon are already testing the use of drones, after the 
US Federal Aviation Administration gave them permission to do so. The company 
states that using the technology will be the quickest way to get products to 
customers as part of itsPrime Air service 
<http://www.amazon.com/b?node=8037720011>, which aims to deliver packages 
within 30 minutes.

The Royal Mail may also use them for Air Mail in the future. If you send a lot 
of packages to your customers and suppliers, this could be a fantastic option 
to consider.

Traffic reports

If you own a fleet, being able to ensure your vehicles can get from A to B in 
the quickest time possible is essential. With the rise oftelematics  
<http://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/kia-fleet-partner-zone/2015/nov/02/how-to-use-tech-driver-training-telematics-insurance)>
– or ‘black box devices – you can track your drivers and make routes more 
efficient.

Combining this technology with footage taken from police drones or reporting 
drones, would enable you to see traffic accidents, jams and potential issues, 
and use live data to inform your decisions.

Dangerous spots and impossible shots

When it comes to providing services in areas deemed to be dangerous, drones 
can help investigate areas with much lower risk. This will be useful for 
businesses as diverse as media outlets reporting on natural disasters, to 
insurance companies that need footage to process claims faster.

When it comes to impossible shots, the possibilities for the film and 
television industries are staggering. If there was a fleet on set, there could 
be a whole host of changes to how films and TV shows are made. Live TV and 
coverage could become an altogether immersive experience.

Privacy and costs

As endless as the opportunities drones provide are, there are some concerns. 
The Companies that are thinking about using them need to be aware of the law, 
theRules of the Air Regulations 
<http://publicapps.caa.co.uk/docs/33/CAP%20393%20Fourth%20edition%20Amendment%201%20April%202015.pdf>
 (pdf) and what is needed in terms of flying licences. There are also issues 
with privacy and how to avoid filming footage deemed intrusive. How can usage 
be monitored?

The second major concern is cost. Drones are not cheap, and demand is high. To 
make them a core part of your business it’s best to wait and see how the 
technology develops, and drops in price. Maybe focus on the potential ofvirtual 
reality 
<http://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/kia-fleet-partner-zone/2016/mar/21/virtual-reality-affect-small-business]>
 or360° video 
<http://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/kia-fleet-partner-zone/2016/apr/25/revolutionise-your-business-with-360-degree-video>
 before taking the plunge with your business.

Although machines are becoming cleverer, there’s nothing that replaces human 
common sense. For all of these concerns, the potential for drones to 
revolutionise processes and ways of working is great. But before they are 
introduced to your business, the challenges need to be carefully considered.

Content on this page is paid for and provided by Kia Fleet 
<http://www.kia.co.uk/kia-business-fleet-cars.aspx> sponsor of the Guardian 
Small Business Network Accessing Expertise 
<http://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/accessing-expertise> hub.
