
Robert De Niro didn’t fancy a traditional sponge for his most recent birthday 
cake. No, he wanted a mozzarella birthday cake. A squidgy mound of Italian 
cheese, with candles. “I came in at 3am to make it,” laughs David, the owner of
Mike’s Deli <http://www.arthuravenue.com/>, knocking his forehead on dangly 
sticks of salami as he leans over the counter. “What De Niro wants, De Niro 
gets.”

Mike’s Deli may be De Niro’s choice, but you won’t find it in any New York 
guidebook. But that’s not because it’s bad. In fact, this little family-run 
Italian stall in the Bronx is ludicrously good. It just hasn’t been 
“discovered” yet. So how did I find it? By scouringInstagram 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/instagram> of course.

Oh yes, I’ve been lying in bed, searching the internet and enjoying multiple 
foodgasms over Instagram foodporn. Forgive the crudity, but these are popular 
Instagram hashtags. With 300 million monthly users (Twitter has 288 million), 
Instagram is one of the fastest-growing social media platforms, and the hottest 
for showcasing food, scenery, concerts and, er, dogs. In New York, one of the 
world’s most Instagrammed cities, it’s now an essential guide to each 
neighbourhoods’ finest eats, with recommendations by tech-savvy, food-loving 
locals.

Equipped with five of the city’s most enticing foodie Instagram accounts – 
@EatingNYC <https://instagram.com/eatingnyc/>, @NYCDining 
<https://instagram.com/nycdining/>, @NYCFoodgals 
<https://instagram.com/nycfoodgals/>, @revciancio 
<https://instagram.com/revciancio/> and @HungryGrls 
<https://instagram.com/hungrygrls> – I set about exploring. No guide books, no 
reviews, no words. I base my meal selections purely on visuals: a trail that 
leads me straight into a lovingly prepped mound of salami, olives, peppers and 
cheese – Mike’s Deli’s generous antipasti feast.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F47ca6%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F47ca6%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F9%2F1428580175937%2Fd2e07097-00f8-445c-9785-f030731ea86b-2060x1920.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eating%20out%20in%20New%20York%20City%20%E2%80%93%20by%20Instagram&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F47ca6%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eating+out+in+New+York+City+%E2%80%93+by+Instagram&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F47ca6%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F9%2F1428580175937%2Fd2e07097-00f8-445c-9785-f030731ea86b-2060x1920.jpeg>
 The Bronx Beer Hall, which serves multiple New York State beers on rotation. 
Photograph: Hannah Summers @burgersandbruce 
Handily, I don’t need to go far for a drink to wash it all down. Mike’s sits 
in the corner of Arthur Avenue Market, a 75-year-old covered market in the 
Bronx’s “real little Italy” neighbourhood that I’d noticed on @revciancio. It’s 
home to around 20 family-owned stalls, including the centralBronx Beer Hall, a 
wooden-clad area serving more than 15 New York State beers, rotated on a 
monthly basis.

I go for blood orange pale ale, which arrives in a small manageable glass. 
“But you need to try all these beers too,” says owner Paul Ramirez, pointing to 
a parade of artistic bar taps, “all 15 of them.”

Soon, there’s beer and food arriving from every corner. Giddied by ale, I 
order portions of lizard chips (deep-fried pickles), garlic bread knots, 
“grandma’s pie” (a Little Italy pizza delicacy), aubergine parmigiana and a 
ground sirloin burger oozing with mozzarella and tarted up with salty fried 
pancetta.

It’s not the first burger Instagram will lead me to. For months I’ve been 
eyeing pictures of the famous ramen burger created by chefKeizo Shimamoto of 
Ramen Co <http://www.goramen.com/>. Sure, it’s one small part of the 
fashionable deifying of the humble burger, but its quirky good looks are 
irresistible. I make my way to the Financial District where, on Maiden Lane, a 
couple of blocks north of Wall Street, I find frazzled stock traders queuing 
for a swift lunch.

My food arrives within minutes. A blend of Japanese and American culture, it’s 
an ultra-soft beef patty drizzled with a sweet (but secret) shoyu sauce, topped 
with rocket and spring onions, all sandwiched between two ramen “buns” – soft 
boiled noodles compacted into rigid circles. It’s a revelation, and although 
it’s verging on healthy compared with most burger options, I resist squeezing 
in another.
 Nom Wah Tea Parlor. Photograph: @nycdining 
Instead I head for a more traditional Asian staple at Nom Wah Tea Parlor 
<http://nomwah.com/>, a Chinatown resident since 1920. It’s recommended on 
several of my chosen Instagram accounts, and behind the faded red exterior is a 
vintage-style room crammed with dim sum fanatics. I’m flustered by the huge 
menu, but Instagram eases the pressure, and I order dishes I’ve seen online: 
stodgy fried turnip cakes with hoi sin dipping sauce, slippery prawncheung fun 
(ginormous prawns wrapped in a roll of soft white rice noodle), and sticky rice 
crammed with chicken, wrapped in a lotus leaf.

I’m at risk of snoozing at the table. Taking a breather with a sip of jasmine 
tea, I check my chosen sources and realise I’m just around the corner from some 
bouncy-looking pork buns. I linger outside theMei Lai Wah Bakery 
<http://meiliwah.com/>, which is responsible for the best cha siu bao in the 
city, a steal at just a dollar each. Oh, go on then. I tear into the steamy 
fluffy mounds of dough, revealing a generous porky barbecue centre, before 
surrendering to another round of the cheap kerbside snacks.

Outside of Chinatown, the most famous New York dollar-eat is pizza by the 
slice. There are tons to choose from, but it seems it’s worth spending a bit 
extra atJoe’s <http://www.joespizzanyc.com/>: the by-the-slice pizza joint in 
Greenwich Village that every foodie Instagrammer consistently posts about. My 
extra dollar gets me Roy Orbison and Bruce Springsteen on the radio and 
impressive celebrity company, with signed photographs on the wall from regulars 
including Ben Affleck, Lenny Kravitz and Leonardo DiCaprio.
 Cha Siu Bao pork buns at Mei Li Wah Bakery. Photograph: @nycdining 
It may be a hotspot for A-listers but there’s not a pinch of glamour. Joe’s is 
standing room only, with sticky faux-marble countertops, chilli flakes in 
plastic shakers and solo diners popping in for post-work, post-bar, and 
post-evening meals. Well, one slice can’t hurt can it?

For a more relaxed table-and-chair option, I cross the East River to Green 
Point, Brooklyn. Guidebooks rave about Brooklyn pizza institutionGrimaldi’s 
<http://www.grimaldis-pizza.com/home>, which offers great food and less 
thrilling queues, but the irresistible Instagram photo directs me to Paulie 
Gee’s <http://pauliegee.com/> pizzeria. It’s not an obvious restaurant from the 
outside – its basic wooden door suggests a warehouse entrance. But inside it’s 
a moody space of dark wood, swinging light bulbs, bare brick, and an unusual 
menu of locally sourced ingredients. The result? Charming owner Paulie talks me 
through over 30 wood-fired pizzas, including a mind-boggling selection of vegan 
options, from the Simply Red to the In Ricotta Da Vegan with house-made vegan 
fennel sausage. But it has to be the Hellboy for me, meaning lashings of spicy 
Mike’s Hot Honey, layers ofsoppressata salami and sprinkles of dried bing 
cherries as extra.

Midriff bulging, I need a digestif. Checking a few images on my phone, I find 
I’m within rolling distance of a cosy saloon bar inside theNew York Distilling 
Company <http://www.nydistilling.com>’s warehouse. The Shanty is easy enough to 
find without a guidebook, and I thump into seats with spectacular views of 
large wooden barrels and sparkly copper stills waiting to distil the next day’s 
booze. After I’ve downed several Ba-Zucca Joes (a gin, Aperol and rhubarb 
cocktail that first caught my eye on Instagram), the cheery bartender Jen 
suggests a side order of bar snacks. Can she convince me? Course she can. I’m 
soon devouring sweet peppers stuffed with prosciutto and provolone and singing 
along with the next table to a stellar playlist of Iggy Pop and Joy Division. 
Instagram may not give detail on atmosphere and soundtracks, but it has done 
particularly well with my final stop of the day.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F47ca6%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F47ca6%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F9%2F1428580687144%2F35b61020-4576-444a-b5eb-76b2d7500cb1-2060x1884.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eating%20out%20in%20New%20York%20City%20%E2%80%93%20by%20Instagram&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F47ca6%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eating+out+in+New+York+City+%E2%80%93+by+Instagram&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F47ca6%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F9%2F1428580687144%2F35b61020-4576-444a-b5eb-76b2d7500cb1-2060x1884.jpeg>
 Black Seed Bagel. Photograph: Hannah Summers @burgersandbruce 
The next morning, all accounts point to coffee and carbs at Black Seed Bagels  
<http://www.blackseedbagels.com/>on Elizabeth Street in Nolita. From the 
images, the hand-rolled wood-fired bagels at this trendy little cafe (black and 
white tiles, distressed wood) look like an act of craftsmanship. The cameras 
don’t lie. Bagel number one comes stuffed with huge slabs of maple ham, onion 
jam, gruyère cheese and sour pickles. The gym can wait, I need to rejoin the 
queue for a more traditional filling of baked egg, cheddar and bacon.

After all that savoury stuff, I’m drawn to a particularly arty shot of a 
chocolate chip cookie and lavender infused hot chocolate atMaman Bakery 
<http://www.mamannyc.com/> in SoHo. It’s terribly pretty, in a soft-hue, 
natural-light kind of way. I take a seat on the handy purple bench outside, and 
manage a warm oozy cookie and flowery hot chocolate in the sunshine.

It’s time to trade some calories for a smidge of health. Avocado smash is the 
fashionable New York eat of the moment, and Instagram tells me there are some 
particularly handsome examples atLittle Collins on Lexington Avenue in Midtown. 
The narrow space is used efficiently, with alien-looking coffee contraptions 
and steel high stools. I tuck into the smash like it’s my first meal of the 
day, groaning in appreciation over a simple dish of mashed avocado and feta on 
toast, sprinkled with seeds, chilli flakes and a squeeze of lemon. Add a frothy 
macchiato, and I’m ready to walk.
 The slogan on Sweet Chick’s outer wall. Photograph: Hannah Summers 
@burgersandbruce 
Better make it a long one. Crossing the water again I wander the hipster 
streets of Williamsburg, ducking into vintage shops, art shops and cycling 
shops. I haven’t eaten for at least three hours, and feel an unfamiliar pang in 
my stomach. Hunger? Surely not. I’m metres away from a restaurant calledSweet 
Chick <http://sweetchicknyc.com/> – pictures of its dishes have teased me 
online for weeks. Unbuttoning my jeans for the final time, I take one for the
Guardian: crispy fried chicken, jugs of maple syrup and light fluffy waffles 
dolloped with three types of butter (flavours include lavender and garlic).

I need air. Outside, the restaurant’s wall is painted with bold red and white 
text. “Fuck that’s delicious,” it says. With Instagram’s help, it certainly is.
• Accommodation was provided by NYLO New York City (+1 212 362 1100, 
nylohotels.com/nyc <http://www.nylohotels.com/nyc>), with doubles from $150. 
Flights were provided by Virgin Atlantic (0844 2092770,virgin-atlantic.com 
<http://www.virgin-atlantic.com/us/en.html>), which flies to New York from 
Heathrow from £628

• Follow Hannah Summers on Instagram @burgersandbruce 
<https://instagram.com/burgersandbruce/>
