
Nima Sherpa owned a lodge in Kutumsang in central Nepal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nepal> when the earthquake of April 2015 
struck and levelled every building in his village. Since then, he has had to 
build temporary wooden structures to house his family and to shelter trekkers.

The worst natural disaster to hit Nepal since 1934, the earthquake killed over 
8,000 people, injured more than 21,000, and left two million homeless, with 
entire villages flattened across many districts of the country.

Yet last June, the Nepal Tourism Board advised that heritage sites were 
reopening, transport links were intact and most trekking areas were safe and 
open again for business. “The government of Nepal requests international 
travellers to visit the magnificent and bustling country of Nepal, and support 
by visiting it as she attempts to stand proudly on her feet once again. Walk 
the beautiful trails in the shadows of the most magnificent mountains on Earth 
as you help the Nepalese people reset their course on the path to prosperity.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4thy7%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4thy7%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcdd06169490333bdebcfead55e28943399acfe98%2F0_0_5282_3169%2F5282.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trekking%20in%20Nepal%20%E2%80%93%20a%20year%20on%20from%20the%20earthquake&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4thy7%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trekking+in+Nepal+%E2%80%93+a+year+on+from+the+earthquake&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4thy7%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcdd06169490333bdebcfead55e28943399acfe98%2F0_0_5282_3169%2F5282.jpg>
 The Gosainkund trek follows an old route used by pilgrims, herders and mule 
trains 
Late autumn is cold and clear in the Nepalese Himalayas, and in December we 
did the Gosainkund trek, a popular route for walkers and pilgrims on their way 
to see a series of sacred lakes in the high pass. Along the way, the lodge 
owners who sheltered and fed us talked about how the earthquake had affected 
their livelihoods.

Trekking is a lucrative industry for the country, and visitor numbers are down 
by more than half in the last 12 months. The government’s optimistic stance is 
certainly not reflected in the experience of those working as guides. The 
government has promised around £1,250 compensation for destroyed homes but none 
for guesthouses. Nima has received only a tenth of that amount. Government 
engineers are meant to approve any building project before it goes ahead, but 
there has been no sign of them yet.

The situation is even harder for Jimbu and Kanchi Sherpa in Thadepati Pass, as 
their business lies within the boundary of Langtang national park. Despite the 
destruction of their property and the subsequent nosedive in tourist traffic – 
which is down by 85% in the area – the park still demands payment of the annual 
royalty fee of about £575. Jimbu is desperate: “If we still have to pay the 
royalty, our only option will be to leave this place.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4thy7%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4thy7%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65bb3c5a55aa1a31d6acf032ec478a5828af8aae%2F0_0_5375_3583%2F5375.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trekking%20in%20Nepal%20%E2%80%93%20a%20year%20on%20from%20the%20earthquake&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4thy7%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trekking+in+Nepal+%E2%80%93+a+year+on+from+the+earthquake&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4thy7%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65bb3c5a55aa1a31d6acf032ec478a5828af8aae%2F0_0_5375_3583%2F5375.jpg>
 Jimbu Sherpa and his wife Kanchi Sherpa, inside their lodge at Thadepati Pass 
In Phedi, Dawa and Lakpa Sherpa tell us that three and half years ago, the 
National Park Authority informed the guesthouse owners that in five years, the 
land their lodges reside on will be put up for tender, effectively sold to the 
highest bidder. The earthquakes and the fuel blockade by India last autumn mean 
they will have less money to bid on the plots than they would have had 
otherwise. They say they’ve lost business because the government has done 
nothing to repair the trail after the quake. Instead, herders and hotel owners 
have had to pick their way through the landslides and the trail is more 
challenging now.

As we ascend towards the sacred lakes, clouds begin to dust the ground with 
snow. We take shelter in an abandoned lodge and light a fire. The next morning 
we have a clear view of some of the world’s tallest mountains as we move along 
a pristine trail dotted with red panda prints, reminding us of what makes Nepal 
the world’s foremost trekking destination.

“Without tourism,” lodge owner Kanxa Sherpa says, “our life is very hard – 
impossible to live.” He’s still hopeful though; Nepal has dealt with political 
unrest and natural disasters before. The tourism industry has always bounced 
back.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4thy7%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4thy7%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F734e924672055bcbba8f48a8632e9e049301be95%2F0_327_4911_2947%2F4911.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trekking%20in%20Nepal%20%E2%80%93%20a%20year%20on%20from%20the%20earthquake&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4thy7%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trekking+in+Nepal+%E2%80%93+a+year+on+from+the+earthquake&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4thy7%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F734e924672055bcbba8f48a8632e9e049301be95%2F0_327_4911_2947%2F4911.jpg>
 Dawa and Lakpa Sherpa with their daughter outside their guesthouse in the 
village of Phedi 
Support from outside is coming from companies such as World Expeditions, which 
has been operating in Nepal for more than 40 years and had over 200 trekkers 
and staff in the region when the earthquake struck. It has run seven “Re-Build 
Nepal” community project trips during the 2015-16 trekking season, sending 
1,000-plus travellers to the country. It will run two new projects in autumn 
2016.

UK manager Gordon Steer, said: “Nepal is ‘open for business’ but trekking is 
down, which has had a knock-on effect – from porters in small villages to taxi 
drivers in Kathmandu and restaurants seeing less business. Now, more than ever, 
the people of Nepal need something back from us. The Foreign and Commonwealth 
Office advises that it is safe to travel throughout the country and we 
encourage travellers to consider visiting sooner rather than later.”
