
In India, where I grew up, I was never considered vegetarian enough. I do not 
eat fish or meat, but I do eat eggs, which meant outing myself as a 
“non-vegetarian” when someone asked if I am “pure veg”. After all, this is a 
countrywhere states have passed laws banning beef 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/23/india-beef-ban-jobs-economy-maharashtra-cows>
. But in the US, I have met vegetarians who eat chicken. Vegetarians who have 
casually thrown the term “flexitarian” at me, as if it were a sprinkle of 
coriander. Vegetarians who are at pains to let you know they are not crazy, 
like, you know, vegans.

Over three decades of being vegetarian, I have learned the hard way that there 
is no universal definition of what a vegetarian is. And when you are travelling 
and eating, finding vegetarian sustenance is not just a matter of asking: “Do 
you have anything vegetarian?” Depending on where you are, “Do you have 
anything vegetarian?” has to be followed with an arsenal of inquiries, from 
“Can you make that without fish sauce?” to “Are the beans cooked in lard or 
oil?”

“Of course it’s cooked in lard,” the waiter at a Mexican restaurant in New 
York huffed proudly, “our food is authentic.”

In Turkey even the most innocuous looking vegetable soup or rice dish contains 
invisible meat, in the form of chicken or lamb stock. One of my first meals in 
Istanbul was at a tiny kebab restaurant on a rather rickety balcony overlooking 
the Bosphorus. “Etsis yemek var mi?” (Do you have any meatless food?) I asked 
the waiter, trying not to be daunted by the smirks from the men drinking tea at 
the next table. The lentil soup was made with beef bouillon. The aubergine 
kebab had meat in between the vegetable pieces. It turned out that the only 
vegetarian thing the kitchen could make was a potato salad, so I ordered that. 
My ‘salad’ arrived 20 minutes after my husband’s chicken kebab. An enormous 
heap of fries on a flatbread.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjjc%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjjc%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9ea77e89719c84869d23535b9c0f01e53e61f9b%2F0_0_5270_3166%2F5270.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20being%20a%20vegetarian%20traveller%20is%20often%20so%20hard%20to%20swallow&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjjc%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why+being+a+vegetarian+traveller+is+often+so+hard+to+swallow&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjjc%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9ea77e89719c84869d23535b9c0f01e53e61f9b%2F0_0_5270_3166%2F5270.jpg>
 A bit chippy … sometimes you say salad and the waiter hears ‘fries’. 
Photograph: Michael Rosenfeld/Getty Images 
Luckily, I love potatoes. And almost every cuisine in the world knows how to 
fry potatoes. Also, fortunately for me, I eat cheese. Several years ago, in 
Slovenia, the waiter asked if I ate cheese. “Yes, maybe cheese on some 
vegetables?” I asked, hopefully, with the help of my friend who was 
translating. After that long round of negotiations, the waiter brought me my 
main course: a block of cheese, carved artistically into the shape of a sheep, 
on a bed of lettuce.

I remember the wave of hungry resentment I felt at the sight of that cheese 
sculpture, but sitting on that grimy rooftop restaurant in Istanbul, while my 
husband ate his kebab, watching the gulls fly over the Bosphorus, it felt silly 
to feel bad for myself because there was nothing other than potatoes to eat. 
Travelling as a vegetarian can have difficult moments – if you are going to an 
“authentic” restaurant you better bring biscuits to tide you over – but it is 
still travel, an act of enormous privilege.

In fact, travelling as a vegetarian has offered a unique window into the 
places I have been to. I used to cringe every time I remembered the low opinion 
that Anthony Bourdain had of people like me: “Vegetarians … are the enemy of 
everything good and decent in the human spirit, an affront to all I stand for, 
the pure enjoyment of food,” he declared in Kitchen Confidential. But a few 
years ago in Cambodia, after a series of increasingly befuddled questions and 
answers, the waiter gave up and invited me into the kitchen. Maybe he was being 
sarcastic? But I accepted with alacrity.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjjc%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjjc%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7527c86bfed8eb1f93471d737b7af96818c1d19d%2F0_113_4096_2457%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20being%20a%20vegetarian%20traveller%20is%20often%20so%20hard%20to%20swallow&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjjc%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why+being+a+vegetarian+traveller+is+often+so+hard+to+swallow&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjjc%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7527c86bfed8eb1f93471d737b7af96818c1d19d%2F0_113_4096_2457%2F4096.jpg>
 Where’s the beef? Chef Anthony Bourdain, no fan of vegetarian food, 
apparently. Photograph: Heathcliff O'Malley/Rex 
In the smoky, dark kitchen with a half-naked chain-smoking chef, I made sure 
that no powdered shrimp or fermented fish made its way into my noodles. 
Smelling ingredients while miming fish movements and watching hand-pulled 
noodles get chopped on a concrete slab, I felt well-compensated for not having 
that increasingly ephemeral phenomenon – an authentic meal.

In Turkey, the manager of a B&B in Cappadocia took pity on me after he saw me 
surviving on chunks of bread and led me home to his mother. While we watched 
Turkish reality television in a living room that was fashioned out of a 
volcanic rock cave, she cooked fluorescent green banana peppers, ripe ribbed 
tomatoes and gleaming aubergine.

Having a kitchen at hand makes all the difference when you are a vegetarian 
who likes to travel. Some of the most memorable meals I ate were in France but 
they were not fancy restaurant meals. I was at a writing residency in a 
mountain village in the south where there were no shops and certainly no 
restaurants. A farmer who lived on the other side of the mountain would visit 
the village twice a week to sell vegetables and eggs. They were astonishingly 
delicious vegetables and all they needed was salt and pepper, a little butter 
or olive oil.

After it rained, all the villagers would disappear into the woods acting 
nonchalantly. A charming neighbour decided that since I didn’t eat meat, La 
France must reveal another side of herself to me. One morning he took me along 
after I vowed not to give away his “cache”. Together, we raced against other 
neighbours and foraged for dewy, newborn mushrooms. I felt as if I was in one 
of those life-or-death video games. It was worth all the drama when I ate my 
mushroom omelette at lunch. In France, the bastion of steak tartar and fattened 
bird liver, I learned to love vegetables even more.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjjc%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjjc%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52e086644fe4e5425f4104bf18ac7bbbc5faaa28%2F0_149_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20being%20a%20vegetarian%20traveller%20is%20often%20so%20hard%20to%20swallow&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjjc%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why+being+a+vegetarian+traveller+is+often+so+hard+to+swallow&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjjc%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52e086644fe4e5425f4104bf18ac7bbbc5faaa28%2F0_149_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 Oh, L’amour … ‘In France I learned to love vegetables even more …’ Photograph: 
Alamy 
My love affair with vegetables began early. I stopped eating meat at the age 
of eight, after seeing my grandmother killing a hen in the ritual Muslim way. 
After the head was severed, I looked in horror at the still-alive bird body 
thrashing around and decided – never again. But over the years, that visceral 
horror has passed and eating vegetarian has become more of a habit rather than 
an ideology. After my doctor told me that I was B12 deficient, I even tried to 
eat some beef. I was revolted by its stringiness. The vegetables had colonized 
my taste buds.

But of course there was New Orleans. My husband and I waited for two hours 
before we could get into Jacques Imo, a restaurant that was recommended by both 
a food writer friend and our taxi driver from the airport. Yes, there was a 
vegetarian pasta on the menu but when my husband’s oysters came to the table, 
there was something about them. My husband pried it out of its half-shell and 
offered it to me on his fork. I ate it. It was a gift. From him to me. And from 
me to an eight-year-old on the verge of noticing blood and bones.


And while it was delicious, it did not turn me into a carnivore. I want my 
carnivorous friends to eat all the meat they want to, especially in India where 
battle lines are being drawn over hamburgers and beef kheema. In New York, I go 
out of my way to Honest Chops, to buy organic, halal meat for my family. Yet, I 
am not even remotely tempted to eat any myself. And when we travel, I am 
grateful for the adventures that emerge because I am a vegetarian.


To be hungry is to be curious. When you can’t eat what is in front of you, you 
have to persuade people to feed you. You learn to explain your dilemma in 
multiple languages. You learn that in some cultures, fish is practically a 
vegetable and in others, mushrooms are halfway to flesh. You learn to go with 
the flow and you learn to see the world at slant. Most of all, you get to poke 
a tiny hole in the traveller stereotype of the macho explorer sitting down to 
eat raw intestines with the locals – and really, isn’t that why we go places?

