
At Anglo American, our vision is to become a partner in the future. Promova is 
achieving that by partnering with local banks, global suppliers and local 
entrepreneurs. This is not only injecting more than 10% of the local GDP in 
additional procurement, but is helping build a context where our Minas-Rio mine 
can operate and deliver financial value. Most importantly, Promova is becoming 
a source of net saving to Anglo American.

In 2014, we spent $12.3bn (£8.4bn) with suppliers, which accounted for about 
half our total economic value distribution. Expenditure on suppliers based in 
the communities close to our operations was $1.8bn (£1.2bn). This represented 
14.7% of total supplier expenditure in 2014.

Related: Promoting drug education in Brazil with PROERD 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/jan/22/promoting-drug-education-in-brazil-with-proerd>

Christian Spano, our global lead for socio-economic development, was invited 
to speak at the recent Extractive Industries and Local Content Development 
Conference in Mexico City organised by the World Bank, the Inter-American 
Development Bank and the government of Mexico.

In his presentation, he focused on “changing local procurement mindsets”, 
using Promova as an example of a programme that delivers savings to Anglo 
American as well as a stronger development contribution to critical 
stakeholders.

What is Promova?

Promova (Portuguese for promote) is a local supplier development programme 
that Iron Ore Brazil (IOB), a business unit of Anglo American, established 
during 2012 in Brazil. The aim of the programme is to develop small and medium 
size local suppliers in a responsible and sustainable way, with a number of 
measureable outcomes:

 * Increase operational efficiency 
 * Improve supply chain performance 
 * Lower costs over the long-term life-cycle of purchasing 
 * Contribute to our social license to operate 
 * Reduce transport and logistical costs 
As part of Promova, alongside the financial benefits, participating suppliers 
are also provided with distance- and classroom-based learning courses.

Promova has particular prominence in the state of Minas Gerais, where our 
Minas-Rio iron ore mine is located. In that region alone, the programme has 
identified 520 potential local suppliers. 120 were considered in the bidding 
process, and 35 have gone on to secure business with Anglo American.

The direct impact of the programme is clear: Promova supported business has 
equated to, on average, 10% of the local GDP in the municipalities where it 
operates. Almost $100m (£68m) has already been paid to 50 suppliers. And for 
each dollar invested in Promova, we estimate around $25 (£17)are unlocked in 
local procurement with community-based SMEs.


Related: What should human rights mean for an international business? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/dec/10/what-should-human-rights-mean-for-an-international-business>

Learning from the local team

The relationship between local procurement, enterprise development projects 
and local employment is usually close and when they work well together, the 
outcome is sustainable socio-economic improvement. Most importantly, the local 
team at IOB learned that it can also deliver savings.

When Promova was launched there was no enterprise development programme at 
Conceição do Mato Dentro, a Brazilian municipality, and there was a local 
employment programme that was run separately in collaboration with SENAI, a 
government-led institution.

Both Promova and the local employment programme were highly successful from 
the beginning, but community engagement teams started to realise that as these 
programmes grew, a sector of the local population did not feel included. The 
response of the Promova team was to listen both to the social team and to the 
communities.

IOB decided to implement an enterprise development programme to create growth 
opportunities, as they learned that for each supplier that was included in 
Promova there could be 20 SMEs with high growth potential but with no 
opportunity to become a supplier. The team also learned that as the mine goes 
into operational mode, there are fewer opportunities for local employment and 
as such, more pressure builds in the local population.

Therefore, integrating the three programmes was vital in delivering full 
development impact and allowing Promova to deliver savings to the operation.

Today, the three programmes are fully integrated and savings to Anglo American 
are real. The team has continued working in cooperation with global supplier 
Komatsu, local bank Itau and corporate dining organisation SAPORE. The result 
is more than 1000 jobs supported and the estimation is that with the new model, 
Promova could save up to $1,000 (£687) per job supported going forward.

Find out more about our local procurement and enterprise development efforts 
in our Sustainable Development Report 2014. 
<http://www.angloamerican.com/~/media/Files/A/Anglo-American-PLC-V2/report-builder-2014/sdr/sdr14-interactive-version.pdf>

Content on this page is paid for and provided by Anglo American 
<http://www.angloamerican.com/>, sponsor of the social impact hub 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/series/social-impact>
