
Groups backing Brexit are winning the fundraising battle in the EU referendum 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> campaign, according to 
figures released by the elections watchdog.

Conservative-supporting hedge fund managers and major Ukip donors dominate the 
contributions to the campaign to persuade people to vote for Britain to leave 
the EU in the 23 June referendum.

The leave side has raised £8.18m in donations and £6m in loans, which is 
nearly double the £7.54m accrued by groups seeking to stay in the union, with 
£7.46m of that amount coming from donations.

“It’s clear the leave campaigns have deep pockets,” said Will Straw, the 
executive director of Britain Stronger InEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, the official remain campaign 
group.

Data released by the Electoral Commission shows that Tory donors to the leave 
campaign include Lord Michael Farmer, the former treasurer of the Conservative 
party, Peter Hargreaves, who set up the financial services company Hargreaves 
Lansdown, and Peter Cruddas, the former Tory party co-treasurer and founder of 
the trading firm CMC Markets.

Many large donations have come from people who have previously declared their 
support for Ukip. The company Better for the Country Ltd has donatedalmost £2m 
<http://search.electoralcommission.org.uk/Search/Donations?currentPage=1&rows=10&sort=Value&order=desc&tab=1&open=filter&et=perpar&date=Reported&from=2016-04-01&to=2016-05-03&prePoll=true&postPoll=false&optCols=AccountingUnitsAsCentralParty&optCols>
 to the campaign. One of its directors isArron Banks 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/27/arron-banks-the-millionaire-hoping-to-bankroll-uk-into-brexit>
, the Ukip donor who was criticised on Tuesday for saying he would privatise 
the NHS.

Stuart Wheeler, the former Ukip treasurer, donated £215,000 to the campaign. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j4j3%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j4j3%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff622f9337322b8ee425809e419955ff4a74a691a%2F0_86_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%20campaigners%20dominating%20referendum%20fundraising%20battle&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j4j3%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brexit+campaigners+dominating+referendum+fundraising+battle&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j4j3%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff622f9337322b8ee425809e419955ff4a74a691a%2F0_86_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 A campaigner from Britain Stronger in Europe. Photograph: Justin 
Tallis/AFP/Getty Images 
Leave.EU received £3.2m from a single donor, Peter Hargreaves, while Vote 
Leave, the designated Brexit campaign, received £2.79m and Grassroots Out 
received £2.01m from various donors. The Bruges Group, WAGTV Ltd and Trade 
Unionists Against theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> have 
given £152,000 together.

Britain Stronger in Europe has received donations of £6.9m including £3.7m 
from the Labour peer David Sainsbury, the biggest individual donor inthe EU 
referendum campaign 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/10/eu-referendum-campaigns-reveal-biggest-donors-remain-brexit>
.

Other prominent remain donors included the hedge fund manager David Harding, 
the businessman and Travelex founder Lloyd Dorfman and the Tower Limited 
Partnership.

Related: George Osborne says Treasury is planning for Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/11/george-osborne-says-treasury-is-planning-for-brexit>

The figures published by the watchdog cover the period from 1 February to 21 
April, detailing money raised by campaigners spending more than £10,000 and 
individual donations of more than £7,500.

Lord Owen, the former foreign secretary who wants Britain to leave the EU, 
said: “The EU works in the interests of the elite – the 1% – so it is entirely 
unsurprising to find that the campaign to keep us in the union is financed by 
big banks like Goldman Sachs and JP Morgan. These figures show again that we 
are in a David vs Goliath fight, but it is one we are determined to win.”

The Electoral Commission has removed 11 groups that were part of the 
Grassroots Out movement from its official register of campaign groups. This 
means they will not be allowed to spend more than £10,000 on campaigning. 
Groups on the register must keep to an upper limit of £700,000.

Britain Stronger in Europe said the commission’s ruling was “a damning verdict 
on leave campaigns’ attempts to circumvent the strict spending rules”.

But Peter Bone, the Conservative MP and co-founder of Grassroots Out, said 
Britain Stronger in Europe’s allegations were “absurd, wrong and very 
disturbing”.
