
One blustery spring morning, Lucy Worsley, the chief curator of the Historic 
Royal Palaces and TV historian, marched me roundHampton Court Palace 
<http://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/gallery/2016/apr/08/lucy-worsleys-tour-hampton-court-palace-eliza-rose-tudor>
 in search of Tudor pee. Traces were, she said, to be found on one of her 
favourite artefacts – a pisspot excavated in Henry VIII’s privy garden. “It 
doesn’t look anything at all,” she said. “But when you realise it’s got 
16th-century urine in it, it’sfantastic.”

Despite some enjoyable rootling around in the palace’s storerooms, we never 
found the pisspot. But it would be hard to imagine a better example of 
Britain’s, or rather England’s, obsession with its 16th-century past – which 
revolves around the bodies and appetites of its rich and famous – than 
searching for traces of what may, or may not, be royal Tudor urine.

Right now, the Tudors hold the nation in an especially fearsome grip. In the 
British history section of my local Waterstones, in a not terribly royalist 
part of London, I measured four shelves of Tudoralia, covering the period from 
Henry VII’s snatching of the crown on Bosworth field in 1485 to the death of 
Elizabeth I in 1603. (The next most popular period was the 19th century, with 
two-and-a-half shelves.) The Tudor titles were mostly variations on a very 
limited set of themes: The Six Wives of Henry VIII; Henry VIII: King and Court; 
Elizabeth the Queen; The Elizabethans; Young Henry: the Rise of Henry VIII; Six 
Wives: the Queens of Henry VIII; Elizabeth’s Women.

Related: Tudormania: Why can’t we get over it? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/audio/2016/may/23/tudormania-why-cant-we-get-over-it>

The Tudors, it seems, are everywhere, neatly calibrated to appeal to every 
register of age, taste and education. The Six Wives of Henry VIII et al are the 
serious-to-popular history books; but there are also avalanches of fictional 
Tudors, on screen and in novels. There is a whole subgenre of racy romantic 
fiction about Anne Boleyn, the most obsessed-over of Henry’s queens, with such 
titles as The Kiss of the Concubine and Between Two Kings. There is The Tudors,
a rumpy-pumpy four-season series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2011/apr/01/the-tudors-history-revelations>
made for an American cable channel and shown on the BBC, in which Jonathan Rhys 
Meyers’s Henry VIII never got fat, perhaps as a result of the sheer amount of 
shagging he did. The show was, said Worsley, “risible – but good for business”. 
(For her, the most characteristic moment was when Catherine Howard tried out 
the block on which she was to be beheaded – an act that is historically 
attested. For the purposes of The Tudors, however, she did it naked.)

Wolf Hall and Bring Up the Bodies, Hilary Mantel’s bestselling, Man Booker 
prize-winning novels, have been the most potent recent manifestation of 
Tudormania. They have also stoked the national appetite for more and more Tudor 
things. Martin Davidson, who commissions factual history for the BBC, told me 
that theTV adaptation of the novels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/dec/16/best-of-tv-2015-no-2-wolf-hall>
, which leads the field in Sunday’stelevision Baftas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/mar/30/bafta-tv-awards-2016-full-list-of-nominations>
, had “unlocked hidden reservoirs of interest in the Tudors that aren’t yet 
exhausted”. And so he has commissioned a new blockbuster BBC1 history show from 
Worsley, to be filmed this month at the National Trust’s Barrington Court, 
which was also used as a location in Wolf Hall. The programme is called Henry 
VIII’s Six Wives, and is not to be confused with the current Channel 5 series, 
presented by historians Suzannah Lipscomb and Dan Jones, titled Henry VIII and 
his Six Wives.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tze4%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tze4%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9988650172e757b1029aad8fc5db33abbeaef83f%2F0_0_1461_1948%2F1461.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tudormania%3A%20Why%20can%E2%80%99t%20we%20get%20over%20it%3F%20%7C%20Charlotte%20Higgins&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tze4%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tudormania%3A+Why+can%E2%80%99t+we+get+over+it%3F+%7C+Charlotte+Higgins&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tze4%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9988650172e757b1029aad8fc5db33abbeaef83f%2F0_0_1461_1948%2F1461.jpg>
 Jonathan Rhys Meyers as Henry VIII and Natalie Dormer as Anne Boleyn in The 
Tudors. Photograph: 2008 CPT Holdings, Inc. All Rights Reserved. (Sony Pictures 
Television International) 
Tudormania spawns more Tudormania: so it is with the great houses and palaces 
that dot the English landscape. Hampton Court, for example, has become, 
essentially, a shrine to Henry VIII and his tragic wives, despite having been 
built by Henry’s lord chancellor Cardinal Wolsey and inhabited by a range of 
monarchs until well into the 18th century. The appeal of the Tower of London 
has become less about its Norman builders than its Tudor victims: visitors can 
see costumed interpreters in the guise of Anne Boleyn or Lady Jane Grey, and 
over the bank holiday weekend it hosted the Tudors at the Tower Family 
Festival. “It is 1533,” announced the website, “and you are invited to join the 
magnificent celebrations for Anne Boleyn’s coronation as Queen of England. 
Immerse yourself in a living Tudor world … Have a go with a crossbow!” Tracy 
Borman, the co-chief curator of the Historic Royal Palaces, told me about the 
time they tried to promote the Georgians at Hampton Court, in 2014, to mark the 
tercentenary of George I’s accession. “As a theme it just didn’t work,” she 
said. “Now we are more consciously giving visitors the Tudors. Commercially, 
the Tudors are the strongest sellers.” The Tudors are not just for domestic 
consumption. They are Britain’s most lucrative royal export, Worsley told me, 
after the current incumbents.

When speaking to historians, novelists and curators of the period, I found 
that they would, at some point in the conversation, reach for a pop-cultural 
analogy. The Tudors are like the Kardashians, said one. They are like the 
Caesars, or the Kennedys, said another. They are like Game of Thrones, said 
one. They are like House of Cards, said another. They are like Dallas, they are 
like Dynasty, said another.

The past is not fixed, but an encounter with the present. Our relationship 
with our history tells us about ourselves as much as about the past. It is, at 
least in part, an act of creation. What is it about the Tudors that has drawn 
us to them? And what does the way we have refashioned them tell us about the 
present moment?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tze4%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tze4%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F610b48e6b2297db36b92f981ca8f815a8effe6db%2F94_0_2813_1688%2F2813.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tudormania%3A%20Why%20can%E2%80%99t%20we%20get%20over%20it%3F%20%7C%20Charlotte%20Higgins&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tze4%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tudormania%3A+Why+can%E2%80%99t+we+get+over+it%3F+%7C+Charlotte+Higgins&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tze4%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F610b48e6b2297db36b92f981ca8f815a8effe6db%2F94_0_2813_1688%2F2813.jpg>
 The execution of Anne Boleyn in Henry VIII and his six Wives. Photograph: 
Channel 5 
There is no more eloquent demonstration of the Tudors’ hold on our 
imaginations than Mantel’s books about Thomas Cromwell, the man who rose to be 
the most powerful man at Henry VIII’s court. BeforeWolf Hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/wolf-hall> and Bring Up the Bodies, 
Mantel was respected and loved by a modest number of readers. After publishing 
those two novels, she became a bestselling, double Man Booker winner with stage 
and screen adaptations to her name; the BBC2 drama was the most popular on the 
channel since modern ratings began 14 years ago.

But the subtle, gloriously rich Wolf Hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/wolf-hall> was not Mantel’s first historical 
novel. A Place of Greater Safety, set during the French Revolution, was 
published in 1992 – 13 years after she had first sent it to publishers, when, 
Mantel told me, she “couldn’t even get anyone to read it”. People don’t want to 
read about revolutionaries, she said, “these sneaky villains with daggers and a 
guillotine in the middle distance”. She added, “I didn’t feel I’d had to move 
my ground with Wolf Hall: the readers came to me. But they wouldn’t do that 
with the French Revolution and they probably never will … The lure of the 
[Tudor] period is something that worked to my advantage. In that people are 
willing to give it a break. You get a category of reader that wouldn’t come to 
your other fiction because they think, ‘I know that story, and I want more of 
it.’”

Every nation has a changing and sometimes fraught relationship with its past. 
Different periods of history swim into view at different times, bringing 
parallels and visions of lost glory or past blunders. For the Americans, aside 
from the origin story represented by the founding fathers, perhaps the most 
often revisited period of domestic history is the civil war – except that, in 
contrast with the Tudors, it is still live as an issue, providing a lightly 
encoded way of talking about present anxieties about race. Italy, an even 
younger country, is certainly invested in the past, but that is more about the 
glories of regional visual cultures than a fascination with a single family. 
The French have enough national mythology to go around, but it is invested more 
in ideas and values than with people.

For the English, by contrast, nostalgia is both a national disease and a 
profit-making enterprise, selling everything from Keep Calm and Carry On mugs 
to Henry VIII outfits for little boys from the Hampton Court shop. The present 
moment of Tudormania does not come from nowhere: it can exist only because of 
our sense of familiarity with them. We have been raised on the Tudors. When I 
was young I adored a book calledA Traveller in Time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/jul/25/allison-uttley-travellerin-time-mangan>
 by Alison Uttley, about Catholic recusants under Elizabeth I in rural 
Derbyshire. Other kids had Annie Lennox or Morrissey on their bedroom walls: I 
had a poster of Elizabeth I, a reproduction of the Darnley portrait, in which 
she looks especially porcelain-skinned and icy, but also tough and clever. Like 
many other middle-class children, I was taken to see some of the great Tudor 
houses of England. For me, it was the grand Hardwick Hall, and the 
half-timbered beauties Ford Green Hall and Little Moreton Hall. I still 
associate the Tudors with long galleries lined with linenfold panelling, the 
scent of National Trust lavender in bowls, and a wandering imagination.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tze4%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tze4%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3776d03c1653dd77eb575fe660cdf8d4fb438b61%2F0_0_2453_3625%2F2453.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tudormania%3A%20Why%20can%E2%80%99t%20we%20get%20over%20it%3F%20%7C%20Charlotte%20Higgins&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tze4%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tudormania%3A+Why+can%E2%80%99t+we+get+over+it%3F+%7C+Charlotte+Higgins&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tze4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3776d03c1653dd77eb575fe660cdf8d4fb438b61%2F0_0_2453_3625%2F2453.jpg>
 The Darnley portrait of Elizabeth I. Photograph: Dea Picture Library/De 
Agostini/Getty Images 
The Tudors are the first people in British history into whose eyes we feel we 
can gaze. We slip into their world – or what we imagine to be their world – 
with ease. They were the first people to have lived in recognisable houses, 
rather than in the draughty great halls and militaristic castles of their 
medieval forebears. There is something comfortingly domestic and ineffably 
English about these dwellings, which is surely why mock-Tudor has been, since 
the late 19th century, such a persistently revived vernacular architecture. 
Some of the inhabitants of these houses had even been women, whose characters 
were a little more than cyphers (such as the redoubtable matriarch Bess of 
Hardwick who, with her four husbands, rivalled Henry VIII in marital energy if 
not murderous tendency). Hans Holbein’s portraits of Henry’s court carry an air 
of realism verging on the photographic; even those stiff, flat-as-a-pancake 
Elizabethan portraits of country squires and their be-ruffed wives have 
something bewitching about them. Unlike their forebears, they spoke what we can 
recognise as our language, the language crystallised by England’s most towering 
and inescapable literary figure.

For those raised in the 1990s and beyond, early immersion in the 16th century 
has much to do with the wildly popular, enjoyably goryHorrible Histories books 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/jul/14/terry-deary-horrible-histories>
, also televised by CBBC, in which the Terrible Tudors loom large. The English 
national curriculum requires the Tudors to be studied between ages seven and 
nine and, according to a state-sector history teacher I spoke to, the period 
becomes so familiar that pupils “turn up to secondary school feeling like they 
are already experts” – knowing, for example, the old mnemonic about Henry’s 
wives, “divorced beheaded died; divorced beheaded survived”. Jessie Childs, a 
popular historian who has written about the period, said: “The Tudors are very 
clearly defined for children: you have Henry VII, the battlefield king; then 
Henry VIII, the tyrant who marries six times; then Edward VI, the boy king; 
then Lady Jane Grey, the nine days’ queen; then [the Catholic] Mary I who burns 
300 people; and then Elizabeth I, the virgin queen. They are like a boyband: 
each has an identity. If you look at the Plantagenets, on the other hand – 
people don’t know which is which.”

The same tidiness of identity works for the wives of Henry VIII, if you want 
it to. Worsley’s forthcoming BBC1 programme takes as its premise, she told me, 
that they represent “archetypes of femininity”, though, when she explained, 
they sounded more like stereotypes harvested from the pages of the Daily Mail. 
“We have Katherine of Aragon, the angry older dumped woman, Anne Boleyn, the 
Angelina Jolie character; Jane Seymour, the good woman who stays at home; Anne 
of Cleves, the one defined by her looks; Catherine Howard, the sexy teenager; 
and Katherine Parr, the career girl who gets through the marriage, survives, 
marries for love, then dies in childbirth because she’s left it too late.” If 
the most characteristic cultural achievement of our time is branding, then it 
would seem that we have done a very effective job on our Tudor past.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tze4%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tze4%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8436056c556d1f52e3e9283f96acb893c6f611be%2F0_0_4284_2570%2F4284.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tudormania%3A%20Why%20can%E2%80%99t%20we%20get%20over%20it%3F%20%7C%20Charlotte%20Higgins&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tze4%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tudormania%3A+Why+can%E2%80%99t+we+get+over+it%3F+%7C+Charlotte+Higgins&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tze4%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8436056c556d1f52e3e9283f96acb893c6f611be%2F0_0_4284_2570%2F4284.jpg>
 Damian Lewis as Henry VIII and Mark Rylance as Thomas Cromwell in Wolf Hall. 
Photograph: Giles Keyte/BBC/Company Productions Ltd 
The Tudors have come to represent a certain kind of English exceptionalism: an 
idea of an England that stands apart from, and above, other nations. This is no 
coincidence – it is precisely how the Tudor monarchs framed themselves. When 
Henry VIII, the original Brexiteer, wrenched himself away from Rome and 
Catholic Europe, a new rhetoric and a new history were required. They were even 
more urgently after Mary I, the successor to the zealously Protestant Edward 
VI, briefly reversed the nation into Catholicism.

This exceptionalism began under Elizabeth I, when new kinds of writers – 
including chroniclers and antiquarians – embarked on what historian John Burrow 
once called “a love affair with England and Englishness”. The story of English 
history, he wrote, was “refurbished in a way that was Protestant, patriotic and 
providential”.Holinshed’s Chronicles 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=holinshed%E2%80%99s+chronicles&oq=Holinshed%E2%80%99s+Chronicles&aqs=chrome.0.0l6.506j0j8&sourceid=chrome&ie=UTF-8#>
, for example, first published in 1577, was an important source of material for 
Shakespeare, whose versions of English history have proved far more persistent 
and formative than more sober and factual accounts of, say, the Wars of the 
Roses. John Foxe’s multi-edition Acts and Monuments, more often known as Foxe’s 
Book of Martyrs, was an entire history of the church from its birth to the 
Elizabethan age, framing Roman Catholicism as a corrupt aberration from the 
true path and pointing to the English as God’s chosen people. Like so many 
radical departures, Protestantism needed to be backfilled with the trappings of 
tradition, however spurious. Elizabethan England created our sense of itself; 
to a large extent, it also created our sense of its own medieval past – as a 
bloody, violent pit out of which the nation had clambered en route to a new 
golden age.

The English no longer believe that they are an elect nation. But the 
underlying sense of superiority still lingers: you can hear it when Boris 
Johnson speaks out against a “half-Kenyan” US president interfering in British 
democracy, or bewails the removal of an Epstein bust of Churchill from the Oval 
office. You can hear it in the arguments over whether to retain Trident, over 
whether Britain is, or is not, in a state of self-delusion when it claims to be 
a world power. We cleave to this ancestral sense most strongly when the nation 
feels threatened. At such moments, Elizabeth I’s speech at Tilbury, rallying 
troops against the invading Spanish, echoes round the national unconscious: “I 
know I have the body but of a weak and feeble woman; but I have the heart and 
stomach of a king, and a king of England too, and think foul scorn that Parma 
or Spain, or any prince of Europe, should dare to invade the borders of my 
realm.” When extracts from Churchill’s “we shall fight on the beaches” speech 
were broadcast on the BBC in 1940,Vita Sackville-West 
<http://www.theguardian.com/profile/vita-sackville-west> wrote to her husband 
of being stirred by his “Elizabethan phrases”.

The different ways in which the Tudor period was used by past generations can 
throw light on the way we see them now. Take the narrative of Hampton Court, 
which was opened to the public by Queen Victoria. The 19th-century tourist 
clutching the standard guidebook, published in 1841, would have received a 
completely different view of the palace from that conveyed today. The palace 
had “a striking lesson” to teach “on the mutability of human greatness”. Its 
hero, however, was not Henry VIII or Anne Boleyn, but Cardinal Wolsey. Henry 
gets short shrift – a single brief chapter, as opposed to Wolsey’s six. The 
Victorian story was much more invested in the lad who pulled himself up by his 
bootstraps, attained the chancellorship of England – and “fell a sacrifice to 
his own ambition”. The message was that worldly desires should be tempered by 
“humility and piety” – a lesson quite absent from our present dealings with the 
16th century, whose protagonists provide spectacle rather than moral 
instruction.

Why are we obsessed with the seductions and the violence, the spying and the 
intrigue, the corridors and the whispering and the catastrophic falls from 
grace? Why above all, are we obsessed by the sexy powerplay of the Tudor court? 
Academic history, popular portrayals, fiction and television have become 
entangled, but one historian’s work stands out as especially significant.

David Starkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/apr/22/david-starkey-interview-a-bit-harsh>
’s PhD thesis, submitted in 1973, took as its subject the king’s privy chamber 
– which, for the post-’68 generation of young leftwing Cambridge historians, 
was a fabulously unfashionable thing to do. Starkey argued that the minutiae of 
court life were inextricably intertwined with the life of the nation. The 
people who were physically close to Henry – including those with the job of 
attending to the most basic of his bodily needs, such as the “groom of the 
stool” – were, rather than menial nobodies, politically important figures.

The political became the personal, and the personal made for compelling 
storytelling. Starkey has promulgated this approach in numerous later books, 
and, in the early 2000s, on Channel 4, where he out-BBCed the BBC with his air 
of establishment-sanctioned authority, his navy blazers and neat cufflinks, his 
high Toryism. (He has since made programmes about the monarchy as an 
institution, and about the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge’s wedding – the 
politics of the enterprise are clear.) There is a straight line from Starkey’s 
groom of the stool to Worsley’s urine-stained Tudor pisspot.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tze4%2Fsfb%23img-6&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tze4%2Fsfb%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb69248c3bf1c6114f718726ebf49c077eaac9742%2F0_45_2160_1296%2F2160.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tudormania%3A%20Why%20can%E2%80%99t%20we%20get%20over%20it%3F%20%7C%20Charlotte%20Higgins&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tze4%2Fstw%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tudormania%3A+Why+can%E2%80%99t+we+get+over+it%3F+%7C+Charlotte+Higgins&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tze4%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb69248c3bf1c6114f718726ebf49c077eaac9742%2F0_45_2160_1296%2F2160.jpg>
 Historian David Starkey launching English Heritage’s Royal Heritage programme 
in 2002. Photograph: Frank Baron for the Guardian 
“We still have this Merrie England shtick. It’s very parochial and it’s very 
English, it’s the Ukip version of England before it got some German aristos to 
run it,” Jerry Brotton told me. The professor of renaissance studies at Queen 
Mary, University of London is fed up with the Tudors – or at least the manner 
in which they are popularly portrayed. “Not to mention that they were actually 
Welsh. It’s the rose-tinted version of history that says, ‘That was when we 
were powerful.’ And we weren’t! What nobody wants to write about is that the 
whole period after Henry VIII’s break with Rome in the 1530s is the time when 
England was completely isolated, a pariah state within the rest of Catholic 
Europe. We were like Romania under the Soviet Union.”

Brotton is the author of This Orient Isle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/13/this-orient-isle-elizabethan-england-and-the-islamic-world-by-jerry-brotton-review>
, which charts England’s links with the Islamic world in the Elizabethan age – 
links made necessary by the Protestant Tudors’ self-extraction from the 
political, diplomatic and trade networks of Catholic Europe. The version of the 
Tudors that the wider culture has embraced – the narrowing of the historical 
frame to England’s nobs, aristos, courtiers and monarchs – is, Brotton and 
other scholars would argue, both limiting and self-deceiving.

Dr John Gallagher, an early-modern specialist based in Cambridge, told me that 
he, too, was interested in restoring historical realism to our picture of the 
16th century. Gallagher’s work focuses on “remarginalising” England as a small 
country perched on the north-western edge of Europe, a Europe that often saw 
England as unimportant. From our purview in 2016, it can be hard to reimagine 
the Tudors without the picture being clogged by the leavings of a British 
imperial dominance that in fact came centuries later. During the Tudor period, 
the English language, for example, was years away from being any kind of lingua 
franca. (Gallagher sent me a quote from the linguist and translator John 
Florio, who wrote in 1578 that English was “a language that wyl do you good in 
England, but passe Dover, it is woorth nothing”.)

The current cycle of popular retellings of the Tudors, said Brotton, is 
frequently “just more thin, secondary-source-material crap. It’s seriously bad 
faith – it’s just giving to a public cynical rubbish”. Other historians simply 
regard the Tudors as a period that has nothing more to tell us – nothing of 
use, anyway. “There is some great writing about the Tudors,” the historian 
Matthew Parker told me, “but for every new book about them, there’s one less 
about far more interesting and relevant threads in our history – the lives and 
opinions of ordinary people, economics, empire, race – history that directly 
shapes our lives today, rather than the soap-opera titillation of Henry’s 
bloody wives.”

The stories we choose not to tell about the Tudors are as revealing as those 
we do. Our present interest has coalesced around the two mighty figures of 
Henry VIII and Elizabeth I. Henry VII, though the subject of a recent and 
respected study by Thomas Penn, has not reached these heights. Nor has Edward 
VI, nor has Mary I. The editor of the magazineHistory 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/historyandhistoryofart> Today, Paul Lay, 
has a theory why: aside from the fact that their reigns were short, the latter 
two monarchs are inescapably bound up with questions of religion: they are the 
radical, iconoclastic Protestant and the queen who briefly reinstated 
Catholicism. It was Henry VIII, of course, who broke with the Roman church, but 
the story is told, by and large, in the prurient terms of his desire for Anne 
Boleyn rather than through the lens of international politics or theology.

“The middlebrow accounts,” Lay told me, “and even Mantel is a bit guilty of 
this, tend to secularise Tudor history. That is just about possible with Henry, 
but Edward and Mary’s reigns cannot be told in secular terms.” Similarly, with 
Elizabeth: her early life offers an exciting adventure story of jeopardy and 
danger and high stakes – will she, won’t she make it to the throne? But “the 
later part of her reign, the more interesting part, is about the growth of 
English puritanism and the rise of ideas about providence, the increasing sense 
of England as an elect nation, singled out for greatness by God. All of this 
reaches its crisis point in the following century and the civil war … But 
unfortunately, there’s not a lot of sex, very little violence, and a lot of 
talk about ideas and fundamentalism.” He added, “These are ideas that are 
really difficult to explain,” and then he stopped himself. “Actually they’re 
not. It’s a lack of ambition among writers.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tze4%2Fsfb%23img-7&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tze4%2Fsfb%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32d6f6797e52548f315c222e7004970242e7be52%2F0_0_3104_4132%2F3104.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tudormania%3A%20Why%20can%E2%80%99t%20we%20get%20over%20it%3F%20%7C%20Charlotte%20Higgins&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tze4%2Fstw%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tudormania%3A+Why+can%E2%80%99t+we+get+over+it%3F+%7C+Charlotte+Higgins&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tze4%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32d6f6797e52548f315c222e7004970242e7be52%2F0_0_3104_4132%2F3104.jpg>
 Mary I of England (1516-1558). Photograph: Rex/Shutterstock 
This secularisation, as well as perhaps a discomfort with the idea of 
revolution, explains how relatively little thought we give, as a culture, to 
the following century – the century of the English civil war. Martin Davidson 
told me that for him and his colleagues at the BBC, historical periods have 
certain textures; they serve as “story engines” for different kinds of 
narratives. “This place, this time that we call Tudorland, Tudorville has 
irresistible ingredients,” he said. “It is sex becomes death, via intrigue … I 
wish we could do more on the civil war, to be honest. But it’s difficult to 
find attractive characters, and it doesn’t help that they have zero sex lives,” 
he said. And, besides, the 17th century is too complex. “In a 60-minute 
programme, you spend 57 minutes explaining the rump parliament, ship money, the 
Irish issue.” Had we more confidence in the Westminster parliament now, 
perhaps, like the Whig historians of the 19th century, we would have more 
fondness for its 17th-century champions.

What we want, it seems – and what the Tudors seem so abundantly to provide, if 
viewed in a very partial light – is a way of shutting out disturbing 
considerations of religious fundamentalism, revolution, people from other 
countries, the role of parliament, relationships with Ireland and Scotland. And 
yet these are issues that, right now, we should look in the eye. “It’s very 
tempting, when you ask yourself why a story has such a wide appeal,” said 
Mantel, “to try to dredge up pieties about the shaping of the English nation: 
but really, it’s because it’s about sex and violence, let’s face it.” It turns 
out that what compels us is lust and death; the passions and appetites of the 
royal, rich and famous; drama set firmly within the family. At this moment, 
what we want from our relationship with a national past is this: to draw the 
curtains, shut out the noise of the world, and put on a box set. Thinking about 
Tudor history is, at least in its laziest manifestations, an excellent way of 
not thinking about history.

The Tudors of our imaginations some time ago transcended the realm of real 
lived lives and entered the zone of myth and fairytale. Henry VIII has become 
Bluebeard – the monstrous character who kills his wives in his castle. The 
story of the Tudors, said Mantel, “has the power and the resonance of every 
story that is not made up, that doesn’t have an author, but comes jumping 
straight out of the collective unconscious”. It cuts to the “verities of the 
human condition”, she said. “Who to love, who to marry, will we have children, 
what children will we have.”

It turns out that what compels us is lust and death; the passions and 
appetites of the royal, rich and famous

Why have we transformed the Tudors into the creatures of myth, and what 
purpose do these myths serve? It has happened partly because the discipline of 
history is so closely allied with other genres, especially various forms of 
fiction. That goes back to the beginning: the first historian, Herodotus, may 
have refuted Homer’s poetic version of the past, but that does not stop him 
shaping his stories about the past as just that: stories. The lives of the 
Tudors, over centuries of retelling, have become malleable, moulded into 
archetypal patterns. These patterns come to us from the earliest forms of drama 
and tragedy, straight from the Greeks: the rise and fall of the great; sad 
stories of the death of kings.

The tale of her Cromwell, said Mantel, is that of “how far you can go in 
making your fate. It is a story of a man who is climbing and climbing, and a 
story of what happens when he actually gets to the top. And we see this 
operating with all sorts of figures: Anne Boleyn, Wolsey.” The wheel of fortune 
revolves. The great rise, and then they fall. It could be Aeschylus’s 
Agamemnon, who wins the Trojan war only to be slaughtered in the bath by his 
wife. It could be Oedipus. Mantel said: “For these people [of the Tudor court] 
the stakes are so high. It makes modern life seem so feeble, when a minister, 
for example, messes things up and he gets to resign and spend more time with 
his family. In Henry’s day they just cut your head off: so you get the sense, 
all the time, of the characters living on a knife-edge.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tze4%2Fsfb%23img-8&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tze4%2Fsfb%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe07955105f081701e689d34d5a8e81387bba21b1%2F0_9_4763_2857%2F4763.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tudormania%3A%20Why%20can%E2%80%99t%20we%20get%20over%20it%3F%20%7C%20Charlotte%20Higgins&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tze4%2Fstw%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tudormania%3A+Why+can%E2%80%99t+we+get+over+it%3F+%7C+Charlotte+Higgins&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tze4%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe07955105f081701e689d34d5a8e81387bba21b1%2F0_9_4763_2857%2F4763.jpg>
 Lucy Worsley, the TV historian and chief curator of the Historic Royal 
Palaces, at Hampton Court. Photograph: Ben Turner 
These people’s stories resonate with us, because their suffering is like ours 
– terrible reversals, bad marriages, forbidden love – but writ large. They 
climb higher and they plunge further. In their presence we frame our own 
tragedies. Every community needs its mythology, and, as the religion the Tudors 
invented ebbs, it is the Tudors themselves to whom we cling as figures of a 
collective imagination. They fit us like a glove. If the story of Henry’s court 
is about a total and arbitrary power quixotically exercised, then it is the 
perfect story now for a people whose confidence in traditional forms of 
politics has drained away.

One of Mantel’s great achievements was to bring these figures of fairytale 
home: to create a story in which the past was both familiar and foreign, small 
with homely detail and large with myth. Now you recognise them, now you don’t. 
Peter Kosminsky, the director of the TV adaptations of Mantel’s novels, did 
something analogous. He told me about how he had tried to direct the series as 
if it were not a costume drama: here we are in the characters’ homes, to them 
unremarkable and familiar; therefore there are no protracted, sweeping shots of 
gorgeous architecture. What he did made perfect sense of our relationship with 
these creatures of the 16th century, who vibrate between feeling familiar and 
foreign. Though strange and sometimes frightening, they march through the 
corridors of our imaginations with an almost insolent ease.

Davidson told me that he thought he might give the Tudors a rest after 
Worsley’s programme has aired: he is also turning his attention to the Russian 
revolution for when the anniversary comes round next year, and thinking about 
how to make history programmes about the 1990s. Perhaps our interest in the 
Tudors will wane a little, but there is no sign of that yet. Caroline 
Sanderson, who covers non-fiction releases for the trade magazine the 
Bookseller, told me she is still seeing at least a book a month on the Tudors. 
Lucy Worsley, the day she took me round Hampton Court, pressed into my hands 
her new children’s novel, Eliza Rose, based on a fictitious cousin of Catherine 
Howard’s. Her colleague at the Historic Royal Palaces, Tracy Borman, has a new 
book coming out later this year, titled The Private Lives of the Tudors. Mantel 
is still working on the final book in the Thomas Cromwell trilogy. She told me 
it was going well, but could not say when it will be finished, or published. 
When it is, I, and doubtless millions of other readers, will devour it, and 
doubtless another burst of enthusiasm for the period and its court will follow. 
On the Tudors will go, our troubling companions from the past, haunting us into 
the future. It is certainly the past we desire, and it is probably the past we 
deserve. Whether it is the past we need is another question.

• Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread 
<https://twitter.com/@gdnlongread>, or sign up to the long read weekly email 
here 
<http://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/jul/20/sign-up-to-the-long-read-email>.
