
Just a quick pudding, that is all I ask. Nothing that will take an age to make 
or involve every piece of kit in the kitchen. Just something sweet with which 
to round things off. A paste of nuts and berries rolled up in pastry and baked, 
perhaps; a dish of scarlet fruit in a warmly spiced citrus syrup; maybe a 
spoonful of strawberries crushed so their juices bleed. Any of those would do 
me nicely.

You’ll never catch me with a piping bag in my hand, but that doesn’t mean I’m 
not up for a spot of baking – even in the summer. This week, rather than 
letting a yeast dough rise slowly on the back of the Aga, I made some buns with 
frozen pastry, the all-butter sort, and filled them with an almond paste 
freckled with blueberries and pistachios: a sort of quick Danish pastry.

A sheet of puff pastry in the freezer can provide endless summer desserts. Try 
one cut into finger-thick slices, brushed with beaten egg and caster sugar and 
baked till crisp as something to dip into a pale-pink rhubarb fool or a purée 
of cooked apricots. Sometimes I bake the pastry, sandwiched between two baking 
sheets to keep it flat, then slice it in half and spread it with crushed 
strawberries and a layer of whipped cream into which I have folded some 
last-minute toasted flaked almonds and the merest drop of cassis. A puff pastry 
and almond sandwich.

The sight of a watermelon used to mean high summer, but I find its cool, 
lollipop flesh rather useful brought out earlier, before the supply of currants 
and gooseberries kicks in (and for which I am already counting the days). 
Sometimes I simply slice the melon and serve the pieces piled higgledy-piggledy 
on a platter with a few splashes of elderflower cordial over the deep-pink 
fruit. This time I had a fancy for some warm spice notes, too. They came in the 
form of a ginger syrup spiked with lemon zest and black peppercorns. A sweet 
spiced marinade with which to add a little intrigue.

Pistachio and blueberry pastries

All-butter puff pastry costs more but gives a better flavour than the cheaper 
butterless versions. I make these pastries, each no bigger than a digestive 
biscuit, early in the day, before the kitchen gets hot. Cool pastry is easier 
to handle – it often becomes too soft to roll in a warm room. A cold marble 
slab helps. The two textures of nut – ground and finely chopped – give a more 
interesting filling than one using all ground almonds, but the choice is yours. 
Hazelnuts work, too, but not walnuts, which are apt to turn bitter in an oven 
hot enough to cook puff pastry. The final generous brushing with maple syrup 
and return to the oven gives the pastries the essential stick-to-your-fingers 
quality.

Makes 8
apricot jam 150g
ground almonds 75g
blueberries 200g
shelled pistachios or almonds 50g
puff pastry 250g
a little beaten egg
maple syrup 4 tbsp

Put the apricot jam into a mixing bowl with the ground almonds and 
blueberries. Roughly chop the pistachios, add to the mixing bowl then stir the 
ingredients together to form a rough paste. Set the oven at 180C/gas mark 4. 
Line a baking sheet with baking parchment.

Watermelon used to mean high summer, but I find its cool, lollipop flesh 
rather useful brought out earlier

Roll the pastry to a rectangle measuring roughly 32cm x 22cm on a floured 
board. With the short edge toward you, spread the surface with the pistachio 
and blueberry mixture. Roll the pastry away from you into a short, plump 
sausage. Brush the outside with the beaten egg.

Cut the pastry into 8 thick slices, then place them on the lined baking sheet, 
giving each a little room in which to puff up and out.

Bake in the preheated oven for 25 minutes till puffed and golden. Remove from 
the heat, then brush the pastries generously with the maple syrup and return to 
the oven for 5 to 7 minutes. Remove, cool briefly, then lift on to a cooling 
rack.

Strawberries crushed with balsamic and cream

Choose the smallest, sweetest strawberries you can get your hands on. Those 
that are crimson inside too will be more rewarding than those with a white 
core. Hull them, then crush them, not quite to a purée, in a bowl with a fork. 
Fold in a mean trickle of balsamic vinegar, and if you must, a dribble of 
cream. Pile on to slices of toasted brioche if you find such a thing, or on to 
warm scones if not. Or just scoop it up from the bowl with a spoon.

Watermelon with ginger and lemon
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kgh7%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kgh7%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9819b4e7ca4a6ad000aa4b4244c126ec3c1a0d3%2F0_2221_4032_2534%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nigel%20Slater%E2%80%99s%20fruit%20pudding%20recipes%20for%20summer&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kgh7%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nigel+Slater%E2%80%99s+fruit+pudding+recipes+for+summer&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kgh7%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9819b4e7ca4a6ad000aa4b4244c126ec3c1a0d3%2F0_2221_4032_2534%2F4032.jpg>
 When it comes to the crunch: Nigel Slater’s watermelon with ginger and lemon 
recipe. Photograph: Jonathan Lovekin for the Observer 
A light and refreshing end to a meal. The thorough chilling is essential, 
rather than optional. An hour is the minimum time. The syrup is not a heavy 
one, and the recipe will appeal to those who don’t like their desserts too 
sweet. I would offer this on a very hot afternoon, probably after something 
dark, hot and spice-laden.

Serves 4
watermelon 1 kg
cherries 200g


For the syrup:
water 350ml
sugar 30g
ginger 50g
black peppercorns 4
a lemon


For the syrup: pour the water into a saucepan, add the sugar and bring to the 
boil. Peel the ginger and slice each piece thinly, then add to the sugar and 
water with the lightly crushed peppercorns. Leave to simmer for 5 minutes then 
remove from the heat and leave to cool.

When the syrup is cool, peel the watermelon and remove the seeds if you wish 
(it is not something I am terribly fussed about) then cut the flesh into slices 
about½ cm thick. Put the watermelon into a shallow dish then pour the syrup 
over, holding back the ginger with a spoon. It has done its work. Halve and 
stone the cherries then add them to the watermelon and refrigerate for an hour 
before eating.

Email Nigel at nigel.slater@observer.co.uk <mailto:nigel.slater@observer.co.uk>
 or follow him on Twitter@NigelSlater 
<https://twitter.com/NigelSlater?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
