
Tony Blair has said it is uncertain whether Jeremy Corbyn 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> can win an election, as he 
insisted his brand of centre-ground politics was not dead.

Speaking at an event in Westminster 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/24/tony-blair-i-underestimated-forces-of-destabilisation-in-iraq-chilcot-report>
 on Tuesday, the former Labour prime minister said: “Let us say it is not yet a 
proven concept thatCorbynism can win an election 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/23/tony-blair-bernie-sanders-jeremy-corbyn>
. It is clear that they can take over a political party; what is not so clear 
to me yet is that they can take over a country.”

Blair admitted the centre ground was losing traction and not providing answers 
to people who wanted an end to the status quo.


He claimed some of the support for Donald Trump and Jeremy Corbyn shared 
similarities, claiming “these people are riding the anger; they are not 
providing the answers”.

Blair said: “Where fringes of left and right meet each other [is] essentially 
as isolationists against free trade. It is true that the left want to hang the 
bankers and the right want to clear out the immigrants, but in much of the 
psychology and attitude they have got a lot in common.”

He said the centre’s problem was that it looks “as if we are managers of the 
status quo and not changers of it”.

He also questioned the basis of Corbyn’s support in the Labour party 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/09/tony-blair-tragedy-of-labour-under-corbyn>
, saying: “If you break down the analysis of the people who are joining the 
Labour party, it is not clear to me [that] those that should feel most angry 
about their personal situation and those joining are the same people.


“The world of the Twitterati gives you a sense of belonging and a sense of 
insurgency. It was about shaking the system and rattling the cage. People do 
feel frustrated and social media gives them the ability to feel that at scale 
and at speed and the centre looks as if we are saying it is all very 
complicated. We are not in the right conversation with people like this”.

He said the centre ground should be discussing issues such as the role of 
technology and big data in public services, the use of monetary policy such as 
quantitative easing and the future of student debt. He also dismissed the 
binary debate over austerity, saying it misunderstood the way economy works.

Corbyn is planning to set out a “bold and ambitious” set of policies well 
ahead of the 2020 elections, after acknowledging the party is not yet doing 
enough to win a majority.

On Tuesday, he told the PCS union conference that the next Labour 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> government will restore national 
pay bargaining in the civil service, more than 20 years after it was scrapped 
by the Conservatives.


Corbyn won applause when he said it was “absurd” to have hundreds of different 
sets of wage negotiations, taking up the time of union representatives and 
managers. He also promised to end the cap on public sector pay and to restore 
good industrial relations to the civil service.
