
Q: I urgently need your advice. The other evening I borrowed my older sister's 
favourite boots without asking (I had nothing to wear with a new dress I had 
just bought). While I was wearing them, the heel snapped clean in half. She's 
had the boots for a few years, so I don't think I can buy her a new pair. She's 
going to kill me if I can't get them mended.
Kelly


A: You have one of three options, depending on how angry your sister will be. 
Firstly, you could try super-gluing the heel in the hope it may hold until she 
leaves the house. When the heel eventually breaks, it will be on her foot and 
you're off the hook. Effective but amoral. Secondly, you could try and find a 
very good cobbler, such as KG Shoes (www.cobbler.co.uk 
<http://www.cobbler.co.uk>), which has never let me down yet. But they can't 
work miracles, and depending on how bad the break is, they may have to send the 
boots away for repair. Finally, you could come clean - though I suggest that 
you look through magazines for replacement boots so you can offer to pay 
towards a new pair as an apology. I recommend getting a lock fitted on your 
bedroom door before you opt for the third suggestion, though.

Q: Now the weather's getting colder, I've rediscovered my old puffa coat. I 
bought it in the late Nineties, but I'm sure I have seen similar coats and 
jackets in some fashion magazines. I'm trying to recycle clothes more.
Fiona


A: Quilting and padding both turned up in the winter collection. Fashion just 
loves a revival and a reinvention, so as long as you refer to your puffa as 
quilted, you can probably get away with it. Though to make sure your look is up 
to date, wrap a wide belt round your waist for a modern silhouette. If you want 
to pursue the quilted trend, look to the catwalks for inspiration. Quilting had 
a heavy influence on accessories, from the classic Chanel bag to the Marc 
Jacobs tote. Burberry had beautifully sculpted padded coats, as did Marios 
Schwab. Giles Deacon went one step further and showed an emerald-green puffa 
cocktail dress


Â· If you have a wardrobe question for Jo Jones, email her at 
ask.jo@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.jo@observer.co.uk>.
