
Johnston Press is trying to dispose of its Irish newspapers. According to the 
Sunday Times in Ireland, 
<http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/news/ireland/article1346853.ece> the 
company "is in advanced talks" to sell its 14 Irish titles to the British 
advertising executive Malcolm Denmark.

The indebted publisher paid about £115m in 2005 to acquire the stable of 
regional and local papers that includes the Limerick Leader, Donegal Democrat 
and Kilkenny People.

But the story suggests Johnston would be prepared to accept just £10m [since 
amended to £7m, see below] from Denmark, who has set up a new company, Iconic
Newspapers <http://www.theguardian.com/media/newspapers>, to effect the 
takeover.

His main firm, Mediaforce, is an agency that places advertisements and inserts 
in newspapers and magazines inIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> and Britain. That almost certainly 
means his deal would require approval from Ireland's competition watchdog.

Denmark would have to convince the authority (and rival publishers) that there 
would not be a conflict of interest between the advertising and publishing 
divisions.

Johnston has slimmed down its Irish business in recent years in the face of 
ever-declining profits.Last year it closed the Offaly Express in Tullamore 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2012/jun/27/johnston-press-ireland>
, having previously sold off the Tallaght Echo.

The sell-off should be seen in the context of the strategy being pursued by 
Johnston's chief executive,Ashley Highfield 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/ashleyhighfield>, who is trying to ease the 
burden of the company's £300m debt pile.

However, it appears that Johnston's newspapers in Northern Ireland 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>, such as the Derry Journal and 
the Ballymena Times, are not included in the sale talks with Denmark.

Update midday: Johnston Press <http://www.theguardian.com/media/johnston-press>
 issued a statement confirming that discussions about selling its Irish papers 
were "at an advanced stage" for an aggregate consideration of €8.5m (£7m) in 
cash. It added: "There can be no certainty that agreement will be reached on a 
sale; a further announcement will be made as appropriate."

Sources: Sunday Times Ireland 
<http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/news/ireland/article1346853.ece>/
Investegate 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/johnston-press-plc--jpr-/rns/re-press-comment/201312021208124370U/>
