
While Ebola, Zika 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/12/on-front-line-brazil-war-zika-virus-i-felt-horror-movie-no-cure>
 andyellow fever 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/13/eu-rapid-reaction-medical-force-targets-yellow-fever-in-angola>
 may seem like distant threats to most people living in the developed world, 
the lessons from these global crises should resonate across health services in 
all countries.

At the G7 meeting in Ise-Shima <http://www.japan.go.jp/g7/>, Japan, and the 
world health assembly in Geneva 
<http://www.who.int/mediacentre/events/2016/wha69/en/> this week, world leaders 
and health policymakers have a prime opportunity to take action. They need to 
lead the way in shaping health systems that can cope with both public health 
emergencies and the longer-term challenges ofensuring access to affordable 
health services for all 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/feb/05/life-without-health-insurance-why-we-need-to-protect-the-most-vulnerable>
.

The Ebola outbreak in west Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> 
highlighted the magnitude of challenges in poor countries. It brought to the 
fore the complexity of maintaining quality, such as adequate infection control; 
the importance of sufficient numbers of motivated doctors and nurses; the need 
for coordination between health and other sectors; and the importance of 
citizen trust in health systems.

Related: Universal healthcare: the affordable dream 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jan/06/-sp-universal-healthcare-the-affordable-dream-amartya-sen>

In Liberia, there were fewer than 100 doctors 
<http://www.aho.afro.who.int/profiles_information/index.php/File:Liberia_HRH_table.PNG>
 at the time of the outbreak and only about 1,400 nurses and midwives for a 
population of more than 4 million. Initially, people hid Ebola victims both 
because they did not understand the disease, but also becausethey did not trust 
the authorities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/02/-sp-ebola-out-of-control-west-africa>
.

It was only through mobilising a larger health workforce, including 
professionals from outside the affected region as well as lesser-trained 
practitioners and community health workers, and through concerted efforts to 
regain the trust of communities that the epidemic was eventually effectively 
addressed.

Among the measures taken were efforts to involve the community in building 
trust between those working in the health system and those who use it.

These challenges may seem particularly germane to poorer and fragile 
countries, but similar trials plague more affluent health systems.

Notably, Europe is struggling to deal with rising levels of obesity and 
chronic diseases. As therecent junior doctors’ strikes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/30/nhs-workers-junior-doctors-strike>
 in the UK demonstrate, there is a need to maintain a skilled and motivated 
workforce. Many countries will also need toincrease their reliance on other 
healthcare professionals 
<http://www.oecd.org/officialdocuments/publicdisplaydocumentpdf/?cote=delsa/hea/wd/hwp(2010)5&doclanguage=en>
 (pdf), such as nurses. Creating a system that also focuses on engaging 
communities in healthy living is critical.

Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> services need to be 
transformed so that they truly put patients and their families at the centre, 
through enhancing homecare programmes, better educating patients and taking 
account of their preferences, and connecting them to other social services. 
Evidently, the biggest challenge of all is not just how to finance care, but 
how to organise and deliver quality health services for all communities.

Related: Ebola epidemic is 'wake-up call' for investment in universal 
healthcare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/03/ebola-epidemic-is-wake-up-call-for-investment-in-universal-healthcare>

Investing in health is not cheap, but it is not a luxury. Liberia spends less 
than $100 (£68) per capita annually on preventive, promotive and curative 
health services, yet more than$1.5bn was mobilised for reacting to the Ebola 
response 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/health/brief/world-bank-group-ebola-fact-sheet>
. In high-income countries,the costs of providing medical treatment for the 
chronically ill will be prohibitive 
<http://www.oecd.org/newsroom/healthmedicalcareimprovingbutbetterpreventionandmanagementofchronicdiseasesneededtocutcostssaysoecd.htm>
 unless prevention and primary care can be strengthened.

This week, the World Health Organisation is tabling its first global framework 
 on integrated and people-centered health services 
<http://apps.who.int/gb/ebwha/pdf_files/WHA69/A69_39-en.pdf> (pdf). 

In November, the global symposium on health systems research 
<http://healthsystemsglobal.org/globalsymposia/> will focus on how to build 
resilient and responsive health systems. But for accelerated action, we need 
political commitment, money and better knowledge.

The G7 can help build the political commitment necessary to overcome 
inevitable resistance to change at the country-level, enhance investments in 
strengthening health systems, and help build relevant and timely knowledge 
bases. While political commitment to the goal appears to be growing, in 
practice there remain many challenges.

We urge those meeting in Geneva and Ise-Shima this week to tackle these global 
health challenges by thinking beyond financing, and asking how can we organise 
and deliver quality health services to all communities. By making health 
systems more resilient, we will also be able to respond more quickly and 
effectively to new disease outbreaks, and other future health emergencies.

 * Sara Bennett 
<http://www.jhsph.edu/faculty/directory/profile/2296/sara-bennett>, from Johns 
Hopkins University, is chair ofHealth Systems Global 
<http://www.healthsystemsglobal.org/> and Edward Kelley 
<http://patientsafetymovement.org/speaker/edward-kelley-md-phd/>, from the 
World Health Organisation, co-chairs thequality in universal health and 
healthcare thematic working group 
<http://www.healthsystemsglobal.org/twg-group/1/Quality-in-Universal-Health-and-Health-Care/>
 of Health Systems Global
