
Nine out of 10 of the country’s top economists working across academia, the 
City, industry, small businesses and the public sector believe the British 
economy will be harmed by Brexit, according to the biggest survey of its kind 
ever conducted.
Brexit explained: The Guardian view 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/05/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?sheet=advanced&id=guardian_view&format=expandable>
A poll commissioned for the Observer and carried out by Ipsos MORI 
<https://www.ipsos-mori.com/researchpublications/researcharchive/3739/Economists-Views-on-Brexit.aspx>
, which drew responses from more than 600 economists, found 88% saying an exit 
from the EU and the single market would most likely damage Britain’s growth 
prospects over the next five years.

A striking 82% of the economists who responded thought there would probably be 
a negative impact on household incomes over the next five years in the event of 
a Leave vote, with 61% thinking unemployment would rise.

Those surveyed were members of the profession’s most respected representative 
bodies, the Royal Economic Society and the Society of Business Economists, and 
all who replied did so voluntarily.

Paul Johnson, director of the independent Institute for Fiscal Studies, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/25/ifs-brexit-extend-austerity-budget-deficit-eu-referendum>
 said the findings, from a survey unprecedented in its scale, showed an 
extraordinary level of unity. “For a profession known to agree about little, it 
is pretty remarkable to see this degree of consensus about anything,” Johnson 
said. “It no doubt reflects the level of agreement among many economists about 
the benefits of free trade and the costs of uncertainty for economic growth.”

The poll also found a majority of respondents – 57% – held the view that a 
vote for Brexit on 23 June would blow a hole in economic growth, cutting GDP by 
more than 3% over the next five years. Just 5% thought that there would 
probably be a positive impact.

The economists were also overwhelmingly pessimistic about the long-term 
economic impact of leaving the EU and the single market. Some 72% said that a 
vote to leave would most likely have a negative impact on growth for 10-20 
years.

Related: Ukip’s use of Great Escape theme tune grates with composer’s sons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/28/great-escape-theme-tune-ukip-composer>

Just 4% of respondents who thought Brexit would mostly likely have a negative 
impact on GDP over the initial five years said it would have a positive effect 
over the longer term.

The findings – which come as 37 faith leaders write in a letter to the Observer
 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/28/peace-europe-different-faiths-must-unite>
 warning that Brexit will damage the causes of peace and the fight against 
poverty – will bolster David Cameron and George Osborne, who have both argued 
strongly that the economy will be hit hard in the event of Brexit.

But the prime minister and chancellor have been criticised by the Michael Gove 
and Boris Johnson-led Leave campaign, which has claimed they are trying to 
scare the electorate and are buying into the establishment views of EU-funded 
international organisations. Last week Vote Leave accused the Institute for 
Fiscal Studies of being a “paid-up propaganda arm” of theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> after it said that leaving the EU would 
result in an extra two years of austerity.

The main reasons cited by economists as to why the UK would suffer were “loss 
of access to the single market” (67%) and “increased uncertainty leading to 
reduced investment” (66%). The leading Leave campaigner Michael Gove has said 
Britain should leave the single market as well as the EU.

Economists working in the public sector tended to be slightly less negative 
about the economic impacts of leaving the EU than average. Non-UK citizens 
living in the UK were more likely to think a vote to leave would most likely 
have a negative impact on GDP over five years (96%) compared with British or 
Irish economists living in the UK (86%). By contrast, relatively few economists 
have publicly come out saying that leaving the EU would be good for British 
growth, and only a handful have signed up in support of the pro-Brexit group
Economists for Britain <https://forbritain.org/economists/supporters/>.

Related: Brexit would jeopardise peace in Europe, warn religious leaders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/28/religious-leaders-oppose-brexit>

Most studies of the impact on Britain’s economy of a decision to quit the EU 
show the uncertainty will hit growth in the short term and the loss of access 
to the EU’s single market will damage growth for decades to come.

The International Monetary Fund (IMF), the Organisation for Economic 
Cooperation and Development and the UK’s National Institute of Economic and 
Social Research agree that there will be a loss of output as foreign investment 
shrivels and international businesses and banks shift work to the continent. 
Any cuts to migration would also have a huge impact on growth.

The Treasury, which has predicted Brexit would cost each household £4,300 by 
2030 in lost output and extra taxes, has gone further with warnings that house 
prices will tumble and pensions values collapse by £300bn.

Economists for Brexit, who base their forecasts on a model developed by the 
Cardiff University professor and arch-monetarist Patrick Minford, argue that a 
fall in sterling, a bonfire of labour protections and the abolition of import 
tariffs will boost trade after a brief period of uncertainty. The free market 
group has said job losses in areas of the economy protected by the EU, such as 
agriculture and manufacturing, will be more than made up for by a booming 
services sector.

Analysis released by the IFS last week showed that leaving the EU in the vote 
on 23 June would lead to a £40bn hole in the public finances 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/25/ifs-brexit-extend-austerity-budget-deficit-eu-referendum>
.

The Stronger In campaign fronted by Cameron said this would lead to spending 
cuts of at least £15.9bn to the NHS – equivalent to 200,000 doctors, 487,000 
nurses or 37 hospitals. It would also mean £7.6bn of cuts to education, 
equivalent to 395,000 teachers, 393 new schools, or 2.8 million primary school 
places.

In total, 639 respondents completed an online survey, sent to non-student 
members of the Royal Economic Society and the Society of Business Economists, 
between 19 and 27 May 2016: a response rate of 17%. Data is unweighted and 
reported figures should only be taken as representative of the views of those 
who responded
