
Sarah Tolfrey, 38, did well at school, particularly in maths, but left at 16, 
taking a banking job in London instead. Three children later, she decided to 
look again at her youthful dream of going to university.

She knew she had left it late and had her doubts. “It seemed self-indulgent 
and there was the expense. It was a big step for me,” she says. But friends 
encouraged her to think aboutClearing 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/clearing> and she had a look at 
universities close by, one of which was Greenwich. Her open day experience was 
so good that she signed up with Ucas.

On the strength of a short course in maths she had taken at the Open 
University, Greenwich accepted her. Their faith was justified – she got a first 
for her first year.

Clearing was “overwhelming”, she says, but Greenwich was so supportive she 
never felt she couldn’t cope. “Going back to university was one of the best 
things I ever did,” she says.

Nowadays, Clearing is seen as a legitimate route into higher education, not 
simply a way in for those who didn’t achieve their A-level grades, says Alison 
Wilde, admissions manager at Nottingham Trent University.

Related: University league tables 2016 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/ng-interactive/2015/may/25/university-league-tables-2016>

How to apply through Clearing

Prospective students are advised to think hard about the area they want to 
study and to go online to see what courses are available. The best thing is to 
talk to an admissions tutor on the phone, says Martin Pout, assistant dean in 
the School of Arts and Media at Teesside University.

And imake a list of the points you want to get across before you pick up the 
telephone.

Susie King, head of admissions at the University of Bedfordshire, advises 
mature applicants – defined as people setting out to study at 21 and over – to 
make sure they can lay their hands on the certificates of qualifications they 
already have.

They should think about the work or voluntary experience they have and be 
ready to turn up for an interview, she says. As soon as they know they have a 
place, they should get their student finance application in, she adds.

Laura Kishore, head of admissions at Oxford Brookes, advises applicants to 
organise someone to write a reference for them – “especially someone with 
insight into what the applicant might be doing at university”.

Some mature students will find they need to enter university via a foundation 
or access course because they have been out of education for so long.

Don’t worry about applying late. “Universities can deal with that,” says 
Justin Lynas, head of student process and systems at Birkbeck.

Related: Get the most for your money at university 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/aug/05/get-the-most-for-your-money-at-university>

Once you get there

For mature students, the anxieties are often about whether they will fit in 
and cope academically – and how they will juggle family and work commitments 
with their studies.

Wildeadvises: “Recognise that maturity is a strength,” she says. “Be aware 
that there will be a lot of other students like you, over the age of 21, and 
that everyone will be worried about something.”

Mature students <http://www.theguardian.com/education/mature-students> should 
try to prepare ahead of time by finding out coursework and examination 
schedules and ensuring they can meet their study deadlines and balance work and 
family responsibilities alongside them.

Many universities have special support for mature students. The University of 
Bedfordshire has a mature students’ officer in its student union and Nottingham 
Trent has trained officers in its student support services teams to help mature 
students. Students aged 21 and over are encouraged to telephone or email if 
they need help before or during their course.

It also holds networking events specifically for older students to get to know 
one another, as well as having a society for older students.

Help with finances

Financial issues are of particular concern to most mature students because of 
their additional responsibilities including mortgages and families. 
Universities assist students to plan their finances effectively through their 
financial support services, which help them to draw up budgets and point them 
towards sources of funding.

When it comes to loans and grants, mature students are entitled to the same as 
18-year-olds – in other words, they can apply for a tuition-fee loan and a 
maintenance loan and, if they are from a low-income household, they can apply 
for a maintenance grant. This year, however, is the last year that they can 
apply for the grant, which is being abolished in 2016.

Some universities have extra grants. All students at Teesside, for example, 
get a Kickstart award of £500 that in their first year, and Bedfordshire has an 
access bursary of £450 over three years. In addition, Teesside gives an extra 
bursary to all students who get at least three Bs in their A-levels. All these 
awards go to students regardless of their age.

Mature students with caring responsibilities (for children or parents) should 
get help from their university when applying for government grants for 
childcare or learning.

Students of all ages in financial trouble can access hardship funds and 
short-term loans. Bursaries may also be available for people from low-income 
households.

Laura Kishore, head of admissions at Oxford Brookes, advises applicants to go 
online to research the availability of bursaries and scholarships at their 
preferred universities.

Accommodation arrangements vary enormously. At Teesside, where 47% of students 
are over 21 on entry, there is no specific housing for mature students. Oxford 
Brookes, however, has flats for families and for postgraduates and older 
students – more expensive than regular accommodation, but also quieter and more 
studious.


Mark’s story: revisiting a dream


When Mark Hardaker was diagnosed with multiple sclerosis he decided to change 
career – which meant going to university.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b6gy%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b6gy%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70985bc3a60a743d4f769a017c79837b6c1ca409%2F103_116_4174_2505%2F4174.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Thinking%20of%20becoming%20a%20mature%20student%3F%20Apply%20through%20Clearing&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b6gy%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Thinking+of+becoming+a+mature+student%3F+Apply+through+Clearing&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b6gy%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70985bc3a60a743d4f769a017c79837b6c1ca409%2F103_116_4174_2505%2F4174.jpg>
 Mark Hardaker. 
Mark Hardaker, 41, left school with a handful of GCSEs. Now he’s getting top 
marks in his degree, has won an academic prize for his writing and has had more 
than 100 articles published. He quit his career as a partner in a hair salon in 
Birmingham when he was diagnosed with MS, returning to Cornwall to be close to 
family. Memories of sitting in the offices of The Cornishman – a magazine 
edited by his stepfather – stirred thoughts of journalism. “I used to go in and 
proofread when I was young – I loved the buzz of the place.”

On an open day at Falmouth University, academics convinced him to apply 
through Clearing. He had a phone interview and was offered a place within a 
fortnight. Mark has since picked up the student prize for best news story and 
seen his work published in magazines. “When I was diagnosed, I thought it was 
game over. But I just needed to rethink my career path.”

Alex’s story

Alex Boorman, 33, is in his first year studying nutrition at Kingston 
University.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b6gy%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b6gy%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9368af4e8d9ecca896d6a9b4c146ca9af32e322%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Thinking%20of%20becoming%20a%20mature%20student%3F%20Apply%20through%20Clearing&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b6gy%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Thinking+of+becoming+a+mature+student%3F+Apply+through+Clearing&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b6gy%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9368af4e8d9ecca896d6a9b4c146ca9af32e322%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
 A healthy option: Alex Boorman has a passion for nutrition Photograph: Alex 
Boorman 
I left school at 16 and headed straight into the building trade, spending the 
next decade honing my skills. But since health and diet had always been very 
important to me, I started to dream about doing a degree in a related subject 
area, and enrolled on a health and human sciences access course. I worked hard 
and when I researched higher education options, decided that a degree in 
nutrition would tick all the boxes.

I was hampered by not having studied chemistry on my access course, so several 
universities wouldn’t even consider me. After getting my results, I hit the 
Clearing lines and got through to Kingston. The hotline operator put me in 
touch with a tutor who took all my experiences into account and was willing to 
give me a shot. I couldn’t believe that within just a few hours of contacting 
the university, I had been offered a place.

If you are dedicated and you want it enough, you can get a degree at any time 
in your life and Clearing could be the way to achieve that ambition. My advice 
for this year’s Clearing students is that it doesn’t matter how you get your 
place on a course, so much as how you conduct yourself once you’re there.

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
