
In a period of rapid expansion and change in higher education, university 
boards are increasingly tasked with the future-proofing of their institutions.

Last week it was reported that the sector is set to borrow £3bn 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/universities-borrow-3bn-for-new-boom-83spkb05k>
 to fund major new building projects. These includeplans for a new campus 
<https://www.ucl.ac.uk/news/news-articles/0416/280416-european-investment-bank> 
for University College London at the Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park in east 
London and a second £1bn research-focused campus in White City for Imperial 
College London. The University of Glasgow has also acquired a 14-acre site for 
another campus.

As well as this building boom, universities are anticipating legislative 
change, with higher education reforms expected to be announced as part of the 
Queen’s speech on 18 May. The reforms are expected to make it easier forprivate 
providers 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/20/tory-plan-worthless-degrees> 
to enter the market to compete with established providers. There is a greater 
focus on attracting students after the lifting of the numbers cap last year, 
and competition from global universities for the international student market.


“There’s a lot of change to deal with, both legislative change and in terms of 
capital projects,” says Martin Conway, the deputy secretary of the University 
of Manchester, who also has a role in the organisation of the university’s 
board. “One of the ways we have approached this is to try to recruit more 
broadly – instead of doing our usual advert in the Sunday Times, we’ve done a 
recruitment drive to look for more diverse people from different backgrounds, 
and from further afield.”

Critical friend

Conway says one of the most significant activities that the university has 
overseen in recent years has been a bond proposal and a new master plan, but 
that the main role of the board is to be a critical friend in these situations.

“It’s oversight rather than leadership, but it is still helpful to have people 
with the right expertise in these areas to give the right advice.

“Next we may look internationally for lay board members as the university has 
an international role, and also for people with specific experience in the 
oversight of capital projects,” he says.

Alison Cressey is an independent board member of Falmouth University who was 
selected specifically for her commercial background in the creative industries 
and experience as CEO ofWomen in Games <http://www.womeningamesjobs.com/>. The 
small creative arts university in Cornwallalmost doubled in size 
<https://www.falmouth.ac.uk/sites/default/files/download/audited_financial_statements_2015_0.pdf#page=4>
 between 2006 and 2015, and has ambitious plans for the future.

Cressey says Falmouth was especially interested in her expertise because it 
was startingLaunchpad <https://www.falmouth.ac.uk/launchpad>, a business 
entrepreneurship graduate programme designed to help students start new games 
companies. She says she has been able to ask searching questions and support 
the course director as a board member.

Nimble and vocal

Her main advice for modern university boards is to make them nimble, vocal and 
challenging, as well as diverse in terms of skills and background: “I would 
also add, they could do with being smaller – many universities have up to 30 
people on board, but that’s too large.”

“You need to all be able to speak and to hear each other. You need to have 
trust and good relationships between everyone to do the task well. And that 
task is to have candid, robust conversations with senior leadership.”

Similar advice is given by Stephen Parker, chair of the board of governors at 
Coventry University. He agrees that it is important to be able to have robust 
conversations with the university, a diverse skillset on the board and good 
relationships that are “both thoughtful and action-based”, but says that 
accountability and evidence-based decisions are also crucial in the whirlwind 
of change.

“All of our decision-making processes are very traceable – you can track each 
suggestion back to the person who made it. We also use data. If a new idea, a 
new strategy, was suggested we would evaluate, in a data-driven way, where it 
should be put in the pecking order of our priorities.”

Strategic plan

The Coventry board uses what it calls a “strategic roadmap” to guide 
decision-making, but Parker adds that decisions can still be made expediently 
where necessary.

“The university wanted a way of providing flexible learning opportunities for 
people in work, of the same academic standard as the main university, and so we 
set up the Coventry University College in 12 months. We can be quick – we have 
to be quite efficient with our time.”

Universities are very complex, says Parker, and consequently university boards 
can feel like a mixture of a charitable trust and a commercial board. Board 
members have to keep in mind the purpose of a higher education institution: “If 
you lose sight of what a university is about – learning, teaching, expanding 
knowledge – then you’ll get lost.”

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>
