
Tiny houses are big news 
<http://gazette.com/tiny-house-event-in-colorado-spring-could-set-big-record/article/1557071>
. Last weekend Colorado Springs hosted the first everTiny House Jamboree 
<https://www.tinyhousejamboree.com/> where speakers included builders, authors 
and outdoor enthusiasts who have downsized their lives by swapping a 
traditional home for a small dwelling. The event builds on the momentum amonga 
community of cabin enthusiasts 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/aug/17/cabin-fever-tiny-homes> 
who have published books – including Cabin Porn (follow them onInstagram 
<https://instagram.com/cabinporn/>) and Taschen’s Cabins 
<http://www.taschen.com/pages/en/catalogue/architecture/all/04605/facts.cabins.htm>
 – blogs and websites offering advice on how to build your own.

Related: 15 pitch perfect UK campsites 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/may/23/uk-cool-campsites-camping-glamping-yurts-britain>

For those of us who dream of cabin life but can’t permanently up sticks to the 
nearest wood or mountainside, there are a growing number of tiny dwellings to 
rent. Glamping websites are bulging withtreehouses 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jul/15/the-best-holiday-treehouses-in-the-uk>
, shepherd’s huts, permanent tents, converted horse boxes, pods, gypsy caravans 
and of course, cabins. Next month sees the official launch ofCabinly 
<http://cabinly.co.uk/>, a new website dedicated to … you’ve guessed it … and 
set up by Garri Rayner, the man behindGo Glamping <http://goglamping.net/>, 
which launched in 2007. At the moment Cabinly features 15 places to stay, 
mainly in the UK, but there are plans to add more. We picked out five from 
across the UK.

Cabin on the Lake, Powys

The Cabin on the Lake is a simple one-room cabin in an idyllic setting near 
Machynlleth in mid-Wales. With a double bed, woodburning stove, covered kitchen 
and shower you can live out your escapist fantasies in comfort. Swim in the 
lake, warm up in the hot tub. The cabin is on a working farm, which is home to
an adults-only campsite 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2009/jul/10/wild-camping-uk-wales-holiday> 
with just five well-spaced pitches each with its own fire pit. The isolated, 
unspoilt setting means wildlife is plentiful, with badgers, wild hare and 
rabbits, birds of prey, woodpeckers, jays and all sorts of garden birds.
• Three-night weekend in low season £360, sleeps two, gwaliafarm.co.uk 
<http://gwaliafarm.co.uk/>

Brockloch Bothy, Galloway
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4be2n%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4be2n%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef0193a5f4ddcf4cb94c523415dfbcd6c0af041b%2F0_166_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cosy%20becomes%20cool%3A%20five%20great%20cabins%20to%20rent%20in%20the%20UK&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4be2n%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cosy+becomes+cool%3A+five+great+cabins+to+rent+in+the+UK&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4be2n%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef0193a5f4ddcf4cb94c523415dfbcd6c0af041b%2F0_166_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
Bothies are basic huts common in remote parts of Scotland, or at least they 
were. A new generation of architects has taken the bothy concept and created 
their own modern-day version; so the Scottish landscape is now dotted with 
smart, eco-friendly, designer cabins. Brockloch is one such place, an off-grid, 
timber-framed micro-building on a 190-acre farm overlooking the Galloway Hills 
in south-west Scotland. Guests can visitThreave Castle 
<http://www.visitscotland.com/info/see-do/threave-castle-p248641>, Logan 
Botanic Garden <http://www.rbge.org.uk/the-gardens/logan> or explore the 
countryside on two wheels at one of the7stanes 
<http://www.7stanesmountainbiking.com/> mountain biking trails. Back at the 
bothy, sit on the deck admiring the views of the fields where black-faced sheep 
graze.
• £100 a night, sleeps two, brockloch.co.uk <http://www.brockloch.co.uk/>

North Star Club, Yorkshire Wolds
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4be2n%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4be2n%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd96a9f0e02b8cc916535c3f1bc4f77f41b4163c3%2F0_90_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cosy%20becomes%20cool%3A%20five%20great%20cabins%20to%20rent%20in%20the%20UK&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4be2n%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cosy+becomes+cool%3A+five+great+cabins+to+rent+in+the+UK&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4be2n%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd96a9f0e02b8cc916535c3f1bc4f77f41b4163c3%2F0_90_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
Set up in 2008, Jollydays was a pioneer of posh camping, offering tasteful, 
luxury tents in 15 acres of North Yorkshire woodland. Now Christian and Carolyn 
Van Outersterp, the husband-and-wife team behind Jollydays, has launched a 
second venture: the North Star Club. Inspired by American camps enjoyed by 
Christian in his childhood, it features eight “suites” set in 500 acres of 
native woodland. If your cabin fantasy tends towards ascetic, this is not the 
spot for you. Suites have king-size beds and woodburners, plus massage and spa 
treatments. All this comes at the price of a good hotel room but for the 
style-conscious city escapee who likes the outdoors to look like a fashion set 
(Carolyn used to work in fashion and the site is dotted with fur throws and 
wooden objets d’art), it’s hard to beat.
• From £175 for two nights (January) rising steeply in July/August, sleep up 
to six,northstarclub.co.uk <http://www.northstarclub.co.uk/>

Grey Willow Yurts, Devon
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4be2n%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4be2n%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33df2e58ea86f47a4c49f74b0ebce5c885706768%2F0_73_1175_705%2F1175.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cosy%20becomes%20cool%3A%20five%20great%20cabins%20to%20rent%20in%20the%20UK&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4be2n%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cosy+becomes+cool%3A+five+great+cabins+to+rent+in+the+UK&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4be2n%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33df2e58ea86f47a4c49f74b0ebce5c885706768%2F0_73_1175_705%2F1175.jpg>
It’s a sign of how quickly the glamping market is expanding that words are 
being invented to keep up with the different types of dwelling on offer. Enter 
the “yabin” – a cross between a yurt and a cabin. These octagonal wooden 
structures are found at Grey Willow Yurts, an eco-friendly site in the 
Blackdown Hills near Honiton in south Devon. The yabins were designed and built 
by owner Peter Selhurst, and feature a double bed, double and single futons, 
woodburning stove and furniture made from local spruce and ash, and a 
designated campfire area.
• Four nights from £149 in low season, sleep up to five, greywillowyurts.co.uk 
<http://www.greywillowyurts.co.uk/index.html>

Elmley national nature reserve, Kent
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4be2n%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4be2n%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F534baa1886c5ee86b4b723e19b5637aa207de73e%2F0_0_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cosy%20becomes%20cool%3A%20five%20great%20cabins%20to%20rent%20in%20the%20UK&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4be2n%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cosy+becomes+cool%3A+five+great+cabins+to+rent+in+the+UK&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4be2n%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F534baa1886c5ee86b4b723e19b5637aa207de73e%2F0_0_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
Elmley is a cattle farm and national nature reserve on the Isle of Sheppey 
encompassing a wildlife-rich grazing marsh. Visitors include wading birds, 
hare, watervoles, an array of lizards and even seals, who fish of the mudbanks. 
Three shepherd’s huts provide accommodation for wildlife watchers (there are 
four hides in the reserve) and photographers drawn to the big skies, or anyone 
after a nature escape. The huts have double beds, en suites, woodburners and 
cooking facilities (cook on the woodburner or on a gas ring in the Kentish 
barn).
• From £75 a night, sleeps two elmleynaturereserve.co.uk 
<http://www.elmleynaturereserve.co.uk/>
