
Where to stay

The Varsity hotel <http://www.thevarsityhotel.co.uk/> is in the perfect 
location, both for the start of scenic runs, and for exploring the town more 
generally. It has large and wonderfully light rooms, with a gym and spa next 
door free for guests to train and chill out respectively. Despite nestling in 
the historic heart of the university town, it’s actually a new build, and has 
chintzy faux-historic decor for clean lines, airy spaces and comfort. The rooms 
range in style and size, depending on budget, but even the smaller rooms are 
large enough to swing a foam roller. The higher floors have spectacular views – 
I stayed in a corner room on the fifth floor, with two walls of 
floor-to-ceiling windows, and actually uttered a rather stunned “wow!” when I 
walked in. My room also had a good-sized bath (useful for post-run aches), a 
fantastically comfortable bed, and a proper selection of teas and coffees to 
make yourself a cuppa. Oh, and an iPod docking station, fluffy towels and fast 
wifi. Really, it’s so amazing I’m surprised I ever got out for a run at all.

Where to run

As Cambridge is flat as a pancake, the question is simply one of finding the 
nicest, most scenic and least tourist-clogged routes. From the Varsity hotel 
you can cross Jesus Green and Midsummer Common and head along the river – I 
turned back to make it a gentle 5k <https://www.strava.com/activities/490089611>
 but there were many more miles to be explored. Cambridge city councilhave also 
handily produced a range of downloadable leaflets 
<http://www.cambridgeshire.gov.uk/info/20012/arts_green_spaces_and_activities/198/enjoying_the_countryside>
 with suggested running routes, ranging from four to 16 miles.



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t92a%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t92a%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcca33babf854d04da1a43e024f20ea6cdb2b8cf%2F0_81_2464_1479%2F2464.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Running%20away%3A%20Cambridge%20has%20flat%2C%20scenic%20and%20peaceful%20routes&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t92a%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Running+away%3A+Cambridge+has+flat%2C+scenic+and+peaceful+routes&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t92a%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcca33babf854d04da1a43e024f20ea6cdb2b8cf%2F0_81_2464_1479%2F2464.jpg>
 The Glassworks gym Photograph: Paul Winch-Furness 
Where to train

Those staying in the Varsity hotel have free access to the Glassworks Gym 
<http://www.theglassworksgym.co.uk/> next door. On the bottom floor are 
treatment rooms for massages, while ajacuzzi  
<http://www.theglassworksgym.co.uk/elemis-spa.php>with a truly spectacular view 
onto the Backs lets you people-watch without feeling self-conscious; the window 
is “one way” so no one can see in at you, but you can watch them picking their 
noses. Again, it’s a wonder I ever got out ...

The gym itself is very well equipped – it’s a smallish space but with 
everything you could need, from cardio machines, treadmills to free weights and 
TRX trainers. You can also book a one-offpersonal training session 
<http://www.theglassworksgym.co.uk/personal-training-sports-massage.php> (£45 
for an hour) during your stay. I spent a painful but instructive hour with 
James, a man who clearly knows his stuff, as he works with some “proper” 
athletes in the town.

Related: How was your weekend running? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/the-running-blog/2016/apr/25/how-was-your-weekend-running>

Where to eat

Breakfast at the Varsity is likely to please the distance runner, as the 
buffet includes a variety of different breads and a toaster, so you can help 
yourself to your carb-hungry heart is content. You have to go out of the hotel 
and round the corner to the River bar, but that should take all of about 45 
seconds. There’s also a new bar and restaurant, Six, opening soon up on the 
hotel’s entire sixth floor, just below their stunning rooftop garden. It’s 
fortunate this was not yet open when I stayed, given that it promises to have a 
dedicated ice cream menu. I’d have moved in.

Races to enter

The Cambridge half marathon is a big and popular route – the flat course means 
there’s huge potential for a PB.Next year’s race will take place in February 
<http://www.onestepbeyond.org.uk/cambridge-half-marathon.php>, but the actual 
date is yet to be confirmed. There is also, of course,a Cambridge parkrun 
<http://www.parkrun.org.uk/cambridge/>. The UK leg of the global Wings for Life 
World Run <http://www.wingsforlifeworldrun.com/gb/en/cambridge/> is also taking 
place in Cambridge this year, on 8 May.

Accomodation was provided by the The Varsity. Prices start at £155. For 
bookings 01223 30 60 30


thevarsityhotel.co.uk <http://www.thevarsityhotel.co.uk/>
