
Tragedies can strike campuses without warning. In a single moment, the 
“it-can’t-happen-here” illusion is shattered. At times like this, social media 
is an essential tool for emergency communication, but it can also be more than 
that. When a student dies, Facebook and Twitter can unite a community, yet many 
higher education institutions shy away from engaging in this way.

In late 2014, I learned that a student had died at my alma mater. I visited 
the college website and social channels in search of information, but there was 
nothing. As an alumna, I felt left in the dark and disconnected from a 
community about which I care deeply. As a communications professional, I found 
the lack of acknowledgement equally troubling.

I recalled a conference I’d attended earlier that year – specifically a talk 
by Dave Tyler, the manager of digital and social media at the College at 
Brockport (the state university of New York), about how he handled social media 
after themurder of student Alexandra Kogut in 2012 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/alexandra-kogut-murder-clayton-whittemore-admitted-he-intentionally-killed-suny-brockport-college-student-police-say/>
.

I got in touch with Tyler and found that he, like me, favours transparency and 
thinks institutions should show their human face in moments of distress on 
campus. Not everyone shares this view and I’ve seen numerous examples of 
institutions missing opportunities to connect with and provide comfort for 
those affected by a loss. Here’s how I would advise them to approach this 
sensitive task:

Be transparent 

Related: The loneliness of the long distance learner 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/dec/08/you-work-in-a-vacuum-the-loneliness-of-the-long-distance-learner>

 In a time of crisis, the campus community will want information — so give it 
to them. Without an official announcement, people are left to speculate, and 
misinformation can circulate on channels the university cannot control. Getting 
in front of the story prevents what Tyler calls an information vacuum.

“If you’re not having the conversation, other people are having it for you,” 
Tyler says. “A good community manager will already have a sense of what the 
audience needs ahead of time. That can help you make better decisions about how 
you’re going to handle a crisis.”

Of course circumstances sometimes prevent institutions from being forthcoming, 
in cases of suicide or accidental overdose, for example. Institutions must 
respect the family’s wishes, which often means silence. If individuals are 
asking questions on social media, it’s best to get in touch with them privately 
and explain the family’s position. If a large community is calling for an 
update, consider crafting an official statement that fits within the 
constraints — announcing that there is no information available to the public 
at least allows you to acknowledge the event.

Stay conversational 

There are three stages to the process of reporting a student’s death on social 
media. First, there’s the information dissemination and clarification. Then, a 
time of coming together. Finally, we return to a kind of normality.

University social media accounts are generally personable and conversational; 
maintaining this approach is key throughout a time of crisis.

“Keep people informed, and let them know you’re experiencing the same sorts of 
feelings that they are,” Tyler says. “That’s something press releases tend to 
gloss over. On social, its best to use an active voice, strip out jargon and 
try to sound natural. By acknowledging the issue, an institution invites people 
to mourn.”

Offer support

The climate at Brockport after Kogut’s death was “shocked and scared”, Tyler 
says. Social media, emails, hotlines and websites were used to distribute 
safety information, direct students to resources such as counselling, and post 
information about the memorial service and other events.

 Last month two students and one former student at the State University of New 
York at Geneseo were found dead 
<http://www.syracuse.com/news/index.ssf/2016/01/two_geneseo_students_one_former_student_dies_in_home_near_school.html>
 in a murder-suicide. The university tweeted facts in a timely manner, and its 
homepage featured a banner image of a flickering candle that directed community 
members to more information.

There was an outpouring of support on Twitter. On Facebook, the university’s 
page hosted messages of support and heartfelt tributes to the students, which 
received upwards of a thousand likes, shares and comments. The community wanted 
to mourn together, and the institution opened its arms.

When a university suffers a loss, morale can plummet. But when a campus 
community witnesses an outpouring of support, and when compassion is shown 
across social media — especially from official accounts and those of important 
campus figures — that gloom can slowly begin to lift.

Related: Bomb threats, breakdowns and bongs: the life of a university security 
guard 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jan/15/bomb-threats-breakdowns-and-bongs-the-life-of-a-university-security-guard>

Communicators too often overlook the fact that social platforms were made for 
conversation. When your community wants to talk the most, it is not the time to 
fall silent.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
