
Snapshot: Grandma in her theatrical glamour

This photograph shows my grandmother’s theatrical calling card from the 1920s, 
when Norah Ada Beatrice Levy became the cheerfully named Molly O’Day. With 
fashionable, flapper finger-waves in her hair and a fur collar framing her 
face, she was a coy soubrette. Born in Camberwell, south London, in 1908, she 
was the only surviving daughter of two music hall artistes.

At 18, Norah ignored the plaintive cry of many a theatrical parent not to 
follow a career on the stage. She had benefited from the largesse of my very 
successful music hall great aunt, Miss Daisy Dormer, and been privately 
educated. Norah succeeded academically and was an accomplished pianist and 
singer. She was due to study at Girton college, Cambridge – an unusual story of 
social mobility for a girl whose own mother had been a Portsmouth docker’s 
daughter.

In the summer before she was due to “go up”, so family legend has it, she took 
a holiday job at Harrods. One lunchtime, flicking though her parents’ copy of 
The Stage, she saw a call for chorus girls at the Palladium. The roar of the 
crowd and the smell of the greasepaint was too strong – she skipped off to the 
audition and it was goodbye to Girton.

Her parents’ fears of the precarious nature of a life on the stage were well 
founded. They had struggled to make ends meet in an exhausting touring schedule 
that took them all over the UK and abroad, never quite making their way to the 
top of the bill. Norah dreamed big, yet after the euphoria of the Palladium she 
was soon to be found playing panto in Merthyr Tydfil.

By 1937 she was married to an engineer and living in West Sussex, in a house 
provided by Daisy’s estate. She had three sons, yet her marriage was unhappy, 
her husband so scarred by his second world war experiences that he took his own 
life in 1955. I often wonder how she managed in 1950s Britain, where attitudes 
to both suicide and single parenthood were unforgiving.

As a child, visits to Grandma always involved a musical singalong and she 
would sit at her piano wrapped in a beautiful embroidered shawl, bashing out 
the old favourites: My Old Man, Daisy Bell, I’m Henry VIII I Am. My sister and 
I would sit entranced as her nimble fingers tore across the piano. She died 
when I was 10 years old but the memories and the melodies linger.

Alison Young

Playlist: I dream of my parents singing it while apart

I’d Really Love to See You Tonight, by England Dan and John Ford Coley

“It’s been such a long time and I really do miss your smile” 

When I first heard this song I was 12 years old, sailing the canals of 
Brittany and the south of France with my parents. My father had music with him 
on every trip, social occasion and new adventure, which meant that for us as a 
family many of these wonderful times are indelibly associated with great songs.

He came across this song when it was released in May 1976 while working in 
Saudi Arabia. He met a lot of Americans out there and shared their musical 
tastes, swapping and buying cassettes, which he would send home to us. Against 
the arid backdrop of the desert, he lay listening to this song in that 
blistering heat, thinking of my mother and how much he missed her.

He sent her a copy of the album Nights are Forever through the post, with a 
note telling her to listen out for this track. She, too, lay alone in her bed 
longing for my father’s return, but instead of Arabian nights she was in the 
cool, crisp evening air of British summertime.

For me, the song takes me back to those lazy summer afternoons sailing through 
the French countryside. I recall negotiating the locks (we were quite 
accomplished by the end), the clanging halyard that you grow so used to, it is 
like a part of your conversation, the wonderful language and food, (grilling 
fresh sardines is a meal I remember with particular affection) and the 
excitement of docking into a new harbour in a different town each day.

Because we were all so touched by it in different ways, we decided to play 
this song at my father’s funeral. There were a lot of tears, but people looked 
moved rather than miserable when they listened. It remains a huge part of our 
memories of my father, so much so that my mother had the line above engraved on 
his headstone.

Now I experience a mixed bag of emotions when I hear this beautiful tune. The 
memory I most like to dwell on, though, is imagining my parents simultaneously 
lying in bed on opposite sides of the world, my father in sweltering heat, my 
mother in bracing moonlight air, both softly singing the lyrics to the chorus 
as they dream of each other, and when they will be together again.

Emma Bullard

We love to eat: Nanna’s scone pudding
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jqnz%2Fsfb%23img-1&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jqnz%2Fsfb%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffbde9929425c03b0c020f1ec24fa29c371969deb%2F0_203_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Family%20life%3A%20Grandma%E2%80%99s%20theatrical%20calling%20card%2C%20I%E2%80%99d%20Really%20Love%20to%20See%20You%20Tonight%2C%20Nanna%E2%80%99s%20scone%20pudding&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jqnz%2Fstw%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Family+life%3A+Grandma%E2%80%99s+theatrical+calling+card%2C+I%E2%80%99d+Really+Love+to+See+You+Tonight%2C+Nanna%E2%80%99s+scone+pudding&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jqnz%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffbde9929425c03b0c020f1ec24fa29c371969deb%2F0_203_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
 ‘Easy to make, and economical’ … Nanna’s scone pudding. 
Ingredients

1 cup flour

½ oz butter (1 oz = 28g so that would be 14g but I’d throw in more than 14g)

1 tbsp golden syrup

2 tsp baking powder

½ cup milk

A pinch of salt

2 tbsp sugar

Rub butter into flour, add baking powder and pinch salt and mix with milk. Pat 
out to size of dish and cover with syrup and sugar in ¾ cup boiling water. (My 
sister reckons you can make 1 ½ times the amount of this syrupy mixture, and I 
agree.) Dot nobs of butter on the top. Bake at 200C for 20-30 min (Fan oven 
150C).

While my nephews and I were recently waiting patiently at table for our scone 
pudding, we remembered its creator: my Nanna, their Great Nanna, who died in 
2012. Where was she now? Why, she was in our hearts, said one nephew. Then he 
looked up. No, he said, pointing to where her photo was hanging on the wall, 
she’s up there. We all laughed and then tucked into her delicious dessert, 
which my sister had made.

I remember my Nanna every time I have her scone pudding. Sadly, I never asked 
her when she was alive whether she brought this recipe from the UK or if it was 
one she picked up in New Zealand, where she emigrated to after marrying my Kiwi 
Poppa during the war. She left the street where her family lived close by for 
another world on the other side of the world where, bereft of immediate family, 
she become well known for holding dinner parties for her new friends.

This scone pudding recipe is easy to make, and economical. It’s elevated from 
its humble scone origins by the golden syrup/sugar mixture that caramelises 
beautifully and, while it ticks all the comfort food boxes for winter, it’s 
good any time of the year.

Susannah Radford
