
Denis O’Brien, often billed as Ireland’s richest man, its most famous tax 
exile and most definitely its largest media owner, has had “a year of striking 
undulation”,reported the Irish Times 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/business/commercial-property/year-of-undulating-fortunes-for-businessman-denis-o-brien-1.2481698>
.

The article about 12 months in the life of a controversial businessman began 
by pointing to problems at his pan-Caribbean mobile phone company, Digicel.

It had to abandon a flotation as O’Brien sought to raise $2bn in order to help 
reduce the company’s $6.5bn debt mountain.

Digicel also faces increased competition following the takeover by Cable & 
Wireless (CWC) of Columbus International, a company backed by Liberty Global’s
John Malone <http://www.theguardian.com/media/john-malone>. Although O’Brien 
objected to the deal, it was passed by regulators.

Then Liberty Global united the two companies by forging a £5.4bn takeover of 
CWC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/22/liberty-global-and-cable-wireless-confirm-merger-talks>
, “buttressing”, said the Irish Times, “Digicel’s competition even further.”

By contrast, in early December, O’Brien made a huge profit by selling off his 
Topaz chain of petrol forecourts to Alimentation Couche-Tard 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/business/retail-and-services/o-brien-sells-topaz-for-more-than-double-what-he-paid-1.2452354>
 for a reputed €450m, thereby doubling his money in just two years.

He also raised more cash by selling other assets. And he cleared the debt at 
Independent News & Media (INM)by selling off its stake in the Australian media 
company APN 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/business/media-and-marketing/inm-to-target-digital-acquisitions-after-sale-of-apn-stake-1.2145262>
. O’Brien is the largest shareholder in INM.

While financial journalists remain uncertain about the reasons for some of 
O’Brien’s sell-offs, the rest of Ireland’s journalistic fraternity - outside of 
the media companies he controls - were critical of his legal actions, which 
were regarded as threats to press freedom.

The most controversial of all involved questions about his banking 
arrangements with Irish Bank Resolution Corporation (IBRC) and the sale of 
Siteserv (since renamed Actavo), an Irish company that provides a range of 
services to industries (such as installing Sky boxes).

After persistent parliamentary questioning about the matter from Independent 
TD Catherine Murphy, the government decided to hold an inquiry. But it has 
become mired in legal difficulties.

O’Brien went to court to try to prevent RTÉ broadcasting a story about the 
repayment terms of his IBRC loans. Although he won an injunction against the 
broadcaster, Murphy revealed the details in the Dáil. O’Brien responded by 
taking out a lawsuit against the Irish state.
