
On 29 March 1516, the Venetian Republic created the first ghetto on a small 
island in the north-westernsestiere <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sestiere> of 
Cannaregio. The residents were removed and replaced within a week by Jews 
already in Venice. This was a period in which the city sought to keep a 
watchful eye on all foreigners: the French, English and Spanish embassies were 
also relegated to Cannaregio. There had been a metal foundry (ghèto) in the 
parish, which has traditionally been the source of the name, although the 
etymology is far from clear. The French writer Alice Becker-Ho in her bookLe 
premier ghetto ou l’exemplarité vénitienne 
<http://www.riveneuve-editions.com/catalogue-2/essais/le-premier-ghetto-ou-lexemplarite-venitienne/>
 presents a number of valid alternatives:gouda-(h), separation and ghetta, herd.

Jews within Venice therefore found a secure place to live despite the 
restrictions imposed on them, and were soon joined by others fleeing 
persecution in central Europe. They built two synagogues in the ghetto: the 
Schola Grande Tedesca and theSchola Canton 
<http://jvenice.org/en/canton-synagogue>. The pragmatic Venetian Republic later 
exploited the economic advantages of allowing Levantine Jews to settle there – 
charging the residents for rent, water, the cost of the compulsory 
nightwatchman and all services.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tvgt%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tvgt%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e7ea6c590b617b0cde1271be997489a59d09325%2F0_0_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=500%20years%20of%20the%20Venetian%20ghetto%3A%20commemoration%20and%20history&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tvgt%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=500+years+of+the+Venetian+ghetto%3A+commemoration+and+history&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tvgt%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e7ea6c590b617b0cde1271be997489a59d09325%2F0_0_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 The main hall of the Schola Canton synagogue, established in 1531. Photograph: 
Marco Secchi/Getty Images 
The population was swelled by the arrival of Marrani Jews, expelled from Spain 
and Portugal when they refused to convert. As the reputation of the ghetto 
spread, the population (about 700 in 1516) grew, and when the English traveller 
Thomas Coryat visited in 1608, he recorded as many as 6,000 inhabitants. The 
Ghetto Vecchio (old ghetto, though it was newer than the original) and later 
the Ghetto Novissimo were added to accommodate the growing population.

Living conditions were cramped and insanitary. Rooms could be reached only 
through other families’ living space. The gates were unlocked at dawn and 
locked by sunset and all residents were required to wear yellow headgear or a 
badge. In what was, for a time, a tolerant Venice, Jews were not forced to 
convert and the ghetto became a place of study and scholarship; money-lending 
and the sale of some goods, such as jewellery and fur, was allowed. Christians 
attended concerts in the ghetto, and Christian architects and builders created 
synagogues. This Jewish melting pot had a lasting cultural impact on Venetian 
language, cuisine, music and dance.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tvgt%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tvgt%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c00c1bdf7f812dae0fa39e72ba8ed82322476cf%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=500%20years%20of%20the%20Venetian%20ghetto%3A%20commemoration%20and%20history&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tvgt%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=500+years+of+the+Venetian+ghetto%3A+commemoration+and+history&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tvgt%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c00c1bdf7f812dae0fa39e72ba8ed82322476cf%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 A mannequin of a Jewish money lender with his ledger books in what was once 
the 16th-century Banco Rosso. Photograph: Alessandro Bianchi/Reuters 
By 1797 disease, war and politics had shrunk the population of the ghetto to 
3,000. Napoleon’s troops brought an end to the Republic of Venice and to the 
ghetto; they burned down the gates, and French principles of liberty, equality 
and fraternity allowed the ghetto’s inhabitants at last to be free and equal. 
The poorest Jews remained in the ghetto, but many others left for other parts 
of the city, where they integrated, buying palaces on the Grand Canal and 
taking part in political life. Some contributed actively to the fight against 
Austrian occupation.

Race laws in Italy in 1938 affected the Jewish community dramatically. Jews 
were barred from the Lido beach, and dangerous discrimination began. After 
German troops arrived in 1944, Venetian Jews of all ages were gathered in the 
ghetto’s centralcampo and from there deported. Most of them never returned. A 
monument now commemorates this shameful event. Its seven bronze reliefs are 
dedicated to the six million victims of the Holocaust. It is the work ofArbit 
Blatas <http://www.arbitblatas.net/>, a Lithuanian Jew. The panels are mounted 
on a wall below the barbed wire left by the Germans. An eighth panel, The Last 
Train, stands alone, inscribed with the names of the deported Venetian Jews. 
There are roughly six hundred Jews in Venice today; those in the ghetto include 
the residents of the Casa di Riposo, a home mainly for elderly Jews.

Events to commemorate the anniversary

There will be a public exhibition at the Doge’s Palace 
<http://palazzoducale.visitmuve.it/en/home/> from 19 June to 13 November 
entitled Venice, the Jews and Europe 1516-2016. On 19 JuneIl Pomo d’Oro 
<http://www.il-pomodoro.ch/orchestra/> orhcestra will give a concert entitled 
Music Without Borders. TheIkona gallery <http://www.ikonavenezia.com/>, on the 
main campo, will host an exhibition, Peggy Guggenheim in Photographs, from 9 
June to 9 October. TheJewish cemetery on the Lido 
<http://www.museoebraico.it/english/cimitero.html> will be open to visitors and 
Venetian Heritage’s <http://www.venetianheritage.eu/cms/index.php?lang=eng> 
planned restoration of the Jewish Museum will allow access to the Italian 
synagogue.
• veniceghetto500.org <http://www.veniceghetto500.org/>

Walks
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tvgt%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tvgt%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa43e9024b32bd9bdb0bb6030df2ca271dc5a030%2F0_0_5558_3333%2F5558.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=500%20years%20of%20the%20Venetian%20ghetto%3A%20commemoration%20and%20history&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tvgt%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=500+years+of+the+Venetian+ghetto%3A+commemoration+and+history&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tvgt%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa43e9024b32bd9bdb0bb6030df2ca271dc5a030%2F0_0_5558_3333%2F5558.jpg>
 Kosher bread in the Paneterria Volpe Kosher bakery in Ghetto Vecchio. 
Photograph: Alamy 
After looking at the powerful monument commemorating Jewish deportation , 
visitors can walk around the Ghetto Vecchio with its two striking Levantine and 
Spanish synagogues and finish in the Ghetto Novissimo. The wealthy Spanish Jews 
built their synagogue in the Ghetto Vecchio with its entrance at ground level. 
It has a beautiful interior with a carved pulpit and rich decoration, but 
visits can only be arranged through the Jewish Museum (see below). There is a 
little bridge crossing the canal between the original Ghetto Nuovo and the 
Ghetto Vecchio, from where local gondola tours can be arranged with the 
resident gondoliers. There is a helpful information point next to the newMajer 
bakery <http://www.majer.it/index.php?lang=it> (which serves Venetian 
specialities).

Jewish Museum

Two synagogues were built on the upper floors of what is now the museum, 
founded in 1953, with a bookshop and cafe. Precious objects are on display but 
it also offers guided tours in various languages, including visits to some 
synagogues.
• Entrance to the museum and guided tours to synagogues €10 adults, €8 
concessions, museoebraico.it <http://www.museoebraico.it/english/home.asp>

Banco Rosso 

The only remaining of the first three banks in the world (and the origin of 
the expression ‘to be in the red’) is worth a visit. There you can read a short 
history of the ghetto and early banking.
• €2 adults, €1.50 concessions, bancorosso.org <http://www.bancorosso.org/>

Eating
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tvgt%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tvgt%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5cb108730396f6fd2cb9c9974eb8e53d3d8f763%2F0_0_813_488%2F813.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=500%20years%20of%20the%20Venetian%20ghetto%3A%20commemoration%20and%20history&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tvgt%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=500+years+of+the+Venetian+ghetto%3A+commemoration+and+history&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tvgt%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5cb108730396f6fd2cb9c9974eb8e53d3d8f763%2F0_0_813_488%2F813.jpg>
 Grilled vegetables at Gam Gam 
You can eat inside and outside at Al Faro <http://www.alfarovenezia.com/N/>, 
Upupa <http://www.upupavenezia.com/> and Banco Rosso restaurants; they serve 
pizza and typical Venetian dishes. For Jewish food tryGam Gam 
<http://gamgamkosher.com/> restaurant-patisserie: it has a pleasant terrace by 
the Cannaregio canal. The lunchtime meze menu is good and cheap, but it is wise 
to book. For the full experienceGiardino dei Melograni 
<https://www.facebook.com/kosherhousevenice/> (Pomegranate Garden) specialises 
in kosher, vegetarian and vegan cuisine and will also have fish on its menu. It 
has a large garden and has recently added a hotel.

Shopping
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tvgt%2Fsfb%23img-6&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tvgt%2Fsfb%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F444195d0eb184087c1fe7e1dc166ab9beeb3975e%2F0_0_7360_4415%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=500%20years%20of%20the%20Venetian%20ghetto%3A%20commemoration%20and%20history&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tvgt%2Fstw%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=500+years+of+the+Venetian+ghetto%3A+commemoration+and+history&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tvgt%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F444195d0eb184087c1fe7e1dc166ab9beeb3975e%2F0_0_7360_4415%2F7360.jpg>
 Tall houses on the Campo Ghetto Nuovo, with David’s Shop. Photograph: Alamy 
The old bakery, Panificio Volpe Giovanni 
<https://www.facebook.com/PanificioVolpeGiovanni>, sells local bread and 
biscuits. Diego Baruch Fusetti’sArte Ebraica Shalom Venezia 
<http://www.shalomvenezia.it/> deals in Jewish religious objects and David’s 
Shop <http://www.davidshop.com/> sells traditional items made of Murano glass, 
such as Hanukkah lamps. Denis Dittura atEl Papussa Calagher  
<https://www.facebook.com/El-Papussa-Calegher-167250536671023/>makes 
soft-leather bags and purses and still repairs bags and shoes, a rare thing in 
Venice these days. Aboaf Enzo at the Stamperia del Ghetto sells, among other 
things, black-and-white prints of the old ghetto.

* Most places closed on Saturdays

Marie-José Gransard is author of Venice: A Literary Guide for Travellers, 
published byIB Tauris 
<http://www.ibtauris.com/Books/Lifestyle%20sport%20%20leisure/Travel%20%20holiday/Travel%20writing/Venice%20A%20Literary%20Guide%20for%20Travellers.aspx?menuitem={A315BD7D-5CA1-476C-9749-F72084E24E4C}>
 (£16.99). To order a copy for £13.59 including UK p&p visitthe guardian 
bookshop <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/327167/> or 
call on 0330 333 6846
