
The Conservatives <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> face a 
series of police investigations into allegations they breached election 
spending rules.


Eight forces are reported to be investigating the claims surrounding the 2015 
general election campaign, but senior Tories have insisted the party did 
nothing wrong.

They face claims that the costs of activists transported by bus into key 
constituencies around the country should have been recorded under individual 
candidates’ limits, rather than as part of the national campaign.

The Electoral Commission met police and prosecutors on Wednesday in a bid to 
ensure they did not run out of time tolaunch possible criminal investigations 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/06/conservatives-campaign-spending-2015-general-election-inquiry-greg-clark>
.

The commission believes its ongoing investigation into the alleged breaches of 
reporting obligations will take at least another month, potentially taking it 
past the one-year time limit for launching criminal proceedings.

A number of police forces have said they will now consider applying for an 
extension to the time limit.

Gloucestershire police said an investigation had been launched into an 
allegation of electoral fraud and “we are considering an application for 
extension on time to investigate”.

A Devon and Cornwall police spokesman said: “We are fully aware that there is 
a 12-month limitation of proceedings for certain offences, which would mean 
that no criminal action could be taken in relation to these offences past this 
point without the police applying for an extension – the limitation period 
expires in Devon and Cornwall in early June 2016.

“Devon and Cornwall police are awaiting further guidance and legal advice in 
relation to the specific points relevant to election legislation.”

A Cheshire police spokeswoman said: “As a result of media interest, some 
members of the public have contacted us to raise their concerns in relation to 
this matter. Officers are investigating these reports and following lines of 
inquiry.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jvnm%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jvnm%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb313c34aeb2f2159e041459df54b487a9ecb82af%2F270_25_2330_1399%2F2330.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tory%20funding%20in%202015%20election%20campaign%20investigated%20by%20eight%20police%20forces&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jvnm%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tory+funding+in+2015+election+campaign+investigated+by+eight+police+forces&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jvnm%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb313c34aeb2f2159e041459df54b487a9ecb82af%2F270_25_2330_1399%2F2330.jpg>
 Greg Clark, a cabinet minister, has played down the investigations. 
Photograph: Stefan Wermuth/Reuters 
“Based on the information we receive, we will consider the appropriate course 
of action and if an application to the extension of the time limit is required.”

A West Yorkshire police spokeswoman said: “The force has received allegations 
of electoral fraud in relation to one West Yorkshire constituency in 2015. We 
will be seeking a time limit extension to investigate these allegations.”

The BBC reported that Derbyshire police, Greater Manchester police, 
Northamptonshire police and Staffordshire police were also actively 
investigating allegations.

Cabinet minister Greg Clark claimed investigations into elections were a 
regular occurrence. The communities secretary told BBC Radio 4’s Today 
programme: “For elections, there are often investigations as to how things have 
been conducted. I have every reason to suppose that the arrangements that we 
had and all parties had with national battle buses, they get reported in the 
required way.

“The Electoral Commission oversee these matters, it’s right for them to make 
their own assessment.”

The claims relating to Conservative spending covering the general election and 
three parliamentary byelections were first raised by the Daily Mirror and 
Channel 4 News.

The party has blamed an “administrative error” for failing to register some 
accommodation costs, but David Cameron has insisted it was right to include 
such expenditure as part of the national campaign.

Eric Pickles, a former party chairman, said the Conservatives were confident 
that everything during the 2015 election was “above board” and said he had 
complete confidence in the team who organised the submission of expenses.

“I’m told that the party is confident that it will be able to successfully 
demonstrate that everything was above board but I have no inside knowledge 
inside the party on this,” he told BBC Radio 4’s The World At One.

“These are matters that are quite normal in politics, I don’t have any inside 
knowledge, I don’t know, I haven’t seen how the forms were filled in, but I 
know the people that did this and they are very professional and I’ve got 
complete confidence in them.”
