
How full is your fridge? I ask this because you may have to make room for some 
more bottles. According to renowned wine expert Jancis Robinson, author ofThe 
24 Hour Wine Expert <http://24hourwineexpert.com/#cover>, any open bottle – 
even a red –should be kept in the fridge 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/uk/put-red-wine-in-the-fridge-for-the-best-flavour-says-expert-a3264276.html>
.

Reds in the fridge?

Yup, it’s a thing. Particularly with lighter reds such as Beaujolais and pinot 
noir. It brings out all their fresh fruit flavours. Even full-bodied reds such 
as cabernet sauvignon, shiraz and malbec benefit from being served cooler than 
we’re accustomed to. The advice to “serve at room temperature” dates from the 
days before central heating. Think cool rather than cold – more like 17C or 
18C. If you have space, by all means pop any leftover bottles in the fridge but 
bring these fuller bodied reds back up to cool room temperature before drinking.

Another tip: don’t pour your friends’ glasses too full, especially on a hot 
day, or the wine will warm up even more.

What about whites and rosés?

Related: Wine: five wine crimes to avoid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/24/fiona-beckett-wine-crimes-red-warm-white-cold-filling-glass-not-enough-air>

Robinson and I agree, most are served too cold. Chances are you’ve left the 
bottle in the fridge all day, which will strip all the flavour out of a white 
wine, particularly a rich oak-aged white such as a burgundy. Even pinot grigio 
may taste of nothing (which could, of course, be an advantage). Rosés, too, 
need chilling if they’re not to taste flat and flabby, but a couple of hours 
should do it.

What about bubbly?

That should be well chilled otherwise the cork will fly explosively out of the 
bottle. Did you know that not only are coupes out of fashion but flutes are 
too? The best way to serve your champagne – particularly vintage fizz – is in a 
tulip-shaped white wine glass that tapers towards the rim.

I’ve heard leftover champagne keeps better if you leave a teaspoon in the neck 
of the bottle?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kg3m%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kg3m%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd57779d8460bcf68d53405901a53433f8784464c%2F0_731_3410_3714%2F3410.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20store%20open%20bottles%20of%20wine&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kg3m%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+store+open+bottles+of+wine&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kg3m%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd57779d8460bcf68d53405901a53433f8784464c%2F0_731_3410_3714%2F3410.jpg>
 Champagne is best served in a tulip-shaped wine glass. Photograph: Peter 
Widmann/Getty Images/age fotostock RM 
There’s no scientific basis for it but it obviously does prevent a certain 
amount of air getting in which will help preserve the bubbles. A purpose-made
champagne stopper 
<https://www.ocado.com/webshop/product/Tescoma-Presto-Champagne-Stopper-Silver/239749011?ULP_CAMPAIGN_ID=3&gclid=CKnnmJiZk80CFdS7GwodAJgIXQ&gclsrc=aw.ds&dclid=CIT6rpiZk80CFSN72wodz3IE0A>
 would be more effective and only costs a few quid. But whoever has champagne 
left over anyway?


How long does wine keep once you’ve opened it?

Depends on the wine but most begin to lose their edge after 2-3 days. Even 
fino and manzanilla sherries (which should be kept in the fridge) are better 
drunk within the week.

Related: Wine: what to drink outdoors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/26/wine-to-drink-outdoors-fiona-beckett>

What happens after that? Can you cook with it or should you chuck it away?

If it is still drinkable, yes. If it is corked or tastes like vinegar, no. If 
you have no call for it immediately, you can freeze it in ice cube trays and 
use it in cooking as needed.
