
Potentially deflating news from Worcester city council – it is about to ban 
the release of helium balloons 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/06/14/council-killjoys-plan-to-fine-people-70-for-letting-go-of-helium/>
, and will fine anyone letting one go for littering. The ban will only cover 
council-owned land, such as parks and open spaces. “In your back garden or 
private land, we’re not looking to introduce a ban on that – it would be 
completely unenforceable,” concedes Claire Neville, a spokeswomen for the 
council.

If the ban goes ahead, Worcester won’t be the only council to have introduced 
such a move – Oxford, Brighton, Plymouth and Shetland have already banned 
balloon releases. Several states in the US, such as Florida and Virginia, and 
parts of Australia have also imposed a ban. “There has been huge support and 
campaigns [for a ban in Britain] for some time, from many bodies including the
RSPCA <http://www.rspca.org.uk/home>, National Farmers Union 
<http://www.nfuonline.com/home/> and the Marine Conservation Society 
<https://www.mcsuk.org/>,” says Neville.

A helium-filled balloon is thought to be able soar up to five miles into the 
sky before shattering into small pieces. However, around 10% of them don’t make 
it that high and make it back down largely intact. They can travel for tens of 
miles, and will often land in the sea, where they become a risk to marine life. 
Turtles are attracted to balloons, which can get trapped in their gut and cause 
starvation (the MCS says even the fragments could be harmful to hatchling 
turtles); dolphins, seabirds and other marine animals have been killed by 
balloons, or the plastic strings that are usually attached to them. The MCS, 
which has long campaigned against balloon releases, says the amount of balloon 
debris on beaches in the UK has tripled since 1996.

The balloon industry’s defence is that latex is biodegradeable and takes about 
the same time as an oak leaf to decompose, although they fail to point out this 
could take several years – and an animal is unlikely to be harmed by the 
consumption of an oak leaf.

In any case, we may soon be forced to end the practice of letting off these 
balloons; helium is a finite natural resource. The Cambridge chemist Peter 
Wothers, deliveringthe Royal Institution Christmas Lecture in 2012, said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/shortcuts/2012/dec/11/should-we-ban-helium-balloons>
: “I can imagine that, in 50 years’ time, our children will be saying: ‘I can’t 
believe they used such a precious material to fill balloons.’”

Balloon-release alternatives that have taken off are no better – paper 
lanterns powered by a candle can float for miles, but their falling parts can 
harm or kill wildlife, and they have started fires. The trend for the release 
of butterflies or doves,particularly at weddings 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/shortcuts/2016/mar/16/when-doves-cry-why-using-animals-at-your-wedding-is-a-bad-idea>
 or funerals, is exploitative and, frankly, weird. The anti-balloon campaign 
groupBalloons Blow <http://balloonsblow.org> suggests blowing bubbles for that 
“release” moment. It may not be as dramatic, but at least it doesn’t come with 
an aftertaste of dead baby turtle.
