
As the EU referendum draws closer, our expert panel 
<http://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/mar/15/small-business-owners-eu-referendum-expert-panel>
 answers a question from one of our readers about the potential effect on small 
businesses’ intellectual property.

What would Brexit mean for my business’s intellectual property rights in 
Europe?

If you have a question about the impact of the EU referendum on small 
businesses, you cansubmit it here. 
<http://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/mar/15/question-brexit-ask-expert-panel-eu-referendum>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j9mq%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j9mq%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41778a63b6a9605beabfebe88eb75855d0f7495d%2F0_522_1365_818%2F1365.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Would%20Brexit%20affect%20my%20business's%20IP%20rights%20in%20Europe%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j9mq%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Would+Brexit+affect+my+business%27s+IP+rights+in+Europe%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j9mq%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41778a63b6a9605beabfebe88eb75855d0f7495d%2F0_522_1365_818%2F1365.jpg>
Swati Dhingra 

Assistant professor at the department of economics at the London School of 
Economics, researching international economics, globalisation and industrial 
policy. Co-author of the recentLife after Brexit 
<http://www.lse.ac.uk/newsAndMedia/news/archives/2016/02/Life-after-Brexit-new-LSE-report-on-UKs-options-outside-the-EU.aspx>
 report by LSE’s centre for economic performance, which looked at the UK’s 
options outside the EU.


Intellectual property (IP) protected through European mechanisms such as the 
European Patent Office, would continue to prevail after Brexit. But Britain 
would need to legislate on what happens to protections granted through EU 
directives such as thecommunity trade mark 
<http://www.shepwedd.co.uk/sites/default/files/Brexit%20Analysis%20Bulletin%20Intellectual%20Property.pdf>
. Many IP lawyers believe Britain would adopt these EU directives into its own 
law, so there should be a fairly smooth transition of protection underBrexit 
<http://www.bb-ip.com/brexit-how-an-exit-from-the-european-union-by-the-uk-might-affect-your-intellectual-property-rights/>
.

A long-term concern with Brexit is that Britain would miss out on the unitary 
patent regime 
<http://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/mar/29/how-would-brexit-affect-eu-patent-protection>
 that is on the EU’s agenda. The unitary patent would provide for a single 
application, a single fee and a single court forIP protection  
<http://www.ipwatchdog.com/2016/04/28/brexit-will-stop-european-unitary-patent-started/id=68676/>
across the EU. If Britain exits the EU, it would need to negotiate to 
participate in the unitary patent and to have its judges in the enforcement 
process. A broader concern is that Britain would lose its voice in shaping 
future EU regulations and its easy access to the EU’s research funding and 
scientific collaboration, which could constrain innovation in sectors such as
medicine <https://medtechengine.com/article/brexit-uk-medical-device-companies/>
.


The unitary patent has been under negotiation for years, but there is some 
reason for optimism on the EU’s future IP agenda. For instance, a recent 
European parliamentary report has proposed a harmonisation of copyright rules 
across the EU and a broad copyright limitation similar to fair use in US 
copyright law, which could spur furtherinnovation. 
<https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2015/01/progressive-visions-future-copyright-europe>

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j9mq%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j9mq%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9423dd841a881ffdcfbf08217bfb0bbe27b59fd1%2F0_207_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Would%20Brexit%20affect%20my%20business's%20IP%20rights%20in%20Europe%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j9mq%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Would+Brexit+affect+my+business%27s+IP+rights+in+Europe%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j9mq%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9423dd841a881ffdcfbf08217bfb0bbe27b59fd1%2F0_207_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Liz Wood

Founder of, and lawyer at, Virtuoso Legal; experienced in all aspects of 
intellectual property law and practice with particular expertise in complex IP 
litigation

The UK’s IP legislation is harmonised across all of Europe, meaning Europe 
offers a pretty level playing field when it comes to the registration and 
enforcement of trade marks, design rights and patents. A number of EU 
directives have sought to harmonise certain domestic laws in relation to 
intellectual property; these include directives oncopyright 
<http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:32001L0029:EN:HTML>
 anddesign law 
<http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:31998L0071:en:HTML>
.

That allows for judgments of the Court of Justice of the European Union 
<http://europa.eu/about-eu/institutions-bodies/court-justice/index_en.htm> to 
be binding on our courts, and UK lawyers can apply the principles of these 
judgments in their day-to-day work. At the moment, if a UK business’s IP rights 
are infringed in another European member state the same principles will apply 
as in the United Kingdom. However, if we were to exit the EU, the UK would be 
free to make its own legislation in relation to IP rights, such as copyright.

 If the UK votes to leave there will be a transitionary period in which rights 
with the EU are re-negotiated. In practice this will mean that much legislation 
has to be re-drafted within a tight time frame, which could lead to unexpected 
consequences.

It is likely that existing rights will be retained but, again, complex 
conversion legislation would need to be put in place. Such legislation would 
need to protect outstanding applications for EU rights, priority for further 
applications and existing EU opposition proceedings.

Enforcement of IP rights could also be affected – UK courts would no longer be 
designated as EU courts, so their decisions may have to be litigated elsewhere 
in the EU as well.

Claims for pan-European injunctions to stop infringement activity in Europe, 
which are currently possible, would be impossible to get.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j9mq%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j9mq%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3355e473aa61dc6a2fa7dcc34382231e71ddcd41%2F0_180_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Would%20Brexit%20affect%20my%20business's%20IP%20rights%20in%20Europe%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j9mq%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Would+Brexit+affect+my+business%27s+IP+rights+in+Europe%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j9mq%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3355e473aa61dc6a2fa7dcc34382231e71ddcd41%2F0_180_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
Ted Shapiro

Partner in Brussels at Wiggin LLP media, technology and IP law firm. An expert 
in international and European copyright law, he assists clients on issues 
related to policy, litigation, compliance and commercial matters

Copyright in the EU is still largely territorial. However, UK businesses 
reliant on copyright will be affected by pending EU regulatory (the so-called
pay-TV case <http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-15-5432_en.htm>, which 
relates to EU competition rules) and legislative initiatives (the draft
portability regulation <http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-15-6261_en.htm> 
and a further proposal expected in the autumn) – whether the UK is in or out.

The impact for such businesses ultimately depends on the deal the UK cuts if 
it decides to go. If the UK decides to strike a deal to be within theEuropean 
Economic Area <https://www.gov.uk/eu-eea> then the UK would still be required 
to follow EU copyright rules but would no longer have a say in formulating 
them. There is copyright reform on the horizon as part of theEU’s digital 
single market strategy <http://ec.europa.eu/priorities/digital-single-market_en>
.

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
