
For people interested in sustainable tourism, planet-friendly goals don’t go 
away during vacation.

Travelers on 19 March are in for a special chance to be sustainable – because 
Earth Hour happens that day, from 8:30pm to 9:30pm in each time zone across the 
globe.

Earth Hour <https://www.earthhour.org/celebrating-earth-hour>, organized by 
the World Wildlife Fund (WWF), first took place in 2007 in Sydney, Australia, 
where citizens turned off nonessential lights for an hour to support a greener 
planet.

Related: Earth Hour around the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/ng-interactive/2015/mar/28/earth-hour-around-the-world>

Since then, the initiative – which happens on a different date each year – has 
taken off in more than 7,000 cities globally. In 2015, 172 countries and 
territories participated in Earth Hour, and lights shut off at more than 10,400 
landmarks and monuments worldwide.

For guests at two hotels – Dreams Riviera Cancun Resort & Spa and Secrets 
Silversands Riviera Cancun –in Mexico, it’s not just an hour of no lights: it’s 
a day of celebration.

At Dreams Riviera Cancun Resort & Spa 
<http://www.dreamsresorts.com/riviera-cancun>, guests can use natural beach 
materials to create a picture of Earth, the number 60 to represent the number 
of minutes in Earth Hour and the WWF panda symbol. During Earth Hour, the 
property is covered with thousands of candles and the resort puts on a fire 
show.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hk4z%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hk4z%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6aaf4ebaa32e8bfe0052ad49e498f5af28aa3bb3%2F0_0_919_612%2F919.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20can%20sustainability-minded%20tourists%20celebrate%20Earth%20Hour%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hk4z%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+can+sustainability-minded+tourists+celebrate+Earth+Hour%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hk4z%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6aaf4ebaa32e8bfe0052ad49e498f5af28aa3bb3%2F0_0_919_612%2F919.jpg>
 Guests at Secrets Silversands Riviera Cancun enjoy a bike ride just before the 
clock strikes the Earth Hour. Photograph: Secrets Silversands Riviera Cancun 
At Secrets Silversands Riviera Cancun 
<http://www.secretsresorts.com/silversands-riviera-cancun>, an environmentally 
friendly bike ride through Puerto Morelos leads up to Earth Hour. At night, 
there are candles, beach bonfires and, like the other vacation spot, a fire 
show.

Additionally, both of these Rainforest Alliance Certified hotels use 
energy-efficient light bulbs throughout the year.

Related: Release baby turtles into the ocean during your next Cancun vacation 
<http://www.theguardian.com/am-resorts-partner-zone/2016/jan/20/be-a-hero-on-the-half-shell-release-baby-turtles-on-your-next-vacation>

Since the Earth Hour movement began, it’s spurred concrete actions that have 
helped fight climate change. Argentina’s 2013 Earth Hour campaign helpedpass a 
law <https://www.earthhour.org/argentina2013> supporting a 136,000-hectare 
(3.4m-acre) protected marine area. The initiative helped launch new education 
programs inThailand 
<http://wwf.panda.org/what_we_do/where_we_work/greatermekong/news/greater_mekong/thailand/>
 and Taiwan. And theGirl Scouts 
<http://blog.girlscouts.org/2012/03/in-yearly-tradition-earth-hour-and-girl.html>
 of the USA have advocated for the installment of hundreds of thousands of 
energy-efficient bulbs.

But what if you’re not on vacation during Earth Hour? The planet will still 
thank you if you take energy-efficient actions at home.
