
In January this year, I visited friends in Miami. One of the most urgent 
topics of conversation was about what they saw as the greatest problem faced by 
the city – rising water levels, and a long-standing reluctance on the part of 
government and business to take the necessary steps to control the extensive 
damage.

From inundated homes, shops and roads, to fresh water pollution and sewage 
being forced upwards, theimpacts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/11/miami-drowning-climate-change-deniers-sea-levels-rising>
 are widespread. In aChristian Aid report 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwian5X4tujMAhUpLcAKHSmVA98QFggdMAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.christianaid.org.uk%2FImages%2Fact-now-pay-later-climate-report-may-2016.pdf&usg=AFQjCNEYvxiBSS3JXg_BDvQTXoVVztGZRg&sig2=tvpVkUE-gusLYvDlukZiGA>
 (pdf) published last week, Miami ranked ninth in a list of cities most at risk 
from future coastal flooding as a result of sea level rises. Supported by data 
from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, projections for the year 
2017 suggest that Kolkata and Mumbai, both in India, are most exposed to 
coastal flooding. Bar Miami, the top ten cities are all in Asia.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jfz3%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jfz3%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c01a78f5287b05507f65122ef56b4082d709761%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Coastal%20flooding%3A%20a%20sign%20of%20the%20damage%20our%20economy%20is%20wreaking%20on%20our%20fragile%20environment&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jfz3%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Coastal+flooding%3A+a+sign+of+the+damage+our+economy+is+wreaking+on+our+fragile+environment&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jfz3%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c01a78f5287b05507f65122ef56b4082d709761%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 A woman walks through a flooded street in Miami Beach, Florida. Photograph: 
Joe Raedle/Getty Images 
As global water levels rise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/30/sea-levels-set-to-rise-far-more-rapidly-than-expected>
, as parts of Florida experience theheaviest rain 
<http://ufweather.org/2016/02/01/more-rainfall-records-likely-to-fall-in-february>
 since records began, as theflooding and salination 
<http://www.climatehotmap.org/global-warming-locations/ganges-brahmaputra-delta-bangladesh.html>
 of farmland in Bangladesh increases, the risk to coastal cities can be seen 
for what it is – a sign of the apparently inexorable effects of a high-carbon 
economy on a fragile environment.

It is not a demand for economic stagnation, nor a matter of having some sort 
of anti-business agenda

But what is also clear from the Christian Aid research is how ecological 
disaster intensifies inequality. In prosperous nations it is the poorest who 
are most at risk from environmental changes such as those Miami faces because 
they have the least means to cope with or move away from the problem. In 
developing countries, coastal cities and their surrounding regions have even 
less in the way of defence.

Business as usual – that familiar and illusory process – will simply deepen 
the gulf separating the economically secure from the insecure, at least in the 
short term. In the long run, to paraphrase Keynes, we are all insecure.

There are measures that can be, and are being, taken with the help of NGOs and 
other civil society groups to limit the damage. During last year’s flooding in 
Myanmar and Bangladesh, for example,Oxfam distributed 
<http://www.oxfam.org.uk/what-we-do/countries-we-work-in/myanmar> water, 
hygiene kits and cash grants, and worked with other international NGOs to 
coordinate the humanitarian response.

But the underlying question is becoming more and more pressing: what is it 
about our prevailing global model of economic growth that apparently blinds us 
to the cost of the high-carbon system? A process of so-calledgrowth that 
inexorably increases the distance between rich and poor 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/mar/13/growth-is-not-the-answer-to-inequality>
 in one way or another ought to look nonsensical to us.

Related: Philippines investigates Shell and Exxon over climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/may/07/climate-change-shell-exxon-philippines-fossil-fuel-companies-liability-extreme-weather>

Economic activity is still so often defined in terms of an unending upward 
spiral of consumption in a materially limited environment. Are we looking hard 
enough at the contradictions here? Are we asking what kind of economies are 
sustainable?

The launch this week of the Centre for the Understanding of Sustainable 
Prosperity <http://www.cusp.ac.uk/>, headed by Professor Tim Jackson who wrote 
the groundbreaking 2011 reportProsperity Without Growth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jan/23/properity-without-growth-tim-jackson>
, looks to galvanise a more urgent discussion of these issues. It is not a 
demand for economic stagnation, nor a matter of having some sort of 
anti-business agenda – this is lazy criticism – but for the question to be 
clearly put: what does prosperity mean in a world of environmental limits?

The old paradigm of economic development and prosperity assured us that 
infinitely expanding consumer choice increased and guaranteed our free agency. 
It is time to wake up to the fact that this paradigm makes us passive to 
processes outside our control and condemns us in the long term to a losing 
battle with the limited material world we share. If we want to be genuinely 
free agents, we need to turn this model on its head.
