
The phrase “parity of esteem” 
<http://www.centreformentalhealth.org.uk/parity-of-esteem> when used to 
describe the treatment of mental health services in the NHS is rightly being 
put under the microscope. It has been widely used to communicate a commitment 
to improving quality, broadening access to services and boosting funding. 
However, recently it has become clear that there is a gap between this 
intention and the reality on the ground.

Our report, Funding Mental Health at Local Level: Unpicking the Variation 
<https://www.nhsproviders.org/resource-library/reports/funding-mental-health-at-local-level-unpicking-the-variation/>
, published in partnership with theHealthcare Financial Management Association 
<https://www.hfma.org.uk/>, shows just that, and it makes for difficult 
reading. Despite a number of funding boosts, it is clear that the necessary 
investment just isn’t reaching frontline mental health services. Our survey 
found that only half of mental health trusts received a real-term increase last 
year, despite the fact that the commissioners who fund them were required to 
increase their investment in line with their overall financial allocation.

Related: Five ways to deliver parity of esteem for mental health 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2014/may/15/parity-esteem-mental-health>

Particularly concerning is the finding that NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> England is not necessarily leading by 
example. It is responsible for setting the rules and for holding local 
commissioners to account for their spending plans, yet its own specialised 
commissioning teams are not consistently meeting parity of esteem commitments 
towards mental health services, with only a third of trusts receiving a 
real-terms increase in 2015–16.

The situation does not look like it will improve this year either. Although we 
are still concluding the contracting round for 2016–17, providers were even 
less positive about receiving additional investment, with only a quarter 
confident that they would see a real-term increase.

There are just too many claims on the additional money given to commissioners, 
which means parity of esteem does not get equal treatment. However, this is not 
a justification for letting commissioners, both local and national, off the 
hook for investing in mental health services, not least because they are 
required to do this. Also, investment in these services has the potential to 
alleviate other pressures on their budget. For example, people with mental ill 
health use more emergency care – they have overthree times more A&E attendances 
and almost five times more admissions 
<http://www.qualitywatch.org.uk/content/summary-people-mental-ill-health-and-hospital-use>
. Supporting people with mental health conditions more quickly and effectively 
isn’t just necessary for improving services, it also ensures that we are 
maximising the value of the constrained NHS budget.

Second, there is not enough information about how services should be 
prioritised. The government announces funding for certain priorities, for 
example£1.25bn for children and young people’s mental health services 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/mar/14/uk-budget-to-include-extra-money-for-mental-health-services-say-lib-dems>
, but this is subsumed in commissioner allocations, making it difficult for 
local organisations to understand how this investment has been passed on to the 
frontline. The stark reality of this situation can mean young people being 
treated many miles away from home. It is ultimately for local organisations to 
determine funding priorities and investment decisions, but we need to ensure 
that there is a level playing field and fair access to services across the 
country.

Third, there is not enough transparency or accountability over how the money 
is spent. As identified by theNational Audit Office report 
<https://www.nao.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/Mental-health-services-preparations-for-improving-access.pdf>
 (pdf) in April 2016, NHS England does not have reliable data matching 
expenditure to different mental health conditions. This both makes it difficult 
to track how money actually reaches frontline services but also undermines the 
evidence base available with which to prioritise investment. When there is such 
little transparency, it is also difficult to hold organisations to account – 
commissioners are required to report their total spend on mental health 
services, but not how much they have spent on different types of treatments and 
services.

Related: Parity of esteem for mental health is essential 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2014/feb/25/mental-health-disease-parity-care>

Concerted efforts will be required locally and nationally to make sure money 
reaches the frontline. We need to create an environment in which commissioners 
and providers work more closely together to determine how and where additional 
investment is spent. It is simply not sustainable to have a situation in which 
commissioners report they have increased their overall spending yet individual 
providers have seen no direct investment, despite services being under intense 
pressure. This lack of alignment between investment priorities and funding 
locally must be addressed. It might be too late for 2016–17 but we need to get 
this right for 2017–18.

In February the mental health task force detailed 58 ambitious recommendations 
<https://www.england.nhs.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/Mental-Health-Taskforce-FYFV-final.pdf>
 (pdf); £1bn has been made available to meet the challenges. However, our 
report shows that 90% of mental health trusts and 60% of commissioners do not 
feel confident this will be enough, particularly given the historic 
underfunding of mental health services.

So, back to that microscope. This close scrutiny shows what’s lacking but it 
also shows how far we have come. Even five years ago, this level of investment 
would have been cause for celebration. Key to the success of the campaign for 
parity has been the continued push for more. That’s why we want parity of 
esteem translated into full equity.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
