
Poor George. It was bad enough waking up to a new opinion poll showing only 2% 
of respondents thought he was a natural leader; a race to the bottom with Tim 
Farron isn’t a good look for someone eyeing up the leadership of the 
Conservative party. Then it dawned on him thatDavid Cameron was away in Japan 
for the G7 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/25/g7-japan-world-leaders-tour-shrine-cameron-obama-abe>
 and he would have to front up prime minister’s questions. It was OK for Dave, 
he only had to deal with Jeremy Corbyn; but he would have to go mano a mano with
Labour’s deputy leader Angela Eagle 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/may/25/george-osborne-v-angela-eagle-pmqs-verdict-the-eagle-has-landed-punches>
, an altogether more tricky operator at the dispatch box.

Eagle began by pointing out that the French tax authorities had raided 
Google’s offices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/24/google-offices-paris-raided-french-tax-authorities>
 while the chancellor had been delighted to just collect the odd fiver from the 
search engine every now and again. Osborne looked around nervously before 
replying that every little helps and no one should forget Google had also 
promised to hand over all the points on its Nectar card.

Having got the chancellor on the back foot, Eagle devoted her remaining five 
questions to pointing out thesplits in the Conservative party over Europe 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/21/how-tory-grassroots-split-eu-party-constituency-cameron>
 – a subject Corbyn invariably avoids. Did the chancellor agree withPriti Patel 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/29/priti-patel-attacks-civil-service-chief-brexit-minister-jeremy-heywood>
, orLen McCluskey who said that the EU was good for business 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/may/25/eu-referendum-vote-leave-calls-ifs-biased-after-it-warns-brexit-would-prolong-austerity-politics-live?page=with:block-574587b1e4b00a2e2e3a0603#block-574587b1e4b00a2e2e3a0603>
? What did he think of Iain Duncan Smith calling him Pinocchio? OrBoris Johnson 
calling the prime minister demented 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/22/david-cameron-defence-minister-penny-mordaunt-lying-turkey-joining-eu>
? How come every pro-Brexit minister had been banished from the front bench? At 
this point, Michael Gove waved rather sheepishly from behind the Speaker to 
show that he could not be so easily silenced. Justice for the justice secretary 
one.

It was all fairly harmless, scattergun stuff but for the first time in weeks 
there were smiles and noise on the Labour benches. There’s nothing like 
divisions in the opposition to make those within your own party seem less 
painful. “It’s no great revelation that different Conservative MPs have 
different views on theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>,” 
said Osborne, making the best of a poor hand. “That is why we are having a 
referendum, because this issue divides parties, families and friends.”

Or, in the case of many Tory MPs, ex-friends. The split over the EU has become 
so corrosive that most can barely look each other in the eye any more; the 
prospect of all being sweetness and light in the Tory party whatever the result 
are now non-existent. Just how bad things have got is that Osborne had a much 
easier time answering questions from the Labour benches than his own.

The blue on blue attacks began with the bizarre suggestion from Richard Drax 
that all MPs would require permission to speak from Jean-Claude Juncker if 
Britain voted to remain and became steadily more deluded thereafter. Philip 
Davies was certain theChilcot report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/09/chilcot-report-iraq-war-inquiry-published-6-july>
 held the key to a Vote Leave victory – who knew the Iraq war was a Brussels 
plot? – and that its publication was being deliberately withheld until after 23 
June. Anne Main then went on to suggest Britain’s entire green belt was under 
threat from the mass immigration that would inevitably occur if Britain stayed 
in the EU; it was only a matter of weeks before the Cotswolds would be 
blanketed in skyscrapers. In months the Peak District would be a distant memory.

The paranoia was proving contagious and Bernard Jenkin was keen to throw a 
conspiracy theory of his own into the ring. Bernie was alarmed the government 
was using its websites to promote government policy and that even those web 
pages that weren’t were probably pumping out subliminal “Vote Remain” messages 
so the only reasonable thing to do was to shut down the entire internet. George 
muttered something noncommittal and made a dash for it out of the chamber. Now 
that he came to think of it, Dave was welcome to the Tory party.
