
For as long as I can remember, my dad and I have been very close. My mum died 
when I was four, so it was kind of obligatory that we spend time together – he 
was the only parent around.

As a kid, I loved being with him. Whether it was waiting while he cooked our 
once-a-week meal of egg and chips, or watching as he mowed the lawn with an old 
upright petrol mower – in defiance of electricity – or playing pool – which he 
was rubbish at – we always had fun.

As I got older our relationship shifted, and I started to assume the role of 
my dad’s sidekick.

First, I was his drinking enabler. I’d sip on a coke in our local pub, while 
he’d drink Boddingtons. Next, I graduated to drinking partner. I’d force down a 
shandy, while he’d drink Boddingtons. Finally, I assumed the role of wingman, 
which involved me standing awkwardly in an over-50s nightclub as my dad chatted 
up middle-aged women. While drinking Boddingtons.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yjga%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yjga%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd65f2cae614dcf16ec571f04d3c7b285ae3b22f4%2F0_32_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20trip%20never%20taken%3A%20a%20mission%20to%20find%20my%20mother%20brought%20me%20closer%20to%20my%20father&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yjga%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A+trip+never+taken%3A+a+mission+to+find+my+mother+brought+me+closer+to+my+father&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yjga%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd65f2cae614dcf16ec571f04d3c7b285ae3b22f4%2F0_32_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
 But there was one thing we never even came close to discussing: the life – and 
death – of my mum. Photograph: Adam Gabbatt for the Guardian 
In those days my dad and I would talk about a wide-range of topics. The 
unexpected bruising in the aftermath of his vasectomy. The sex he was having 
with a woman who lived up the road. The number of shots of Jagermeister he had 
drunk one night in Spain.

But there was one thing we never even came close to discussing: the life – and 
death – of my mum.

I didn’t know it then, but this concealment would end up costing me a lot of 
money. And not just on self-help books

It’s not as though my dad wanted us to forget her – we’d visit her grave on 
Sundays and clean the headstone with a chamois leather, but conversations about 
who she was, or what she was like, never happened. I’m still not sure why. 
English stoicism? Grief? Maybe it was down to my dad marrying again (for the 
third time, it ended in divorce), or perhaps he just didn’t know what he should 
say to two young children who had lost their mum.

The only times we’d come close to the subject were in the pub. After a few 
pints my dad would ask if I remembered her. But it was difficult to know what 
to say. I’d manage a strangled: “No, not really,” before sipping a drink and 
looking away. Then we’d return to a more comfortable subject, like how my dad 
once, allegedly, bench-pressed 266lb.

I didn’t know it at the time, but years later this concealment would end up 
costing me quite a lot of money. And not just on self-help books.

Amid the fog, there was one thing I did know about my mum. My dad once told me 
that she had booked them tickets to fly to New York, on Concorde, for his 40th 
birthday. That would have been in March 1989, but she was too ill to make the 
trip. She died five months later, on 13 August.

When I was a teenager I decided that once I had a proper job I would make that 
trip for her.

So when I got my first job as a trainee reporter in 2009, I started saving up. 
I found a cheap flight to JFK, roped in my friend Tom, booked a hostel in the 
East Village, and by January 2010 we were there.

Tom and I did it all: we went up the Empire State building, we went up the 
Rockefeller building, we went up the Bowery.

On our jaunts around the city I found myself lingering at the main 
attractions, thinking about my mum, trying to imagine how she would have felt. 
She grew up in Preston, a northern English town, and I wondered if she would 
have felt like she’d made it amid the glamour of New York City. Would she have 
wanted to live here? Would she have had her photo taken with the Naked Cowboy? 
Was the Naked Cowboy even around in 1989?

When I got back to the UK and saw my dad, he listened, relatively patiently, 
as I told him about how the buildings were really tall and how the roads were 
really busy and how the Statue of Liberty was kind of small in real life.

“So what made you want to go there?” my dad asked.

I could feel myself welling up as I waited for my dad's response. There were 
tears in my eyes

I’d normally have deflected the question. But this experience felt too big to 
gloss over. I was proud of myself for making the trip, and it’d revived a 
long-suppressed desire to begin talking about my mum.

“Well. I didn’t want to tell you this beforehand,” I said. “But I always 
remembered you saying my mum had booked a trip to New York, and how you never 
got to go because she was too ill. So I thought I’d go there and, sort of, take 
the trip she never got to take.”

I could feel myself getting upset as I waited for his response. There were 
tears in my eyes.


“Oh that’s nice,” my dad said. He took a sip of his pint. 

“But that wasn’t New York. That was Paris.”

It took a moment to sink in. 

Paris? Paris??? I’d been to Paris years earlier and I hadn’t soaked in 
anything! I hadn’t taken deep breaths with my eyes closed, I hadn’t relished 
the feel of the Parisian wind on my face.


I’d taken some Paris pictures on a disposable camera but they hadn’t made it 
on to MySpace – this was pre-Facebook – because I didn’t have a scanner. And 
anyway, who flies Concorde to Paris? It’s a one-hour flight!

That was six years ago. I wouldn’t exactly say it was a watershed moment, but 
since then my dad and I have slowly started talking more.

I’ve learned that my mum had expensive tastes. In clothes, jewellery and 
furnishings. I learned that she could touch type. I learned that she spoiled me 
and my sister.

I’ve learned that she got terribly sick during chemotherapy. I learned that 
the day before she died she managed to eat some eggs and was chirpier than 
she’d been in weeks – that it almost seemed like she was getting better.

Related: Adventures with my father in the world of men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/18/sid-waddell-darts-commentator-fathers-day-remembered-by-his-son>

I’m probably never going to know as much about my mum as I would like. But I’m 
happy to be slowly finding out more, and I’m glad my dad and I are better able 
to talk about her.

Last month I texted him, asking what alcohol my mum liked to drink. Her 
birthday was 3 June, and I wanted to toast her with her favourite beverage.

“Your mum liked lager but also Bacardi and coke,” he replied. More new 
information: my mum had terrible taste in alcohol.

On 3 June my girlfriend and I duly went out and drank lager, and Bacardi and 
coke, and remembered my mum. And this time, when I told my dad about my homage, 
I’d got it right.

