
Ireland, a country where one man dominates the media (and it isn’t Rupert 
Murdoch <http://www.theguardian.com/media/rupert-murdoch>, by the way), has 
finally drawn up guidelines on media ownership.

 They say, according to an Irish Times report 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/news/politics/new-rules-will-focus-on-media-ownership-1.2029298>
, that it is “undesirable” for one person, or a single business, to hold 
excessive influence. And they advise the introduction of a “public value test” 
for future media industry consolidation.

The draft guidelines, which will be published today by Ireland’s 
communications minister Alex White, will apply across print, broadcast and 
online.

They will set out thresholds that specify how many shares or holdings are 
needed to be able to influence the “direction or policy ... with regard to 
news, current affairs or cultural content”.

Doubtless to the relief of the man who bestrides the Irish media landscape, 
Denis O’Brien, the rules will not apply retrospectively.

So he will not need to divest any of his holdings. He is the biggest 
shareholder in Independent News & Media (INM), which publishes Ireland’s two 
largest selling titles, theIrish Independent 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/irish-independent> and the Sunday Independent.

Although he has only a 29.9% stake, he effectively controls INM. Through 
another company, Communicorp, O’Brien owns two popular national radio stations, 
Today FM and Newstalk. The latter supplies news bulletins to some 20 local 
stations around the country.

Under the draft guidelines, his INM stake would be deemed as a controlling 
entity. The guidelines say that “a holding or voting strength of more than 20% 
... will generally constitute a significant interest”, while a 10% share could 
also constitute a “significant interest”.

A “significant interest” is defined as having “sufficient voting, financial or 
ownership strength” to influence direction or policy.

The public value test involves “a more thorough definition of media 
concentration than before” and deals specifically with cross-media ownership.

“It is undesirable,” it says “to allow any one media business or individual to 
hold excessive significant interests within a sector or particularly across 
different sectors of media businesses in the state.”

O’Brien is now regarded as Ireland’s richest man. According to the Sunday 
Times’s 2014 list of the richest 250 people in Ireland, he was the wealthiest 
individual,with a reported worth of £3.9bn. 
<http://features.thesundaytimes.co.uk/richlist/2014/live/richlist/view/group11#list>

Companies under his control have interests in mobile phones (Digicel is a 
major telecoms provider in the Caribbean); aircraft leasing (Aergo) and oil 
(Sterling Energy). He has also acquired a private hospital and a four-star 
castle hotel. Communicorp owns 42 radio stations in eight countries acrossEurope
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.

Source: Irish Times 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/news/politics/new-rules-will-focus-on-media-ownership-1.2029298>
Full disclosure:I am spending Christmas at O’Brien’s hotel (but I am paying for 
it!)

