
For some it’s tucking into lunch at the latest new Nordic restaurant and later 
embarking on a tour of the city’s craft microbreweries. For others, it’s 
getting into gear with the cyclists zipping around the city in dedicated lanes, 
heading out to the vivacious Vesterbro district, or admiring the noble old 
palaces and grand mansions of the centre of town. Or perhaps it’s that serious 
local veneration of a perfect cup of bean-nectar, as witnessed at the buzzing 
branches of Coffee Collective. Or checking out Danish design – whether through 
the architecture, in the newest hotel openings or in the one-off fashion 
creations on display along Jægersborggade.

Related: Win a weekend break for two in Copenhagen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uncover-cool-copenhagen/2016/may/23/win-a-weekend-break-for-two-in-copenhagen>

It’s the combination of all these qualities that has made Copenhagen one of 
Europe’s favourite cities, and a bucket list staple for those who love their 
weekend breaks. It’s only a short flight from the UK, and the city is just a 
13-minute train ride from the airport. Plus the Danish capital is compact and 
arguably one of the most walkable – and bikeable – cities in the world.

But perhaps the rise and rise of Copenhagen reflects the fact that city 
travellers are increasingly sophisticated. For their hard-won weekend treats, 
they want destinations that can deliver the whole gamut of art, culture, 
gastronomy, leisure and pleasure, with, ideally, a bit of exercise thrown in 
for good measure.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dnoyly9v1Zwk&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dnoyly9v1Zwk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dnoyly9v1Zwk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dnoyly9v1Zwk&media=>
From the tourist-thronged yet still very likeable Nyhavn to edgy Nørrebro, or 
the twinkling lights of the Tivoli Gardens to the mellowrus in urbe refuge that 
is the Assistens cemetery, Copenhagen offers enough variety and cosmopolitan 
vitality to challenge many bigger metropolises. Whether you join a guided city 
tour or walk or bike it alone, or go for a food-themed excursion fuelling up on 
tasty bites between sights, you’ll see the winding streets, royal palaces and 
elegant squares of old Copenhagen set cheek by jowl with the new – all cutting 
edge architecture, world-class dining establishments, and funky retail.

Highlights are for you to decide after your visit, but perennial 
recommendations include the canal tour, the King’s Garden, and a walk on the 
ramparts of the Citadel, founded by King Christian IV, who was also responsible 
for the iconic Round Tower, should you need another little hike. These sights 
will give you a good grasp of Copenhagen’s rich history and the opportunity to 
admire the gracious splendour of old.

Then it’s time to be shocked – or at least stimulated – by the new. Copenhagen 
is always rebuilding, reimagining, rethinking. For evidence of this, look no 
further than the bold architecture of the new National Aquarium and the 
Copenhagen Opera House or the dashing cuisine of three-Michelin-starred 
Geranium and newly opened restaurants such as Scandi-Latin fusion joint Taller 
and seafood specialist Musling. Of note, too, are the ever-experimenting 
fashions of the city’s hipster faction – porridge restaurants, socially 
conscious chocolatiers, skatey streetwear. This is a city alive with ideas and 
scenes that are increasingly garnering global attention.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j99x%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j99x%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce391a2d242b8a40e506c7a4c063ac71b6f8d14f%2F0_105_5210_3126%2F5210.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Introducing%20Copenhagen%3A%20sophisticated%20Scandinavian%20city%20breaks&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j99x%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Introducing+Copenhagen%3A+sophisticated+Scandinavian+city+breaks&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j99x%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce391a2d242b8a40e506c7a4c063ac71b6f8d14f%2F0_105_5210_3126%2F5210.jpg>
 Copenhagen is one of the most bike-friendly cities in the world. Photograph: 
Michal Krakowiak/Getty Images 
Yet somehow it manages to do so without losing its laid-back spirit – and that 
might well be one of the underlying factors behind Copenhagen’s appeal to 
travellers from other, more manic cities. It’s cool, yes. It’s contemporary – 
of course – but it’s calm, too, and kind to visitors.

Nor does all the fun have to end at the city limits. It’s less than an hour by 
train or car to get to North Sealand, and the world-renowned Louisiana Museum 
of Modern Art, majestic renaissance castle Frederiksborg Slot, and Hamlet’s 
Kronborg castle, otherwise known as Elsinore. So if you can make your weekend a 
bit longer, or make two trips this summer, there’s always plenty to do, and 
plenty of clean, green space to take it all in.

For more information and inspiration, go to visitdenmark.co.uk 
<http://www.visitdenmark.co.uk/en-gb/denmark/choose-your-copenhagen?utm_campaign=UK_Copenhagen&utm_medium=textlink&utm_source=guardian&utm_content=kampagnesite&utm_term=>

For the lastest news and pics, visit Denmark on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/denmark> and Instagram 
<https://www.instagram.com/govisitdenmark/>
