
France 

The Front National leader, Marine Le Pen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/marine-le-pen>, who polls suggest 
<http://www.lesechos.fr/elections/presidentielle/presidentielle-2017/021853035297-limage-du-fn-reste-encore-negative-1214941.php>
 could defeat a mainstream candidate to reach the second-round run-off of 
France’s 2017 presidential elections, has seized on the UK’sEU referendum 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> to boost her own critical 
stance on Brussels.

Her anti-immigration and anti-euro party has said it would seek to renegotiate 
the terms of France’s EU membership if it took power, and would also hold a 
referendum on the EU.

Le Pen has hailed the UK’s referendum and suggested she may cross the Channel 
to campaign for Brexit (Vote Leave said it would “not be welcoming her” if she 
did). A vote to leave would “prove it’s possible to live outside the EU. You’re 
either free or you aren’t,”Le Figaro 
<http://premium.lefigaro.fr/international/2016/04/19/01003-20160419ARTFIG00372-brexit-marine-le-pen-a-londres-avant-le-referendum-du-23juin.php>
 quoted her as saying.

Describing the UK referendum as “a key moment in European history”, Le Pen has 
also said every European country should also be able to decide whether or not 
to stay in the EU: “I want each people to be able to have their say on the 
subject … I hope the French will also have a similar exercise.

“There has to be another model of cooperation between peoples; their history, 
sovereignty and freedom has to be respected.” She has also said David Cameron’s 
renegotiation deal with Brussels earlier this year marked “the beginning of the 
end of the EU”.Angelique Chrisafis

Germany and Austria

Like many populist parties in Europe, Alternative für Deutschland, currently 
polling at 14% and the third biggest political force inGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>, is highly critical of Brussels – 
but accepts the EU is necessary, not least because of Germany’s Nazi past.

So while the AfD would not campaign for Gerxit (a German exit) or welcome 
Brexit, it will certainly push for widespread reform of the institutions – and 
views Britain and the Brexit debate as a motor for that.
Brexit explained: who wants UK to stay 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/05/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?sheet=intermediate&id=vote_stay>
In the words of the party leader, Frauke Petry: “A British exit from the EU 
would be fatal because the British are often the voice of reason ... and bring 
with them a healthy corrective to the madness of the expansion project. If 
Britain left, we’d also lose a net contributor to the budget [and Germany] 
would have to shoulder the financial loss to the EU.”

Across the border, Austria’s Freedom party, which recently swept the first 
round of the presidential election with 36.4% of the vote, has been campaigning 
against further European integration since 2005.

The party’s EU delegation leader, Harald Vilimsky reacted positively to David 
Cameron’s renegotiation with Brussels, and to an Austrian petition calling for 
the country’s exit in 2015, suggestingAustria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/austria> should follow suit.

At the very least, Vilimsky said, the country should start a renegotiation 
over the country’s relationship with the EU. If this led nowhere, Vilimsky said 
the idea of an ‘Öxit’ – an Austrian exit – would be on the cards.Kate Connolly

Visegrád countries

Nationalist governments in central and eastern Europe have seized on Britain’s 
referendum as a precedent-setting opportunity to change their own relationship 
with Brussels.
But much of the EU-related tough-talk of the Visegrád group – 64 million 
people in Poland,Hungary <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hungary>, Slovakia 
and the Czech Republic – is posturing for domestic consumption.

Appearing to stand up to Brussels spices up nationalist rhetoric in countries 
with living memories of superpower domination. In reality, the young EU members 
of the east are too wedded to the EU’s benefits – development funds and the 
free movement of labour – to dream of their own exit.

The Visegrád governments look to the Hungarian prime minister, Viktor Orbán, 
for their rhetoric on Brussels. But for him, as for Poland, an EU without 
Britain would mark the loss of their most influential ally in Brussels and 
Strasbourg in Cameron.

“Orbán has been testing the limits of the EU’s freedoms for years,” said Edit 
Zgut, a foreign policy analyst at the Budapest-based thinktank Political 
Capital. “But all of Hungary’s exports are EU-internal, and 97% of developments 
completed in Hungary have been achieved with EU co-financing.”


Bulgaria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bulgaria> and Romania badly want 
EU investment and would prefer Britain to remain in the EU. Were it to leave, 
Sofia and Bucharest would vote for Britain to be required to make a full 
financial contribution to the EU budget.Alex Duval Smith and Dan Nolan


Belgium and the Netherlands 

As a small country that is home to the EU institutions, Belgium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/belgium> is one of the staunchest supporters 
of European integration. But one party is hoping for Brexit – the far-right 
Flemish separatist party, Vlaams Belang.


“Brexit would show other countries that life outside of the EU is perfectly 
possible,” Tom Van Grieken, Vlaams Belang’s president, told the Guardian. “It 
would encourage other countries to take the same step.”

Van Grieken, whose party has almost doubled its vote to 12% since he took over 
in 2014, says he admires Ukip’s Nigel Farage but feels he is “isolating 
himself” by not joining forces with Vlaams Belang, the Dutch Freedom party and 
France’s Front National.

The Freedom party leader, Geert Wilders, also an admirer of Farage 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/europe/eu/10804531/Geert-Wilders-I-respect-Ukips-Nigel-Farage-a-lot.html>
, hopes Britain will vote to leave the EU. “A Brexit would make it easier for 
other countries to make the same decision,” hesaid in January 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-01-14/dutch-populist-wilders-says-eu-finished-netherlands-must-leave>
.

Wilders’ party achieved its best-ever results in January 
<https://www.noties.nl/v/get.php?a=peil.nl&s=weekpoll&f=De+Stemming+van+10+januari+2016.pdf>
 in a poll giving it 42 seats out of a possible 150 in parliament, more than 
the main Labour and centre-right Liberal parties combined.

Other, smaller Dutch parties, including the Socialists and Voor Nederland, 
were prominent in the victorious no campaign in theDutch referendum on Ukraine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/13/politicians-trust-readers-dutch-referendum-ukraine-association-treaty>
. They are likely to “make statements praising the benefits of Brexit for the 
Dutch debate”, says Rem Korteweg at the Centre for European Reform.Jennifer 
Rankin

Scandinavia 

The clearest voices in support of Britain leaving the EU are small parties on 
the left. They reject nationalist and xenophobic arguments but accuse Brussels 
of putting the interests of banks and corporations first on issues such as 
health, welfare, human rights and the environment.

In Denmark <https://www.theguardian.com/world/denmark>, the Red Green 
Alliance, which has 14 seats in parliament, has opposed Danish membership of 
the EU for 25 years. The party says it “favours international cooperation, but 
is against the current EU form of cooperation, which is solely controlled by 
the goal of economic growth”.

In Sweden, Jonas Sjöstedt, leader of the Left party, which has 21 seats, 
welcomes a Brexit because it “would start a debate on continued EU membership in
Sweden <https://www.theguardian.com/world/sweden> and other EU countries”. The 
euro has contributed to “a profound social and economic crisis” in Greece, 
Spain, Portugal and Ireland, the party says.

On the right wing of Scandinavian politics, Eurosceptic voices are more 
powerful – but also more ambiguous.

Kristian Thulesen Dahl, leader of the Danish People’s party, which props up a 
minority Liberal government, has said Britain staying inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> would strengthen Denmark’s case 
to renegotiate its own EU relationship. But he also caused uproar by saying an 
“out” vote would give Britain a better deal.

The Sweden Democrats, whose 49 seats give it the balance of power in 
Stockholm, are formally in favour of remaining in the EU. But the EU today “is 
not the one that Swedes voted for in 1994”, the party says. Its policy is to 
“limit the EU’s influence” and keep Sweden outside the euro.

The party’s leader, Jimmie Åkesson, recently said he could see “nothing 
positive” in the EU and “nothing negative” in leaving it. “I really hope we get 
the opportunity to hold a referendum on EU membership in Sweden eventually,” he 
added.

Italy

Italy’s love for the EU is not as strong as it once was, with a recent poll by 
Ipsos Mori showing almost half of Italians would vote to leave the EU if they 
were given the chance.

Two political parties have given voice to that frustration: the Five Star 
Movement (M5S), a populist anti-establishment party whose founder, Beppe 
Grillo, has said he admires Farage, and the rightwing Northern League.


Related: A closer look at the leftwing case for Brexit | Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/17/a-closer-look-at-the-leftwing-case-for-brexit>

Politicians from both parties have suggested British voters would probably 
vote to leave the union, but that idea seems only to inflame their 
frustrations: even Eurosceptics tread carefully here in calling for an in/out 
referendum, perhaps realising the idea is too radical for most Italian voters.

M5S, supported by about 28% of Italians (barely 5% behind the ruling 
Democrats), has, however, called for a referendum to leave the eurozone. On his 
popular blog, Grillo has said the UK referendum will have vast consequences for 
the EU, even if the UK votes to remain.

If the UK votes for Brexit, it would confirm Grillo’s view that the European 
experiment has failed, and his belief thatItaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> and other EU countries that adopted 
the euro – including Greece - have essentially been taken hostage and will end 
up being “strangled in the euro’s grip”.Stephanie Kirschgaessner

• This article was amended on 19 May 2016. An earlier version misspelled 
Harald Vilimsky’s surname as Vlimsky.

