
Occasionally it feels as if a person’s facial hair exists in a completely 
different zone to their face. And to the rest of their bodies. I’m thinking of
Drake <https://www.theguardian.com/music/drake>, whose beard almost existed as 
if it were the breakout star of his face and career. The brief loss of it last 
month resulted in a deleted Instagram and aninternet outcry 
<https://twitter.com/aubreysoctober/status/731100120775856128?ref_src=twsrc>.
The existence of a beard is so essential to Brand Drake that he grew it back 
sharpish. A similar thing happened toKit Harington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/kit-harington> when he appeared sans 
facial growth. Looking slightly goth-y, he drew comparisons to Adam Driver, The 
Crow’s Brandon Lee and even Matthew Healy from the 1975. Suddenly Harington was 
everybody and no one. He was his beard and his beard was him.

Think of it like a vital appendage or comedy partner: could Morecambe survive 
without Wise? It’s something to bear in mind when considering shaving off your 
beard for summer if the idea of having your face wrapped in a hair-balaclava 
for the hot and humid months does not appeal.
Master Barber Alex Glover champions the idea of a summer shave: “Facial hair 
is prone to drying and becoming crispier in warmer conditions with excess sun 
and sea exposure,” he says; on the pro side, “it can give you a lighter look”. 
But what price this lighter look?As science has taught us 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0191886908001748>, it 
anthropologically puts you on the back foot. The appeal of the beard is caveman 
clear: it makes guys look more mature and masculine. Shaving it off can makes 
someone look as if they’ve gone through a time machine and been sent back to a 
visually younger (anddefinitely more awkward) time. 

Free of beard, your face is both visually and literally softer and more 
sensitive. Glover says that, post beard, the face can feel a bit exposed: “keep 
that skin you’ve been covering for so long in top condition by exfoliating 
every so often.”
So if you spend more on grooming products and you end up looking as if you 
don’t have enough pocket money to spend on grooming products, is shaving it off 
actually worth it?
It’s a tough one. Glover thinks you should view it with the breeziness of 
getting a new haircut. “It’s just something that naturally takes a bit of time 
to adjust to. You can always change up your hairstyle, be it on your head or 
face.” Which feels like wise words to live by.
