
The question of who should lead digital transformation has two answers, 
because it requires two people: a political sponsor to champion the initiative 
and a hard-charging executive to drive it through the bureaucracy.


The sponsor’s job is to champion digital transformation and provide political 
cover when it conflicts with traditional ways of working – as ambitious digital 
efforts almost always do.

Sir Francis Maude, who helped launch the UK’s Government Digital Service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/government-digital-service> (GDS), is 
the kind of political leader needed for digital projects. While in opposition, 
Maude developed the Tory’s government reform programme. He’s a seasoned 
political veteran with more than three decades of experience inside and outside 
government (including the Treasury, Cabinet Office, and Foreign Office) and, 
critically, a trusted confidant and adviser to prime minister David Cameron.

GDS made countless decisions that upset other ministers

After becoming head of the Cabinet Office in 2010, Maude launched the 
efficiency and reform group (ERG) to drive down the cost of government. “Maude 
was a ruthless efficiency-seeker,” a senior official who worked with him told 
me in March 2015. “He was constantly saying, ‘This is wasteful. This is 
shameful, it’s morally wrong and we need to fix it and drive it through’.”

Maude followed up his efficiency drive with an equally ambitious effort to 
reform the civil service in 2012 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/civil-service-reform-plan>. His 
third major reform was to make digital by default the UK’s tech strategy, with 
the aim of providing government services through fast, simple and easy-to-use 
digital interfaces.

Maude described these new digital platforms 
<http://www.computing.co.uk/ctg/news/2398080/a-modern-equivalent-to-londons-victorian-sewers-francis-maude-hails-importance-of-government-digital-reforms>
 as “the foundations of our new civic infrastructure, a modern equivalent to 
London’s Victorian sewer network, or the building of the National Grid”. As 
such, he envisioned a digital strategy built into policy, so it wouldn’t be 
seen as a stand-alone reform plan. He deliberately made digital service a part 
of overall civil service reform, with the goal of creating a civil service that 
wasless bureaucratic, more skilled, digital and unified 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/2010-to-2015-government-policy-civil-service-reform/2010-to-2015-government-policy-civil-service-reform>
. His aim was to empower people to push back against policy when it runs 
counter to a digital way of working.

Maude also realised that the UK government, which had a huge debt burden, had 
to radically change to remain solvent.

A big part of Maude’s effort was standing up to the status quo. GDS made 
countless decisions that upset other ministers, particularly when it denied IT 
projects it deemed to be wasteful or duplicative. Maude’s fellow ministers 
would go to him to overturn the decisions, but by all accounts he stood firm, 
backing up GDS.

Related: What impact has Francis Maude had on Whitehall? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2015/feb/02/francis-maude-whitehall-impact>

But politicians such as Maude have many responsibilities so it’s unrealistic 
to think they can personally drive each and every change through government. 
They need partners.

Maude found his partner in technology specialist Mike Bracken. Calling it “the 
devil’s own job”, Bracken was asked to get more than a dozen government 
departments moving the way Maude and GDS wanted. He talked about the challenge 
ina 2011 blogpost 
<http://mikebracken.com/blog/gov-uk/on-becoming-executive-director-of-digital-in-the-cabinet-office/>
, written the day he joined GDS: “So I signed up. I’ve been watching this 
unfold for 15 years. We’ve had some success at the Guardian in the last few 
years, but this challenge is far greater: to improve the quality of digital 
public service provision for every person in the UK.”

The US techies with muscle

Bracken’s counterpart in the US was Mikey Dickerson, brought in by US chief 
technology officer Todd Park to help fix HealthCare.gov during its crisis.

After salvaging HealthCare.gov – something Dickerson describes as more 
important and meaningful than anything he could have accomplished in a lifetime 
at his old job – he went back to Google buthe struggled to care 
<https://medium.com/@USDigitalService/mikey-dickerson-to-sxsw-why-we-need-you-in-government-f31dab3263a0#.2mat544ml>
.

Mikey Dickerson knows that there is a big difference between the government 
and Google.

He soon came back into government to lead the US Digital Service (USDS). 
There, he and his team took the same methods they used to turn around 
HealthCare.gov and applied them to other projects. His appointment to the USDS 
got a lot of attention, andso did his casual style 
<http://www.theregister.co.uk/2014/08/21/obamas_new_national_it_admin_says_no_suits_please_were_techies/>
 – his rumpled shirts providing a stark contrast to normal White House attire.

One of the reasons Dickerson was so successful was his relationship with the 
US president Barack Obama. This gives him the power to take on problems others 
can’t. “Quite simply, the president can (and does) ask his cabinet secretaries 
to take seriously any USDS overtures to work on projects within their agencies,”
wrote Fast Company’s Jon Gertner 
<http://www.fastcompany.com/3046756/obama-and-his-geeks> in 2015.

Another smart move, according to Gertner, was nestling the USDS within the 
Office of Management and Budget. He said this “gives the techies muscle within 
various agencies and an ability to influence various IT budgets and lines of 
command”.

But Dickerson himself is a unique leader. Like all the best techies, he has a 
relentless drive to fix problems and improve performance. After all, he comes 
from an industry that holds as natural law the idea that everything will get 
twice as good every two years. At the same time, he knows that there is a big 
difference between the government and Google.

He understands that you can’t disrupt huge programmes at will; you have to 
innovate with patience. It’s in this softer approach to the USDS, patiently 
hacking technology and bureaucracy, that’s he’s found a formula for success.

But the right formula will only get you so far. Ask Dickerson, and he’ll tell 
you that the number one advantage he has is a top-flight team. With 37 of the 
nation’s best engineers and tech minds, it’s no surprise that USDS has made 
such a splash.

William D. Eggers is responsible for research and thought leadership for 
Deloitte’s public sector practice. This is an edited excerpt from his newest 
bookDelivering on Digital: the Innovators and Technologies that are 
Transforming Government 
<http://www.amazon.com/Delivering-Digital-Innovators-Technologies-Transforming/dp/0795347510>
 and is printed with permission from RosettaBooks.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
