
The Sun was rapped over the knuckles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/18/queen-backs-brexit-headline-in-the-sun-was-inaccurate-press-watchdog-rules>
 for its “Queen backs Brexit” headline. Now, on the eve of the EU referendum, 
it has dared to feature the monarch on its front page again as part of its 
support for the leave campaign.

Its headline, “What the Queen asked dinner guests: Give me three good reasons 
to stay in Europe 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/1320632/queen-asks-guests-at-vip-dinner-for-their-views-on-eu-ahead-of-brexit-vote/>
”, is based a revelation by royal biographer Robert Lacey.

He claimed that she asked close friends and family their views on whether or 
not Britain should stay in theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>. 


Related: Sun apologises for saying Paul McKenna was drunk and abusive on flight
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/21/the-sun-apologises-paul-mckenna-hypnotist>

The Sun <http://www.theguardian.com/media/sun> quotes Lacey as saying: “The 
Queen has no vote but she’s definitely Eurosceptic.

“She does like robust debate. She likes a debate around the table, like all of 
us round the country, and she’s been debating Brexit with close friends and 
family. But from what I’ve heard, she’s been very careful to be scrupulously 
neutral.”

The Sun was not alone in reporting Lacey’s claim, which was originally 
publishedon a Daily Beast blog 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2016/06/21/why-the-queen-should-oppose-brexit.html>
. It was also carried, among others, by the Daily Express, “Queen issues EU 
challenge 
<http://www.express.co.uk/news/politics/682042/Queen-asks-dinner-guests-why-stay-in-European-Union>
”, and by the Daily Telegraph, “‘Tell me why we should Remain, Queen asks 
dinner guests’ 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/06/21/queen-asks-guests-to-give-her-3-reasons-why-britain-should-remai/>
”.

Lacey explained that the Queen posed her EU question “within the last few 
months at a royal home in England”. The dinner guests were thought to have 
included two of her children, Prince Andrew and Princess Anne.

In further comments, made to the Sun, he described the Queen as “a very 
thoughtful Eurosceptic” but said she had “been playing it with a straight bat”.

It is very doubtful that Buckingham Palace will report the Sun to the 
Independent Press Standards Organisation for this story as it did over the 
“Queen backs Brexit” headline.

Ipso <http://www.theguardian.com/media/ipso> decided that the newspaper’s 
headline, published on 9 March, was “significantly misleading”. Its story was 
based on anonymous claims that the Queen “strongly” believed the UK should 
leave the EU.

Related: Sun editor defends 'Queen backs Brexit' headline as watchdog rules it 
inaccurate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/18/queen-backs-brexit-headline-in-the-sun-was-inaccurate-press-watchdog-rules>

The Sun’s editor, Tony Gallagher, rejected the watchdog’s ruling, arguing that 
he had not made a journalistic error in publishing the story and headline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/18/queen-backs-brexit-headline-in-the-sun-was-inaccurate-press-watchdog-rules>
. “The sources were so impeccable,” he said, “that we had no choice but to run 
the story in the way that we did.”

He also said: “We were in no doubt that the Queen’s views were strongly of the 
opinion she would want to leave the European Union.”

Ipso decided that the article did not breach the code, but the use of Brexit 
in headline did because it was “a factual assertion that the Queen had 
expressed a position in the referendum debate”.


In a recent speech 
<http://www.pressgazette.co.uk/sir-alan-moses-interview-sun-editor-a-lousy-advocate-guardian-unimaginable-piety-for-refusing-to-be-regulated-brexit-debate-deeply-dispiriting/>
, Ipso’s chairman, Sir Alan Moses, called Gallagher a “lousy advocate” who 
offered “a bad defence” for his decision to use the Brexit headline.
