
Nicola Sturgeon <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicola-sturgeon> believes 
it is inevitable that the killing of Jo Cox will have an impact on the EU 
referendum and suggests that voters will be increasingly disgusted at the 
“poisonous” nature of the campaign after the politician’s death.

Speaking to the Guardian on Monday, as the Westminster parliament paid tribute 
to the 41-year-old Labour MP who was fatally attacked in her West Yorkshire 
constituency last Thursday, Sturgeon said: “I think it inevitably will [affect 
voting decisions]. It’s too early to say whether it will have a direct impact 
on the result. I think there was a bit of disgust setting in on Thursday 
morning about the Farage poster. I started to detect a sense of ‘if you’re 
voting leave, are you associating yourself with that?’.

“Obviously nobody knows whether the debate around the referendum had anything 
to do with what happened to Jo, but the sense that the debate had become a 
little bit poisonous and a little bit intolerant and focused on fear of 
foreigners as opposed to legitimate debate about immigration, I suspect what 
happened will have intensified those feelings.”

Related: MPs pay tribute to Jo Cox's 'humanity, compassion and irrepressible 
spirit' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/20/mps-pay-tribute-to-jo-coxs-humanity-compassion-and-irrepressible-spirit>

Scotland’s first minister also said that the media’s treatment of Cox’s death 
risked ignoring the wider politics around the attack, suggesting that it would 
have been very different had the alleged perpetrator been a Muslim. “The 
[media] treatment of this event has been very different from the treatment of 
other attacks that have been equally horrific. I do feel that if the person 
arrested for this had been Muslim, for example, the treatment would have been 
very different.”

Describing herself as disappointed by how focused the referendum campaign has 
become on immigration, the SNP leader accused leading Brexit campaigners of 
“exploiting and twisting” people’s fears. “The leadership of the leave campaign 
– and I emphasise leadership because there are lots of people who will be 
voting leave for reasons that I don’t agree with but nonetheless are legitimate 
reasons and don’t deserve to be dismissed by calling them racist and intolerant 
– what the leadership have done, and I’m not just talking about Nigel Farage, 
but Boris Johnson and others, is to allow themselves to be associated with this 
view that pressure on our public services is the fault of immigrants, 
immigrants are the fault of the EU and therefore the answer is to close our 
borders and pull up the drawbridge. It has been really, really distasteful.

“[It’s] not that I think that people’s concerns should be ignored, but the 
leave campaign has exploited and tried to twist people’s fears around 
immigration into something that is really distasteful.” All politicians should 
draw a lesson from the referendum that there was a “need to change the tone and 
the narrative around immigration”, she said.

Asked whether there were plans in place to initiate the process for a second 
Scottish independence referendum should there be aBrexit victory on Thursday 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/11/corbyn-urges-voters-in-scotland-to-show-solidarity-with-people-across-eu>
, in which the majority of Scots vote to remain but are dragged out of the EU 
by other parts of the UK, Sturgeon said: “Our manifesto was very clear that the 
Scottish parliament should in these circumstances have the right to propose 
another referendum. Even if we don’t take the decision straightaway that it’s 
definitely happening in a particular timescale, we’ll have to start doing 
certain things to keep that option open. It takes time to legislate for a 
referendum. So it’s going to be really important to make sure that every option 
that is available to Scotland to protect our position is kept open.”

She insisted, however, that she genuinely hoped not to find herself in such a 
position. “I want there to beanother independence referendum at some stage 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/01/scottish-independence-vote-referendum-off-table-nicola-sturgeon>
, I want Scotland to be independent, but I wouldn’t choose to have it happen 
because England votes to come out of the EU.”

Reflecting on the longer term impact of Cox’s death, Sturgeon suggested that 
politicians needed to counter their critics while leading by example when it 
came to changing the tone of debate. “Maybe its time for politicians to fight 
back a little bit in terms of this notion that politicians are all in it for 
themselves, we’re all the same, we’re not driven by sincere motives. Because 
the fact of the matter is the vast majority are. Most politicians come into 
politics because they want to make a difference, we just have different ideas 
how to do it.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Frachel-reeves-tribute-mp-jo-cox-commons-video&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Frachel-reeves-tribute-mp-jo-cox-commons-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rachel%20Reeves%20pays%20tearful%20tribute%20to%20MP%20Jo%20Cox%20in%20Commons%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Frachel-reeves-tribute-mp-jo-cox-commons-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rachel+Reeves+pays+tearful+tribute+to+MP+Jo+Cox+in+Commons+%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Frachel-reeves-tribute-mp-jo-cox-commons-video&media=>
Rachel Reeves pays tearful tribute to MP Jo Cox in Commons – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jun/21/rachel-reeves-tribute-mp-jo-cox-commons-video>
“It’s very much the currency of discourse on social media where political 
disagreements very quickly become very personalised. It would be naive to think 
that this tragedy is suddenly going to change all of that, but maybe the next 
time someone is about to compose a tweet that hurls personal abuse they could 
think twice. Politicians, while we can’t control the tone of debate on social 
media completely, we can lead by example.”

She cautioned, however, against forfeiting passion in pursuit of a gentler 
discourse. “I didn’t know Jo at all, but everything that I’ve read about her in 
the past few days leads me to believe that the last thing she would want would 
be for us to stop being really passionate about political debate. When people 
talk about changing the style of politics it’s important we don’t have that 
mean politics becomes anodyne.”
