
Strictly Come Dancing and other popular BBC 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> programmes may still be at risk of being 
axed under government plans to overhaul the corporation’s governance, Labour 
has warned.

Shadow culture secretary Maria Eagle said prescriptive requirements in the BBC 
white paper for charter renewal 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/10/bbc-white-paper-conservative-mps-independence>
 suggest shows such as Countryfile and Doctor Who may also be under threat.

The document’s requirement for the BBC to be “distinctive” and suggestion it 
could seek to rely on “fewer high output long-term titles” give the impression 
it may forced to drop programmes which go head-to-head with commercial rivals, 
Eagle said.

She urged culture secretary John Whittingdale to give assurances that Ofcom 
will not make the BBC stop making popular programmes off the back of the 
requirements.

Related: BBC white paper critics were 'leftwing luvvies', says John 
Whittingdale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/12/bbc-john-whittingdale-white-paper-star-pay-board>

Opening an opposition day debate on the white paper, Eagle said: “The white 
paper defines distinctiveness as being ‘a requirement that the BBC should be 
substantially different to other providers across each and every service’, but 
that hardly really pins it down.

“Ministers must allay concerns that this could be interpreted as the BBC being 
forced to withdraw from anything its commercial rivals wish it wasn’t doing for 
their own commercial gain.

“You have in the past questioned the distinctiveness of some of the BBC’s most 
popular programmes, like Strictly Come Dancing.

“The white paper says ‘the government is clear that it cannot, and indeed 
should not, determine either the content or scheduling of programmes’.

“But it also sets out prescriptive content requirements for radio and TV. To 
take one example for TV, it demands … ‘fewer high-output, long-term titles’.

“So you seem to be telling the BBC to stop producing much loved shows like 
Countryfile or Casualty or Doctor Who that happen to have been produced for 
very many years.

“What reassurances can you give that you are not simply going to require Ofcom 
to make the BBC back off doing things you don’t like on the basis of these 
extremely prescriptive requirements?”

Eagle added: “If the secretary of state, who’s a free marketeer by instinct, 
wishes to intervene by micro-managing the public sector elements of our 
broadcasting industry, he is making a very big mistake, as well as turning into 
a statist interfering minister who should just leave our broadcasters to get on 
with doing the job that they do so well. Particularly those who work in the 
BBC.”

When the white paper was published in May 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/12/bbc-white-paper-key-points-john-whittingdale>
, Whittingdale insisted the requirement to produce distinctive content is 
“emphatically not saying the BBC should not be popular”.
