
Improving the UK’s mental health system is among the greatest challenges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/13/mental-health-services-crisis-britain-revealed-leaked-report#https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/13/mental-health-services-crisis-britain-revealed-leaked-report>
 facing the NHS. Rising suicide rates, long waiting times for inpatient and 
community mental health team appointments, and people in crisisunable to find a 
hospital bed 
<http://media.wix.com/ugd/0e662e_6f7ebeffbf5e45dbbefacd0f0dcffb71.pdf#http://media.wix.com/ugd/0e662e_6f7ebeffbf5e45dbbefacd0f0dcffb71.pdf>
 anywhere near home are just some of these challenges.

Mental health has never been so high profile, with politicians lining up 
almost weekly to declare it a priority and even theprime minister pledging 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/prime-minister-pledges-a-revolution-in-mental-health-treatment>
 earlier this year to set in motion a mental health “revolution”. However, 
translating rhetoric about paving the way for radical improvements and 
achieving “parity of esteem”, so that people in need of mental health support 
can expect swift, appropriate treatment on a par with physical health, is 
proving tricky.

In a time of austerity and unprecedented funding constraints, there is a huge 
mountain still to climb.Figures released last month 
<http://www.mind.org.uk/news-campaigns/news/one-in-two-people-with-mental-health-problems-have-felt-suicidal-because-of-money-housing-or-benefits-issues/#.VyDCuzYrLAw>
 by the charity Mind revealed that almost half of people (46%) with mental 
health problems had considered or attempted to take their own life due to 
social factors such as debt and welfare difficulties. This comes at a time when 
cuts to community services are making it harder to access local support and 
advice.

Despite repeated government announcements of extra cash, mental health 
services continue to face relentless strain. According to the charityRethink 
Mental Illness 
<https://www.rethink.org/news-views/2014/04/the-nhs-will-pay-a-high-price-for-short-term-mental-health-cuts>
, as a proportion of the NHS budget, mental health is just 13% despite 
accounting for more than 23% of the disease burden.

Against this backdrop there have, nevertheless, been considerable efforts to 
improve the overall quality of care, focusing on prevention as well as 
treatment, which have been widely welcomed.

In March, The Kings Fund 
<http://www.kingsfund.org.uk/publications/physical-and-mental-health>’s highly 
significant report on the potential benefits to patients and NHS finances of 
integrating mental and physical health services demonstrated how restructuring 
could save billions. The continuing separation of physical and mental-health 
services is a formidable obstacle to progress – it comes with “a high human 
cost” and adds £11bn a year to the NHS’s financial burden. The report’s 
recommendations include improving mental health expertise in general hospitals 
to identify where people have such needs and physical health checks in 
psychiatric facilities to become routine.

However, a report by the National Audit Office 
<https://www.nao.org.uk/report/mental-health-services-preparations-for-improving-access/>
 published last month questions whether the government has a grip on the true 
cost of achieving parity of esteem and that its ambition to meet new mental 
health targets was “challenging” in the current climate.

The recent publication of the independent Mental Health Taskforce’s report 
<https://www.england.nhs.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/Mental-Health-Taskforce-FYFV-final.pdf>
 on the state of mental health services shone a spotlight on the level of 
underinvestment and shocking lack of access to care many people experienced. 
Commissioned by England’s NHS chief executive Simon Stevens, the report laid 
bare the complexity and scale of the undertaking to achieve parity, but it also 
provided a blueprint for a system-wide, strategic change to tackle striking 
failures and gaps in care.

Its proposals – including how to improve care through prevention and early 
intervention, seven-day access to care for people in crisis, and integrated 
physical and mental health provision – precipitated a nationalNHS strategy to 
transform services 
<https://www.england.nhs.uk/wp-content/uploads/2015/12/planning-guid-16-17-20-21.pdf>
.

At the same time a report by the Centre for Mental Health (CMH), Priorities 
for Mental Health 
<http://www.centreformentalhealth.org.uk/priorities-for-mental-health-economic-report>
, drilled down even further, providing robust evidence of the economic case for 
reform, particularly when it comes to prevention and early intervention. CMH 
deputy chief executive Andy Bell says scarce resources can be better deployed 
by, for example, reshaping services for children and young people; creating 
community-based alternatives to inpatient crisis care can also be effective.

However, Bell warns that there is no getting away from the need for much 
greater investment. “The evidence is absolutely clear cut. At the moment, the 
current level of provision is way below what it should be. We know that if you 
focus on [investment], you will get good returns both in terms of reduced costs 
down the line and of better health.”

The chief executive of Mind and chair of the Mental Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Taskforce, Paul Farmer, says the 
challenges may be formidable, but long-lasting change is achievable if there is 
consistent political will and the cash to back it up. “We’re trying to do 
something that’s not easy, especially in the current climate. But I do think 
there’s a momentum and a new level of confidence from people that this is the 
moment that things not just should change, but really will change.”

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
