
There has long been the question of whether it is better to boil or to steam 
new potatoes. I have listened to all the arguments. My conclusion is that it 
matters not one jot. Mash is another matter, and I’d certainly steam a potato 
if I need a dry-textured spud to pat into gnocchi. But a tiny Jersey Royal, 
cooked whole and in its skin, can handle a quick dip.

I cook new potatoes in much the same way I do pasta: in plenty of deep, 
furiously boiling water. This is not the time to overcrowd the pan or skimp on 
the sea salt. I can cut back on the salt elsewhere. Small potatoes can be 
cooked in as little as eight minutes. If I’m steaming them, then I like to toss 
them, hot and straight from the steamer, in butter to which I have added a 
crushed anchovy.

It is worth mentioning that much of what is sold as “new” is nothing of the 
sort. “Small” would be nearer the truth. The texture of a true new potato is 
buttery, almost fudgy inside. Look for those with skins that flake. If you 
can’t remove the skin with a good firm rubbing of your thumb, then it’s 
probably not worthy of the name.

The smell of a bag of new potatoes is distinctive: dark, earthy, cool and 
damp, like the smell of a deep well. Many of those offered seem to have no 
smell at all, partly, I suppose because supermarkets insist on washing them, 
despite the fact that tumbling your expensive Jerseys around in a drum of water 
steals the essence of “freshly dug” from them.

The floury flesh of large, main-crop potatoes is good for soaking up a 
dressing, crumbling deliciously as they plump with mayonnaise. But I like the 
firm and buttery flesh of a new potato for a summer salad, too. You can slice 
or crack them open with the back of a spoon, showing just enough flesh to let 
the dressing seep in. Use olive oil mashed with thyme or basil; yogurt thinned 
with oil and spiked with tarragon; or, as I did this week, cream infused with 
garlic leaves and black pepper. If I can’t find ramsons, then I’ll use the 
young heads of green garlic, crushed flat with the side of a knife, instead.

New potatoes, wild garlic and cream

If garlic leaves prove evasive, I use 6 cloves of new, wet garlic instead, 
crushed flat and left in the hot cream for 15 minutes to infuse, then removed. 
I add pepper, but not salt, which I already added to the potato cooking water.

Serves 3-4 as side dish
new potatoes 450g
butter 20g
garlic leaves 85g
double cream 250ml
lemon zest 1 tsp
lemon juice 1 tsp


Scrub the new potatoes, but do not peel them. Either steam them in a colander 
over boiling water covered with a lid, or boil them in lightly salted water. 
They will need 8-15 minutes depending on their size.

Melt the butter in a saucepan, add the washed garlic leaves and let them cook 
for a minute or two, turning them in the butter as they soften. Once they have 
wilted, pour in the cream, then bring it to the boil. As the cream starts to 
boil, remove it quickly from the heat, season it lightly with pepper, the lemon 
juice and zest then cover with a lid or plate and set aside for 10 minutes for 
the cream and garlic to infuse.

Drain the potatoes and put them on a large serving plate. Using the back of a 
spoon or a potato masher, press firmly down on the potatoes to lightly crush 
them. Ideally the skins should be broken and the flesh open enough to take up 
the dressing, but not so heavily crushed that they fall to pieces.

Spoon the cream and softened garlic leaves over the potatoes, leave for a few 
minutes for the cream to soak in, then eat while still hot.

New potato salad with tomatoes, anchovies and toasted crumbs
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j92d%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j92d%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffeefec090084f3a8e03982e1d698f5569547e2f2%2F0_1743_4756_2854%2F4756.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nigel%20Slater%E2%80%99s%20new%20potato%20recipes&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j92d%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nigel+Slater%E2%80%99s+new+potato+recipes&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j92d%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffeefec090084f3a8e03982e1d698f5569547e2f2%2F0_1743_4756_2854%2F4756.jpg>
 Potato pitstop: Nigel Slater’s new potato salad with tomatoes, anchovies and 
toasted crumbs recipe. Photograph: Jonathan Lovekin for the Observer 
New potatoes are quite forgiving in terms of cooking time, but it is worth 
checking them for doneness after about 8 minutes. Depending on their size and 
variety, they can take anything up to 15 minutes. It is not often I put 
tomatoes in a potato salad, but here I think they work nicely together.

Serves 4
new potatoes 500g
tomatoes 500g
anchovy fillets 6


For the herb oil:
olive oil 5 tbsp
basil 8g
chives 10g
parsley 10g
red-wine vinegar 2 tbsp


For the crumbs:
white bread a thick slice
olive oil 3 tbsp


Scrub the new potatoes, removing any flaky skin, then boil in deep, lightly 
salted water for up to 15 minutes until tender to the point of a knife.

Make the herb oil: put the olive oil in a blender, add the basil leaves and 
stems, the chives and parsley leaves, then pour in the red-wine vinegar. 
Process for a few seconds until you have a thick dressing. I don’t think you 
need salt or pepper, but do as you wish, remembering the presence of the 
anchovy.

Blitz the bread to coarse, soft crumbs. Warm the olive oil in a shallow pan 
over a moderate heat then add the crumbs and let them cook for 3 or 4 minutes 
until golden and lightly crisp. Remove from heat.

Slice the tomatoes thickly. Drain the potatoes, cut each one in 2 or 3 thick 
slices then put them in a bowl with the tomatoes. Add the anchovies, whole or 
chopped as you wish. Pour over the herb dressing, turning everything over very 
gently with a large spoon to coat the potatoes and tomatoes evenly.

Transfer the salad to a large serving dish then scatter the toasted crumbs 
over the top.

Email Nigel at nigel.slater@observer.co.uk <mailto:nigel.slater@observer.co.uk>
 or follow him on Twitter@NigelSlater 
<https://twitter.com/NigelSlater?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
