
What do Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, 
“moist”, and Pantone 448 C have in common? They all demonstrate the powerful 
sway that disgust has over us.

The word “disgust” is overused, and is not well understood. It is one of the 
most powerful biological responses we have. It shapes how we think, feel and 
behave far more than we realise. It permeates and perverts politics, exercises 
an insidious influence on our laws, and helps trigger tragedies. Disgust at two 
men kissing, combined with self-disgust at his own homosexual feelings, 
motivated a gunman in Orlando to kill 49 people. And Donald Trump’s knack for 
triggering conservative America’s revulsion has helped propel him to his 
present political success.

Disgust is a survival mechanism. It evolved as a warning system to stop us 
putting things that would kill us into our mouths. That is why rotten food, 
faeces and slime provoke disgust across cultures. While disgust has oral 
origins, it soon acquired moral dimensions. The list of things that elicit 
disgust has grown to include things considered socially impure – largely, stuff 
that reminds of us our animal nature, such as bodily functions and sex. This 
explains whymany find the word “moist” disgusting 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/05/03/this-is-why-you-probably-hate-the-word-moist-according-to-scienc/>
: we associate it with bodily functions that society says are repellant.

The extent to which you were just grossed out by the word “moist” holds a clue 
as to whether you will vote to stay in the EU or leave. Sensitivity to disgust 
is closely tied to political orientation: more disgust-able people are more 
likely to be politically conservative. Indeed, researchers are able to predict 
with 95-98% accuracy where you sit on the liberal-conservative spectrumby 
measuring your reaction to an image showing an elicitor of core disgust such as 
bodily waste. 
<https://www.newscientist.com/article/dn26481-left-or-right-wing-brains-disgust-response-tells-all/>

Even if you are a political liberal, feeling disgust can temporarily make you 
more conservative.An experiment by psychologist David Pizarro 
<https://www.newscientist.com/article/mg21528731-800-the-yuck-factor-the-surprising-power-of-disgust>
 found that inducing disgust (in this case, via a foul-smelling spray) caused 
people to become more hostile towards gay men. He notes that while you cannot 
turn liberals into raging homophobes simply by grossing them out, disgust can 
be used to catalyse more conservative behaviour. Disgust triggers near a 
polling station, for example, might tilt undecided voters towards a more 
conservative decision.

The extent to which irrational feelings of disgust can cloud our moral 
judgment and affect our behaviour is terrifying when you consider how easy it 
is to provoke. If I show you a picture of a festering wound, you will feel 
visceral disgust. I cannot make you feel hate or love or fear quite so easily.

Sometimes, the power of disgust is used for the greater good, which is why it 
is frequently deployed in public health campaigns. In May, anti-smoking 
legislation came into effect that made all cigarette packs in the UK a single 
colour: Pantone 448 C, or opaque couché. According to market research, this is 
the world’s ugliest colour – respondents associated it with dirt, death, and 
tar. The rest of the pack is covered in gory images. The hope is that you will 
be too disgusted to bring yourself to put a cigarette in your mouth.

More often than not, however, disgust has been used in, well, more disgusting 
ways. Asthe philosopher Martha Nussbaum notes 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/From_Disgust_to_Humanity>, “throughout history, 
certain disgust properties – sliminess, bad smell, stickiness, decay, foulness 
– have been repeatedly and monotonously been associated with ... Jews, women, 
homosexuals, untouchables, lower-class people”. Disgust has evolved from a 
food-rejection system to a human-rejection system: a means to justify 
discrimination against a threatening other. Nazi propaganda spread the idea of 
the “smelly Jew” being a disease-ridden parasite to be exterminated. The Tutsis 
in Rwanda were described as cockroaches to be killed by the Hutu majority in 
that country’s 1994 genocide. Legal discrimination against LGBT people in 1950s 
Britain was justified not via rational arguments, but bysqueamishness about gay 
sex <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/From_Disgust_to_Humanity>.

Verbally contaminating minority groups with disgusting properties is the most 
common way that politicians use disgust – but some have gone even further. In 
2010, Carl Paladino of the Tea Party in New York Statesent out thousands of 
flyers impregnated with the smell of rotten garbage 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2010/09/11/nyregion/11ads.html> urging people to “get 
rid of the stink of corruption” alongside a gallery of Democrat faces.

Donald Trump is a self-confessed germaphobe and his propensity to disgust, 
particularly around female bodily functions, has become a running joke – 
comedian Jimmy Kimmel even produced a segment about it. But Trump’s abundant 
disgust is far from funny: he has tapped into the very worst instincts of 
conservative America and has reduced political discourse to:“Hillary Clinton 
urinates, she is disgusting, don’t vote for her.” 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2015/12/22/the-clever-trick-donald-trump-was-playing-when-he-called-hillary-clintons-bathroom-visit-too-disgusting/>

When we try to make sense of tragedies such as Orlando or the killing of Jo 
Cox, we use words such as hate and fear. When we try to make sense of Trump’s 
success, we use the same words. But it is impossible to interpret these events 
because they aren’t driven by sense, but by our sensibilities. Disgust is a 
primitive emotion exerting a primitive pull on contemporary politics.

Understanding – and not underestimating – the role that it plays in shaping 
our laws and mores is essential if we want to combat a political system that is 
growing ever more putrid.
