
You report (Burnham urges MPs to back ‘Hillsborough law’ for families 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/12/andy-burnham-hillsborough-law-policing-and-crime-bill>
, 13 June) that Labour are urging the government to go ahead with the second 
phase of the Leveson inquiry into the media, but that the government has said 
it wants to wait until all criminal investigations into phone hacking are 
complete before it commissions a new inquiry.

This would not be a new inquiry. Leveson part 2 was commissioned in July 2011 
when its terms of reference were set out, alongside those of part 1. The prime 
minister promised publicly then, and again in November 2012, that it would take 
place when prosecutions were over.

It is a shabby state of affairs when, after the conviction of dozens of public 
officials for taking bribes from newspapers, and the damning findings of the 
Hillsborough inquests, including evidence of a police and media cover-up, the 
government appears to be trying to wriggle out of a promise to inquire into 
police corruption.
Dr Evan Harris
Joint executive director, Hacked Off

• I fully support Andy Burnham’s call to commence Leveson part 2. There is 
much unfinished business to be investigated concerning the relationship between 
various authorities and the media, not least the relationship between special 
advisers (spads) and the press. We frequently hear journalists quote sources 
“close to” ministers or No 10. These sources are anonymous and unaccountable 
yet pass on information to the media on behalf of those in power. No public 
official should be permitted to provide backdoor briefings to the press. 
Journalists and politicians know the identities of these sources; the only 
people who don’t know are the public who pay for them.
Andy Trotter
Former chief constable and chair of Acpo media advisory group 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
