
When the temperature plummets and the ground is frozen, there is not much to 
tempt even a hardy gardener outside, but the warm fug of a heated glasshouse is 
extremely alluring. The Victorians gave birth to the idea of a "winter garden" 
as they needed somewhere to show off the newly discovered tropical plants they 
were bringing back from all corners of the globe.

Joseph Paxton, best known for his Crystal Palace of 1851, had already designed 
a large glasshouse at Chatsworth and a smaller building to house his giant 
Victoria amazonica water lilies. Seeing them there, the head of botany at the 
University of Oxford Botanic Garden (botanic-garden.ox.ac.uk 
<http://www.botanic-garden.ox.ac.uk>) returned to build his own lily house. But 
he tried to charge local people a shilling to see them and they were so 
outraged, the plants weren't grown again at Oxford for 150 years.

Now only the pool remains and a newer structure keeps the temperature at a 
cosy 18C. This is the perfect humid environment for growing bromeliads, orchids 
and bananas which would struggle in the dry air created by central heating.

Ordinary conservatories can be used for these exotics, but running costs are 
high without double glazing and humidity must be raised by putting trays of 
water on radiators or standing pots on trays of pebbles filled with water.

Edible bananas can be grown only indoors, with a high temperature and high 
humidity or they won't produce fruit and will be susceptible to pests such as 
red spider mite

Even in a small conservatory, a pond may be a realistic, if unusual, 
possibility - it can be dug down into the ground or built on top of an existing 
concrete floor

The Victoria cruziana lilies at Oxford produce their pie dish leaves in a few 
months after seeds have germinated. They can support the weight of a small child

Tropical plants from forest habitats, such as bromeliads which mostly grow in 
tree canopies, will thrive in conservatories but are naturally adapted to the 
lower light levels of our homes

The lotus flower Nelumbo, which can be grown in a small pond or just a large 
container of water, can survive at temperatures down to 5C
