
Copenhagen is cool. Now. End of story. But for those who want to see where the 
city is going, there are arguably two main directions to take – west, across 
the lakes via Queen Louise’s bridge to Nørrebro, or south-west of the city 
centre to Vesterbro, the former red light district turned happening hub. Both 
are begging to be explored by bike, and while they definitely have a more 
breathable, village-y feel when compared to the compact old centre, both cram 
in more urban delights than some major cities.

Related: Gastronomy, art and design: the best of classy Copenhagen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uncover-cool-copenhagen/2016/may/23/gastronomy-art-and-design-the-best-of-classy-copenhagen>

It’s anybody’s guess what Hans Christian Andersen would have made of Nørrebro. 
Just a stone’s throw from his grave in the bucolic Assistens cemetery – which 
is as lovely as any city park – are some of the coolest, funkiest streets in 
Copenhagen. Cobbled Jægersborggade, with its Michelin-starred restaurants, 
third-wave cafes, wine bars and vintage shops, is already established as a sort 
of edgy alternative to Strøget, the popular retail promenade in central 
Copenhagen. Of course, it’s hipster heaven and you can feast on organic 
porridge, browse for retro gear and explore the high end of Copenhagen’s coffee 
scene, but there are also some 40 galleries showcasing work from the city’s 
famous art and design scene. While the accent here is on youth culture, plenty 
of more senior collectors and curators are also to be found scanning the art 
spaces for the next big thing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jb32%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jb32%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe61191eef9d4255bc90b754564ef9bb7db0ace5a%2F0_338_2700_3375%2F2700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Music%2C%20nightlife%20and%20hip%20districts%3A%20the%20best%20of%20cool%20Copenhagen&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jb32%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Music%2C+nightlife+and+hip+districts%3A+the+best+of+cool+Copenhagen&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jb32%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe61191eef9d4255bc90b754564ef9bb7db0ace5a%2F0_338_2700_3375%2F2700.jpg>
 Assistens cemetery, where Hans Christian Andersen is buried. Photograph: 
VisitDenmark 
Before leaving Nørrebro, make sure you pedal through Superkilen – not only is 
it a kilometre-long park with bike lanes, it’s a public space dedicated to 
Copenhagen’s beating multicultural heart. Vesterbro, which can very easily be 
segued into the same cycle trip as a cruise through Nørrebro, boasts its own 
Meatpacking District, with dive bars and fine dining set side by side, much 
like its New York equivalent. Divided into white, grey and brown sections – 
according to the colour of their buildings – the once grubby, unloved area is 
now a major nightlife destination for students and party people.

Whether you want to shop or window shop, head to Istedgade for antiques, 
designer gear and cycling clobber, or Vesterbrogade for the best in furniture 
and kids’ clothing. You’ll find your walk punctuated with fab restaurants and 
cosy coffee shops, and a turn down tucked-away Værnedamsvej will reveal several 
smart delis, cafes and restaurants.

The Carlsberg museum is part of an interesting development for Vesterbro. The 
enormous former brewing plant is being transformed into a “microcity”, 
comprising a museum showcasing the history of the famous lager, a couple of 
bars, a restaurant, and a pop-up area where locals sell second-hand clothes. 
There’s also a “climbing forest” – that is, a climbing trail along wooden 
platforms and zipwires.

Finally, whiz over to Papirøen or Paper Island – where the newsprint for the 
Danish Press was once stored – to see Copenhagen’s Street Food Market. Snacks, 
wraps, full meals and deli dishes from all over the world are served out of the 
back of trucks, and can be eaten in the warehouse halls or al fresco on the 
waterfront. The accent is on tastiness and sustainability – nothing comes from 
far away and everything is made fresh on site. Oh, and a meal costs from just 
DKK50 – about a fiver.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jb32%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jb32%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc52234346a1a29cffe7faf4a873fa53b63be3e43%2F0_166_2700_1620%2F2700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Music%2C%20nightlife%20and%20hip%20districts%3A%20the%20best%20of%20cool%20Copenhagen&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jb32%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Music%2C+nightlife+and+hip+districts%3A+the+best+of+cool+Copenhagen&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jb32%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc52234346a1a29cffe7faf4a873fa53b63be3e43%2F0_166_2700_1620%2F2700.jpg>
 The harbour bath at Islands Brygge. Photograph: VisitDenmark 
If you’re not a cyclist, you can do all of the above on foot. Whatever mode of 
transport you opt for, wind up your edgeland exploration with a swim in the 
harbour bath at Islands Brygge – an urban pool open year-round that can 
accommodate up to 600 swimmers. On sunny days it fills up and is a major 
meeting place.

Alternatively, head to the award-winning Kastrup sea bath, or “the snail” as 
the locals have dubbed it – which is built of an African hardwood called azobé 
and is simply one of the most beautiful bathing structures on earth. The 
designer dip … only in Copenhagen.

For more information and inspiration, go to visitdenmark.co.uk 
<http://www.visitdenmark.co.uk/en-gb/denmark/your-guide-urban-copenhagen?utm_campaign=UK_Copenhagen_Urban&utm_medium=textlink&utm_source=guardian&utm_content=kampagnesite&utm_term=>

For the lastest news and pics, visit Denmark on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/denmark> and Instagram 
<https://www.instagram.com/govisitdenmark/>
