
The five-second rule is based on the not-entirely-scientific belief that 
bacteria cannot contaminate food within five seconds, so you won’t get sick 
eating things you have picked up from the floor.

The first person to investigate this urban myth scientifically was Jillian 
Clarke, an American high-school student, during an apprenticeship in a 
microbiology laboratory 
<http://news.aces.illinois.edu/news/if-you-drop-it-should-you-eat-it-scientists-weigh-5-second-rule>
 at the University of Illinois in 2003. Clarke and her colleagues inoculated 
rough and smooth tiles with the bacteriumE coli (certain strains of which cause 
stomach cramps, diarrhoea and vomiting) and put gummy bears or cookies on the 
tiles for five seconds. She found thatE coli was transferred to gummy bears 
within five seconds, more so from smooth than rough tiles. As a side issue, 
Clarke also established in her work that university floors are remarkably clean 
and that people are more likely to pick up cookies from the floor than 
cauliflower.

Related: Should I let my child take more risks? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jun/14/should-i-let-my-child-take-more-risks>

Paul Dawson, professor of food science at Clemson University in South Carolina 
is a five-second-rule expert.His 2007 study, published in the Journal of 
Applied Microbiology <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17381737>, found that 
the dirtiness of the floor was more important than how long the food lay on it. 
His study was a progression from Clarke’s because it measured the amount of 
contamination. Using bread or bologna, he showed that it was better to drop 
either of them on carpet inoculated with salmonella, where less than 1% of the 
bacteria were transferred, than on tiles or wood, where up to 70% got on to the 
food.A similar study from Aston University 
<http://www.aston.ac.uk/about/news/releases/2014/march/five-second-food-rule-does-exist/>
 found that, as soon as food hit the floor, it became contaminated – especially 
on smooth surfaces – but that the number of bacteria on the food increased up 
to 10 times between lying from three seconds to 30 seconds on the floor.

Solution


Dawson says that the five-second rule is simply not true because, if food hits 
a virulent brand ofE coli, even the small number of bacteria it attracts 
immediately will make you sick. He doesn’t eat food when it falls on the floor. 
The very young or old shouldn’t use the five-second rule as their immune 
systems may not cope with even tiny amounts of bacteria. If the floor is 
filthy, then the rule is invalid on the grounds of grossness anyway. But the 
likelihood is that, for most of us, eating food off the floor isn’t going to 
hurt us. So if you are very hungry and you must pick food off the floor, then 
do it quickly, and preferably off a carpet.

• This article was amended on 28 September 2015 because an earlier version 
misnamed Aston University as Ashton University.

