
The EU referendum <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> campaign 
is expected to resume tentatively on Sunday after hostilities wereabruptly 
halted 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/17/morning-briefing-eu-referendum-campaigning-suspended-jo-cox>
 by thekilling of Labour MP Jo Cox 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/16/jo-cox-killing-shooting-mp-birstall-west-yorkshire>
, with politicians on both sides of the debate appearing at events and on 
television ahead of the final few days before the vote.

With just days left before the referendum on Britain’s future in the European 
Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>, MPs will gather in Westminster on 
Monday to remember the MP for Batley and Spen, who was killed outside her 
constituency surgery on Thursday.

Both campaigns were immediately suspended in the aftermath of the attack on 
Cox, and Jeremy Corbyn and David Cameron made anunprecedented joint visit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/17/david-cameron-and-jeremy-corbyn-to-pay-joint-tribute-to-jo-cox>
 to her constituency on Friday to pay their respects.

Related: Remain needs to change tack on immigration – or risk Brexit | 
Jonathan Freedland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/14/brexit-labour-migration-controls>

But campaigners are acutely conscious that there is little time left to 
convince the public of their cause in the historic vote, and a poll released on 
Saturday morning showed the remain campaign had pulled ahead on the final 
weekend.

 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Fdavid-cameron-jeremy-corbyn-jo-cox-birstall-video&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Fdavid-cameron-jeremy-corbyn-jo-cox-birstall-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98She%20died%20doing%20her%20job%E2%80%99%3A%20Cameron%20and%20Corbyn%20honour%20Jo%20Cox%20in%20Birstall%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Fdavid-cameron-jeremy-corbyn-jo-cox-birstall-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98She+died+doing+her+job%E2%80%99%3A+Cameron+and+Corbyn+honour+Jo+Cox+in+Birstall+-+video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Fdavid-cameron-jeremy-corbyn-jo-cox-birstall-video&media=>
‘She died doing her job’: Cameron and Corbyn honour Jo Cox in Birstall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2016/jun/17/david-cameron-jeremy-corbyn-jo-cox-birstall-video>
The UK-wide BMG telephone poll for the Herald put support for remain at 46% 
and backing for leave on 43%, with 11% undecided or unwilling to say. Excluding 
this group, 52% were in favour of staying in the EU, with 48% backing Brexit. 
By using a series of questions to calculate the likely voting intention of 
people who say that they will vote but have yet to decide or do not want to 
say, BMG put the remain camp ahead on 53% compared to 47%. The survey of 1,064 
voters was carried out between 10-15 June, before the fatal shooting and 
stabbing of Cox.

Scores of events up and down the country had been cancelled since Thursday; 
but a full schedule of appearances by senior campaign figures on the political 
television shows on Sunday morning, including Corbyn and Michael Gove on the 
BBC’s Marr on Sunday, is planned to go ahead, though they are expected to 
strike a markedly less combative tone.

A senior spokesman for Vote Leave, which has cancelled a rally in Birmingham 
on Saturday but is expected to go ahead with an event in London on Sunday, 
said: “There’s a democratic process, but we have to reflect the mood of the 
country as well, so it’s striking that balance.”

He said it would be the wrong response to the attacks to make subjects such as 
immigration taboo. “You can’t start thinking that you don’t talk about some 
things: the central subject of the debate is the same,” he said, adding however 
that the tone might be less “brash” – with a planned event involvingBoris 
Johnson <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> on a hovercraft cancelled, 
for example.

Sadiq Khan and other senior politicians have pleaded for a change of tone 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/17/sadiq-khan-calls-for-more-respectful-tone-in-eu-referendum-debate>
 in the EU referendum debate, as dozens more weekend campaign events were 
called off. The Labour London mayor said the whole country “just needs to pause 
and reflect” and make sure the debate is not marred by the “climate of hatred, 
of poison, of negativity, of cynicism” that has characterised it so far.

Khan will appear at the BBC’s EU referendum 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> debate at Wembley arena on 
Tuesday opposite Boris Johnson. A spokeswoman for the BBC said the debate will 
be proceeding as planned, with thousands of people expected to attend.

In a striking intervention on Friday, the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, 
alsowarned of the dangers 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/17/angela-merkel-urges-eu-referendum-campaigns-to-moderate-language>
 arising from the divisive language often deployed by politicians. 
“Exaggerations, and radicalisation of part of the language do not help foster 
an atmosphere of respect,” she said. “We know how important it is to draw 
limits: in choice of speech, in choice of argument, and also in choice of 
disparaging argument.”

Both party leaders, and their counterparts on the leave side, will have to 
tread extremely carefully to avoid accusations that they are using Cox’s death 
to further their political aims. Cameron and Corbyn have so far limited their 
political remarks to calls for democracy to be protected, but former Labour 
prime ministerGordon Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/17/jo-cox-legacy-end-downward-spiral-political-culture-tackling-prejudice-intolerance>
 became the first to make a link between to Cox’s commitment to a nation built 
on tolerance and a referendum campaign that has descended into exploitation of 
fears about immigrants.

Politicians have avoided drawing any public conclusions about the impact of 
the killing on the referendum outcome, but aides acknowledge it could affect 
the psychology of voters and are grappling with how best to proceed. There has 
been no suggestion of postponing the vote, because that would require new 
legislation.

Britain Stronger In Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, 
the official remain campaign, said it was scrapping all events on Saturday, 
including rallies and street stalls. “Volunteers may choose to continue 
door-to-door leafleting in their own local areas, but the campaign nationally 
will not be doing so,” said its director, Will Straw.

Labour’s own remain camp also said it was suspending all activity until 
Monday, with sources saying they were reviewing all campaign material to make 
sure there were no personal attacks or inappropriate language.

Ukip called off a countrywide tour with its battlebus until at least Monday.

After months of bitter attacks 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/16/nigel-farage-defends-ukip-breaking-point-poster-queue-of-migrants>
 between the rival sides, a senior remain source said campaigning would be less 
aggressive than planned for its final week. “This will change the tone of the 
rest of the campaign, there is no question of that,” he said. Some MPs also 
began to suggest that Cox might be honoured by a collective attempt to make 
politics less vitriolic.

Stephen Kinnock <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/stephen-kinnock>, the 
Labour MP for Aberavon and a friend of his counterpart for Batley and Spen, 
said there was a need to “change the tone forever and reflect on what Jo stood 
for her whole life”. Anna Turley, the Labour MP for Redcar, said it was time 
for a more respectful tone in political discourse. Anna Soubry, a business 
minister, said it would be time to “reset the dial on political debate, comment 
and discourse” after the referendum.

Others, however, were concerned that political debate had become so toxic that 
it might take a long time to change. Mike Gapes, theLabour 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> MP for Ilford who has been on the 
receiving end of abuse on social media, said: “Cameron and Corbyn have been 
showing leadership and maturity which is what is needed, but it’s got to be 
long term. And I’m worried we’re still not going to get that from some people. 
We’ve seen the Ukip poster that is similar to Nazi propaganda and this debate 
has been very aggressive, and I’m concerned that not everyone is going to be 
mature.”
