
The last couple of weeks have seen the start of the main block of marathon 
training, for Berlin at the end of September. So it was a bit of a switch to go 
out yesterday and race a mile. TheAmba City of London mile 
<http://www.cityoflondonmile.co.uk/>, though, has become one of my favourite 
events of the year. It’s brilliantly organised, a fabulous course on closed 
roads around St Paul’s Cathedral, you get a medal, water and there’s a goody 
bag for little racers. You can enter multiple waves. How much, you ask? Oh, 
it’s free. I don’t know how they do it, but if you were judging races on value 
for money, I think we have an annual winner …

I ran in the women’s wave and the family wave. I was pleasantly surprised – 
once my lungs stopped screaming at me – with my time, 5min 44sec, which is 
quicker than last year despite coming at the end of avery high mileage week 
(for me) <https://www.strava.com/athletes/2812473>. But more importantly, my 
two little mini-racers 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BG1ZyMxgPBK/?taken-by=katehelencarter&hl=en> both 
scored PBs. This is undoubtedly one of the best things about this race – 
inspiring little runners to get out and try their best and, hopefully, plant 
the seeds of a lifetime’s habit. Or at least a love of race bling …

Unfortunately for me, a mile is clearly not enough for marathon training, so 
post-races I ran 17 miles home, via quite a few laps of Battersea Park. If 
racing a mile is a lung-bursting, short but oh-so-sharp torture, then a long 
run afterwards is a protracted scream of legs v head. I had to give myself at 
least three stern talkings-to and promise myself a very large pizza to get 
through it. But I did it, so one Franco Manca <http://www.francomanca.co.uk/> 
number three was my reward (cake sponsorship for this blog has inexplicably 
failed to materialise, so I’m moving to Plan B).

So, tell me about your weekend, fellow runners. I saw quite a few familiar 
faces at the City Mile – did you race it too? Or were other start lines 
beckoning? As always, I want to hear about your races, your training, your 
injury woes, your questions and your miles.
