
Labour <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> moderates have used the 
first day of the party’s conference to start a fightback against Jeremy 
Corbyn’s leadership, saying they welcomed the end of tightly controlled debates 
but warned that confusion over touchstone issues would put off voters.

Related: Corbyn suffers blow as Trident vote is rejected at party conference 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/27/corbyn-trident-vote-rejected-labour-party-conference>

The warning came as Spencer Livermore, the party’s general election strategist,
writing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/27/labour-right-sect-blairites-brownites>
 in the Guardian, said modernisers “had been reduced to little more than a 
narrow sect, itself divided and insular”. Modernisers needed to unite and end 
the narcissism of small differences between Blairites and Brownites, he said.

Lord Falconer, the shadow justice secretary and now one of the leading 
moderates inside the shadow cabinet, said Corbyn’s willingness to end 
“zipped-up debate” was exhilarating, but warned Labour would have to, at some 
point, come to a collective view on foreign and economic policy rather than 
hold two opposing policies.

He again warned he would have to quit the shadow cabinet if the party backed 
unilateral nuclear disarmament, but said there would be chances to prepare a 
more nuanced view in the months ahead.

Falconer and other moderates are treading a delicate tightrope respecting 
Corbyn’s electoral mandate and open politics, but at the same time refusing to 
give ground on policy.

Tristram Hunt, the former shadow education secretary, and another leading 
moderniser, said his wing of the party felt like the inside of a pig’s head 
after a Piers Gaveston party, adding “we need to get the taste of defeat out of 
our mouths”.

There were signs of a grassroots fightback against Corbyn when Labour First, 
the long-standing rightwing group, had to hold a chaotic fringe meeting in the 
street due to the large numbers attending. Former shadow cabinet members Rachel 
Reeves, Yvette Cooper, Ivan Lewis and Liam Byrne addressed the meeting, as well 
as the deputy leaderTom Watson <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/tom-watson>
, who urged unity.

Making her first political appearance since her maternity leave, Reeves said 
“we will be back” and went on to say that those on the right of the party 
should go on the doorstep to say the leadership did not represent the party. 
Richard Angell, the director of the Progress thinktank, got the biggest cheer 
of the meeting by saying “we need to rally against the Trots”.

Byrne, the former Treasury secretary, told the crowd his wing of the party 
needed to combat the left’s narrative that party moderates did not have 
principles. “The left in the party does not have a monopoly of virtue, it does 
not have a monopoly on the political conscience of this party. We joined the 
Labour party for the same reason and we too are determined to do something 
about it,” he said.

Andy Burnham <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/andyburnham>, the defeated 
Labour leadership contender, told a fringe meeting: “The Labour party has voted 
for change and it is beholden on everybody in the party to deliver it. Both 
sides need to take something from each other. We have to accept that the style 
of politics in recent times – the shallow ‘retail politics’ approach – has left 
people cold and alienated. But others need to realise that politics cannot be 
an intellectual pursuit that makes us feel good about ourselves but takes us 
further from power.”

Speaking on BBC Radio 4, Falconer said he disagreed with Lord Mandelson, the 
former business secretary, who has said modernisers should not move against 
Corbyn until the national party has realised he is unelectable. Many moderates 
probably agree with Mandelson, but would prefer not to be as explicit as he was 
in a strategy paper leaked to the Guardian.

Corbyn has said he wants to change the way the party makes policy, hinting 
that party conference, described by him as the People’s Parliament, will have 
greater authority. He has insisted he is relaxed about divisions being aired in 
the party.

Angela Eagle <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/angela-eagle>, the new 
business secretary and the chair of the national policy forum (NPF), announced 
there would be a review of the way the party makes policy, but stressed the 
elected NPF would not be wound up, but instead enhanced to give members greater 
say. She wants the policy forum to be better resourced with more open policy.

 Watson said: “That kind of spin doctor politics, where some sort of graduate 
second jobber decides a line and a shadow cabinet repeat in at TV and radio 
stations, those days are gone.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cmqq%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cmqq%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20380fb861399a1c048387a2bf3de69496b37d0b%2F398_1492_2941_4408%2F2941.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Labour%20moderates%20warn%20Corbyn%20party%20must%20be%20clear%20on%20key%20policies&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cmqq%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Labour+moderates+warn+Corbyn+party+must+be+clear+on+key+policies&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cmqq%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20380fb861399a1c048387a2bf3de69496b37d0b%2F398_1492_2941_4408%2F2941.jpg>
 Lord Falconer Photograph: AIecsandra Raluca Dragoi for the Guardian 
Falconer acknowledged the anger in the rank and file expressed in the Corbyn 
victory, saying: “I do think very strongly that the doors are open to a proper 
policy debate and that it is a good thing the membership are dislocated from 
leaders of the party. The public generally are fed up with zipped-up 
politicians speaking to an agreed script.”

Related: Mandelson: it’s too early to force Jeremy Corbyn out 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/24/mandelson-corbyns-critics-wait-public-negative-view-force-out>

He repeatedly said the new leadership should put their views to the test, 
defining the criteria by which policies should be judged, including the policy 
itself, its practicality and whether it is attractive to the electorate.

But he stressed: “If the party reaches a position I fundamentally disagree 
with, then that makes my position difficult”. On some issues, he said, it would 
be possible for the party to hold different views on the frontbench but he said 
there had to be an agreed position on the fundamentals of the economy and on 
foreign policy.

Livermore said: “The essential pre-condition for a successful analysis now is 
unity among Labour’s modernisers. The problem that bedevilled Labour in 
government is the same problem that still blights our understanding today: the 
historic and continuing fracturing of new Labour between Tony Blair and Gordon 
Brown. As a result, we have seen little in the past few weeks other than 
factional scapegoating of individuals, when the truth is that all of us share 
responsibility for our defeat.

“This factionalism already seems incredibly outdated, and by the next election 
will be ancient history. Given our much-diminished position within the party, 
we can no longer afford to indulge in the narcissism of small differences. 
Anyone who cares about us being a party of power, not merely protest, should 
get over this two-decade-old split once and for all. Indeed, debate would be 
vastly improved if the words ‘Blairite’ and ‘Brownite’ were never uttered again.


“Far from being in touch with working people, we had descended into 
managerialism and technocracy, fatally amplified by the expenses crisis. Our 
hard-won reputation for economic competence had been ceded by misreading the 
public mood on the levels of public spending. And, organisationally, it means 
beginning the long journey back to economic credibility, by finding an answer 
to what Labour is for when there is little money to spend”.







