
Good leadership is often credited with being able to save the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>. For individuals willing to take on 
leadership roles, the rewards can be great. However, with a general feeling of 
demoralisation in the workforce and services facing unprecedented demand, the 
challenges are even greater.

Marcus Powell, director of leadership and organisational development at The 
King’s Fund <http://www.kingsfund.org.uk/>, recognises that leaders get 
“buffeted in all sorts of situations” and that they must have the ability to 
absorb problems and make sure their team feels safe.

Related: Developing individual leaders is not enough to save the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/jun/03/developing-individual-leaders-is-not-enough-to-save-the-nhs>

He says that interference from the government and national bodies holds 
leaders back from fulfilling their potential: “The politics of healthcare gets 
in the way of the job people need to do ... the interference is a drag on 
people’s resilience.”

Powell says that every member of staff working in the NHS should demonstrate 
leadership qualities. He says leaders should foster a culture whereby employees 
feel able to speak out if standards slip in order to improve care.

People should explore their responsibilities as a leader and learn how to 
listen, empathise and create conditions where people feel cared for – it’s 
impossible to lead a complex organisation as a cut-throat, coercive or bullying 
leader, he says.

‘If clinical leadership isn’t visible, morale is affected’

Leadership is not a skill limited to the top roles in the health service. As a 
junior doctor who returned to medicine full-time this year, Na’eem Ahmed, a 
radiology registrar at St George’s hospital, knows only too well the need for 
good clinical leadership throughout the ward.

“The best places you’ll work at have strong clinical leadership, with great 
role models to aspire to. Where clinical leadership hasn’t been visible, morale 
is affected and the quality of the care will be affected as well.” he says.


“At the moment the NHS is under a lot of stress.” adds Ahmed, who was also a 
clinical fellow for Prof Sir Bruce Keogh, NHS England’s medical director. “If 
you’re going to put your head above the parapet, you need extra resilience.”

However, the NHS could learn a thing or two about leadership from other areas 
says Bob Pearce, deputy director of service delivery atGloucestershire 
hospitals NHS f <http://www.gloshospitals.nhs.uk/>oundation trust 
<http://www.gloshospitals.nhs.uk/>. He brings aspects of what he learned during 
his army training to his current role. “On the face of it, people might imagine 
the army is very hierarchical, but the fundamentals of what we’re trying to 
achieve – motivate people to deliver their best outputs under significant 
pressures – are the same.” he says.

He recognises, however, that the health service and the army have some 
different challenges. In the army, every officer is trained at Sandhurst in the 
basic values and standards that they will need throughout their career. Routes 
into healthcare are more varied, so people have a different view of how to do 
things and what is important. This can be difficult, because not everyone 
starts at an agreed standard.

There are also differences in the way decisions are made, says Pearce. In the 
army, he took decisions more readily using his intuition. In the health 
service, however, there is a drive to “cross all the t’s and dot all the i’s”.

‘Too often we look for our own traits in other people’

Karen Lynas, deputy managing director, NHS Leadership Academy 
<http://www.leadershipacademy.nhs.uk/>, says: “What we should be thinking about 
is creating jobs that are doable which you can enjoy and thrive in.”

Many agree that the other qualities needed to be a good and effective leader 
in today’s health service include being able to set an example to others, 
decision-making, taking responsibility, a sense of humour, compassion and 
empathy. On top of this, you need a technical knowledge of the area you’re 
working in as well as a strong moral compass and incredible interpersonal 
skills.

Related: The NHS is moving backwards on race equality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/may/31/nhs-moving-backwards-race-equality>

Despite challenging conditions in the NHS and the extensive requirements of 
successful leadership, Lynas believes that the problem is not related to a 
shortage of talent. Instead, she laments the lack of diversity at the top and 
says that recognising and promoting talent should be considered to be a more 
important part of a leader’s job than it currently is.

“Few recognise that this is a big part of the role of the leader – to look for 
difference,” she says. “We do this incredibly badly in the NHS ... that’s why 
we have a shocking level of white men at the top. It’s just a disgrace in 2016; 
I think it’s because too often we look for our own traits in other people.”

In such a climate, nurturing and developing leaders is essential – yet Lynas 
feels that the health service doesn’t promote leadership enough. “In the NHS 
we’re not proud enough to say that leadership is really important. It’s still 
regarded as ‘nice to have’, which misses the point of what leadership is.”


Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
