
How far has higher education come in improving opportunities for women in the 
sector? To mark International Women’s Day, we gathered anexpert panel 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/mar/03/live-qa-how-far-have-we-come-on-gender-equality-in-he>
 from HR, policy and academia to share their ideas and advice. Here’s what we 
discovered:

The pay gap calls for transparency

Related: The scientist's dilemma: can you be a parent, a partner, a friend 
#AndAScientist? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/mar/07/the-scientists-dilemma-can-you-be-a-parent-a-partner-a-friend-andascientist>

Ellen Pugh, senior policy adviser at the Equality Challenge Unit: All 
university employees can discuss their pay. However, it is an issue that many 
people like to keep private and there can be legitimate reasons for 
differences. It would help if more universities published their equal pay 
audits, then employees could scrutinise these.

Smita Jamdar, a lawyer with a focus on universities: Publishing attributable 
salary information is clearly problematic from a legal perspective. However, 
greater transparency on the equality or otherwise of pay between men and women 
will be important in scrutinising and driving change.


Michael MacNeil, head of bargaining and negotiations at the University and 
College Union: A lack of transparency over pay is an issue within HE. We can 
see that where employees are paid in accord with relatively well-understood 
negotiated agreements, the pay gap is smaller than where it is not. This is 
true across the economy and also within HE.

Unconscious bias needs attention

Kim Frost, director of human resources at the University of London, and chair 
of Universities Human Resources association: Use of inclusive language in job 
adverts is well known, but I have seen evidence that factors such as the 
pictures hanging in a room can influence the confidence of those in meetings or 
doing presentations. Evidence suggests female applicants perform discernibly 
better when not surrounded by pictures of elderly white males. Awareness of 
this sort of thing can incrementally achieve a lot.


Smita Jamdar: There are a lot of things we can at least try. For example, 
leadership training to address unconscious bias in recruitment and performance 
management. Such things may or may not work to change culture, but they need to 
be tried consistently and over a period of time before we can conclude one way 
or another.

We should acknowledge intersectionality

Related: Casual contracts are ruining universities for staff and students 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/feb/12/casual-contracts-are-ruining-universities-for-staff-and-students>

Kalwant Bhopal, professor of education and social justice at the University of 
Southampton: There is evidence to suggest pay discrepancies between those from 
black and minority ethnic (BME) backgrounds and their white colleagues. We also 
need to look at how intersectionality plays out, such as how the experiences of 
a working-class black woman will be different to those of a middle-class Indian 
woman. A greater acceptance of these factors is often overlooked.


Kim Frost: There is certainly more work to be done on equality of pay and 
opportunity for staff who are female, or BME, or part-time, for example, 
because looking just at gender or one other characteristic can be misleading. 
But this needs accurate data and analysis as well as an investment of time and 
effort. Analysing intersectionality is a much more complex thing and I am not 
sure we have done much more than dip a toe in it so far.

We’ve achieved a lot, but we have a long way to go

Emily Bell, a teaching associate at the University of Bristol and media and 
events co-ordinator forSoapbox Science <http://soapboxscience.org/>: We have 
come on leaps and bounds in the past decade in terms of gender equality in HE, 
but we still have some way to go before we see equality at all levels. 
Ultimately, changing higher education is all about changing the culture of 
everyone, breaking down stereotypes, removing unconscious bias and realising 
that it is not just women doing teaching and men the research. There are some 
fantastic initiatives out there to help us tackle gender inequality in HE, but 
for them to succeed it is going to need all of us to support them.

Related: I have a disability. When do I tell a prospective employer? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/mar/11/i-have-a-disability-when-do-i-tell-a-prospective-employer>

Ellen Pugh: Research has shown that the Athena Swan Charter is helping to 
improve equality in the sector and more institutions and their departments are 
signing up than ever before. We need to focus on enabling the women who do 
choose a career in HE to progress, whether they are on an academic, 
professional or support staff contract. Giving appropriate recognition to 
teaching in promotions criteria will help and the Teaching Excellence Framework 
is likely to signal significant change for the sector in this regard. We also 
need to keep focusing on issues of work-life balance and workload management.

Louise Morley, professor of education at the University of Sussex: We have 
come a long way in terms of increasing the number of women as undergraduate 
students (although this is not evenly distributed across disciplines). We have 
come a long way in the development of feminist theory and research. We need to 
apply the understandings of gender equity that have been developed 
theoretically to the everyday practices in universities.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com

