
In April [2015] opponents of [President Pierre Nkurunziza’s] third term began 
to organise. The ruling party organised two big demonstrations supporting a 
third term. These were more than counterbalanced by the decision of the 
Catholic church to oppose the idea, by the creation of the “Stop the Third Term 
<http://htmburundi.org/index.php/en/about-us/>” movement by 15 organisations, 
and by pressure from abroad, notably from the UN secretary general and the 
American secretary of state.

On 30 April the constitutional court gave Nkurunziza the decision he wanted, 
despite having earlier endorsed theArusha accord 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/africa/901922.stm>’s [a peace deal signed in 
Arusha, Tanzania, in 2000 
<http://africacenter.org/spotlight/burundi-why-the-arusha-accords-are-central/>
] clear indication that presidents should serve for only two terms. The 
vice-president of the court, Sylvère Nimpagaritse, fled the country saying that 
the six other members faced “enormous pressure and even death threats”. His 
brave remarks effectively destroyed the president’s chances of having the 
election result seen as acceptable by his critics inside the country and abroad.

The following morning demonstrators took to the streets 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/gallery/2015/may/01/burundi-protests-president-third-term-in-pictures>
. Mostly young men, Tutsi and Hutu, they set up road blocks and effectively 
stopped normal life in the capital. The police reacted ferociously and were 
supported by members of the party youth league, theimbonerakure. 

On 3 May, the government marked world press freedom day by banning African 
Public Radio <http://www.rpa.bi/> [a public station in Burundi, known by its 
French abbreviation RPA] from broadcasting and stopping other free radio 
stations from broadcasting outside the capital. They also closed theMaison de 
la Presse <http://www.maisondelapresse-burundi.org/> [a group that supports and 
defends the press], so the journalists had to meet instead at the premises of
Iwacu <http://www.iwacu-burundi.org/> [a weekly Burundian journal], whose 
courageous editor, Antoine Kaburahe, said in his speech: “The independent media 
opened their columns and their radios to the CNDD-FDD [the main rebel movement, 
which is now the governing party] when it said it was fighting for freedom. 
Today they are the ones who are closing our radios and stopping us from 
working.”

Related: 'Why does no one mention Burundi?' asks winner of new humanitarian 
award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/11/marguerite-barankitse-why-does-no-one-mention-burundi-winner-humanitarian-award>

Then, on 13 May, came the day of reckoning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/13/burundi-army-officer-says-he-is-dismissing-countrys-president>
. Iwacu reported that a column of armoured cars and pick-ups carrying machine 
guns drove into town, followed by an immense crowd of jubilant demonstrators. 
RPA began broadcasting again. Crowds surrounded police headquarters to liberate 
their colleagues.

The attempted coup was led by Major General Godefroid Niyombare, whom the 
president had dismissed as head of security three months earlier. He announced 
that Nkurunziza had been deposed to “save the Arusha accord” and the government 
dissolved by theforces vives de la nation for illegally standing for 
re-election and for many other wrongs committed.

But the army was not united 
<http://www.irinnews.org/analysis/2016/06/07/briefing-%E2%80%93-who%E2%80%99s-who-burundi%E2%80%99s-armed-opposition>
. Forces loyal to the president – and these included the chief of staff, 
General Prime Niyongabo – prevented Niyombare from taking the state 
broadcaster, RTNB, which meant that the news of the coup did not reach the 
provinces. The airport was only closed briefly.By the evening the coup had 
failed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/14/burundi-violence-coup-protests-bujumbura-president-pierre-nkurunziza>
. Hopes that had been raised high were quickly dashed.

That night the independent radio stations were physically attacked. RPA’s 
premises and equipment were set on fire, Radio Bonesha and Télé Renaissance 
were also smashed up and Radio Isanganiro closed down. The president, who had 
been away at a meeting of the East African Community in Dar es Salaam, returned 
more determined than ever to crush his opponents.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tymf%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tymf%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20394f60471e59b1bd2dee0845e7be3bcee80cdf%2F0_0_2492_1701%2F2492.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20failed%20coup%20and%20Facebook%3A%20the%20story%20of%20Burundi's%20elections&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tymf%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A+failed+coup+and+Facebook%3A+the+story+of+Burundi%27s+elections&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tymf%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20394f60471e59b1bd2dee0845e7be3bcee80cdf%2F0_0_2492_1701%2F2492.jpg>
 Protester in Bujumbura holds his hands up in front of soldiers during a 
protest against President Nkurunziza and his bid for a third term. Photograph: 
Goran Tomasevic/REUTERS 
Those in the ruling party who had the temerity to oppose Nkurunziza’s third 
term fled. Two hundred students tried to get refuge in the US embassy. All the 
staff of the free media were to be found in Kigali, Rwanda. The World Bank and 
the IMF threatened to leave the country. Belgium withdrew its funding of the 
elections and threatened to stop all bilateral aid and collaboration with the 
police. The Catholic church announced that it would not cooperate with the 
electoral process. Calls for elections to be postponed came from the East 
African Community, the African Union, the US and the UN, but the government was 
determined to go ahead and simply added to the budget deficit to pay for them, 
even appealing for donations on Facebook.

Related: Burundi instability adds to risks for children surviving on the 
streets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/24/burundi-instability-children-surviving-streets-violence-bujumbura-unicef-crisis>

The final dates chosen were 26 June for the communal and parliamentary 
elections and 15 July for the presidential. Even before this new crisis had 
blown up there had been a total determination on the part of the ruling party 
to win these elections and continue ruling. Ten years of almost uncontrolled 
corruption had allowed the big military men to grow rich. They knew they could 
be prosecuted and stripped of their wealth if the CNDD-FDD were to lose. As 
many [voters] had no identity cards, a million and a half of these had been 
distributed, in some areas only to party supporters, and often to people too 
young to vote.

The government counted on the fact that there was no appetite on the part of 
the people to return to violence and therefore that the mere threat of force 
from their side was enough to discourage voters from taking risks. The 
controversial arming of the youth wing – denied by the government – was thus a 
kind of insurance policy and a reminder that it could be dangerous to vote 
against the regime. Visits and meetings of opposition parties up country had 
long been restricted or sabotaged. By the time of the election the heavy police 
presence in the “hot” parts of town, coupled with the desperate economic 
situation, meant that the demonstrations were diminishing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tymf%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tymf%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc5579b9c926dd2f3e0897da499d2ea7a94b8565f%2F0_0_3212_1927%2F3212.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20failed%20coup%20and%20Facebook%3A%20the%20story%20of%20Burundi's%20elections&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tymf%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A+failed+coup+and+Facebook%3A+the+story+of+Burundi%27s+elections&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tymf%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc5579b9c926dd2f3e0897da499d2ea7a94b8565f%2F0_0_3212_1927%2F3212.jpg>
 President Nkurunziza is sworn in for a third term at a ceremony in Bujumbura. 
Photograph: Gildas Ngingo/AP 
The government need not have worried about the result. The conditions for a 
fair election on 26 June were absent and the ruling party won a large majority. 
Theresults of the presidential election on 15 July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/21/burundi-elections-pierre-nkurunziza-set-win-third-term>
 were also no surprise, with Nkurunziza winning 69% on a 73% turnout.

 As this book goes to press tension and fear in the country continues to 
increase. The president’s ultimatum on 2 November, directed at the opposition 
strongholds in Bujumbura and threatening to attack and confiscate arms, has led 
to a number of deaths and to many families fleeing their homes. Rwandan 
President [Paul] Kagame’s bitter criticisms of Nkurunziza have added to the 
explosive atmosphere. The economy continues to deteriorate and it is not only 
the poor who are getting poorer. International news coverage of the situation 
is increasing and perhaps the world will start to take Burundi’s latest crisis 
seriously.

 * Nigel Watt worked in Burundi for several years and was formerly director of 
the Africa Centre in London.Burundi: Biography of a Small African Country 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/305202/> is published 
by Hurst (£15.99) 