
So here we go again. French investigators are examining the IAAF’s decision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/09/french-authorities-iaaf-eugene-world-championships>
 to award the 2021 World Athletics Championships to Nike’s hometown of Eugene, 
Oregon, without an open competition. The news certainly had the IAAF president, 
Britain’s Sebastian Coe,sprinting to the studios 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p03bplj5> to defend his conduct in yet another 
murky sporting corruption drama that saps public confidence.

Defence contractors, dodgy pharma pricing, greedy supermarkets and banks. 
Hitherto exemplary car companies like VW fiddling their emissions software. 
Town hall scams exposed among others by newspapers, a few of which engaged in 
illegal phone hacking. The list seems endless. As Thursday’s Guardian exposure 
ofexploitative working conditions at Sports Direct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/how-sports-direct-effectively-pays-below-minimum-wage-pay>
 show, even innocent sportswear worn by millions of paying customers can come 
to seem grubby.

In a week when the spotlight is again on barely concealed official efforts to 
impose restrictions on the UK’s own Freedom of Information Act (FoI) it’s worth 
wondering if the public benefits from relentless exposure and transparency? Or 
will the corrosive and cumulative impact help to push desperate or bewildered 
voters into the arms of much more serious scoundrels, the Trumps or Le Pens, 
who are bigger and better liars?

Related: Paul Dacre is right to launch Mail's freedom of information campaign 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2015/dec/10/paul-dacre-is-right-to-launch-daily-mail-campaign-on-freedom-of-information>

The redoubtable Daily Mail has no doubt. Thursday’s edition blasts away with 
both barrels atwould-be restrictors of FoI 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3353660/Public-sector-chiefs-unite-attempt-crush-FOIs.html>
 who would impose fees and other deterrents on searchers for truth. Last month, 
the paper ran a big series –here’s a sample 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3309596/The-shocking-scale-fat-cat-pay-public-sector-exposed-today-major-Daily-Mail-investigation.html>
 – of public sector scams, mostly greed at the top.

FoI helped it reveal some pretty bad behaviour. Well done again, Daily Mail. 
But Thursday’s edition also reveals questionable activities closer to home. For 
example, it ran a “Trump was Right” article aboutparts of London being no-go 
areas to the police 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3352406/Scotland-Yard-mocks-Trump-s-claims-London-police-terrified-Muslim-areas-officers-claim-tycoon-RIGHT.html>
 on the say-so of half a dozen anonymous officers, some of its data culled from 
a rightwing website. The Mail can be bold and brilliantly thorough in its 
campaigns, but this was shoddy and irresponsible stuff. It will be recycled 
around the world to no one’s benefit.

That’s what the philosopher, Onora O’Neill, meant more than a decade ago when 
she usedher Reith lectures <http://www.bbc.co.uk/radio4/reith2002/> in 2002 to 
challenge the unaccountable right of the press to proclaim its freedoms, often 
at the expense of others. How are readers to know what’s true or untrue without 
proper accountability,she asked? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/comment/story/0,3604,707820,00.html> 

All this was pre-phone hacking, pre-Leveson and the unresolved showdown over 
press regulation from which David Cameron has tiptoed away in search of the 
easy life he won’t get. Rebekah “Acquitted” Brooks isback at her desk 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/sep/07/rebekah-brooks-say-it-is-a-privilege-to-be-back-at-news-uk>
 in the Murdoch empire and probably back on Dave’s Christmas card list, luckier 
than many ex-News of the World staff and their jailed contacts.

Related: Daily Mail editor: openness should be default position for government 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/09/daily-mail-editor-paul-dacre-freedom-of-information>

It’s a scandal, but the Mail is right to assert that greater public good is 
served by an assertive media, never more so than now when so much bad behaviour 
seems to be around. Are things getting better or worse? Is a cover-up more 
comforting to citizens than a fearless, unsettling exposé? Don’t snort with 
derision. Ugly thingssometimes happen to brave whistleblowers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/oct/27/julie-bailey-mid-staffordshire-nhs-whistleblower>
, as they did to Mid Staffs NHS trust families who spoke out when medical staff 
didn’t.

It’s also tempting for many people in Britain to say corruption is the 
inevitable consequence of unbridled (I really mean “under-bridled”) free market 
capitalism, those fraudulent bank scandals and the rest. That’s too simple, too 
self-flagellating and against the run of evidence.

After all, last month’s World Anti-Doping Agency exposé was directed primarily 
against Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/09/wada-iaaf-russia-dick-pound-banned>
, a supposedly progressive experiment in totalitarian social control for most 
of the 20th century, now a strange hybrid of oligarch capitalism, KGB policing 
and gangsterism.

Suffering, as it does, from challenging geography and weak borders, poor 
Russia has never enjoyed the luxury of living under the rule of law. We have to 
fight every day to uphold ours. Some people will cheat if they think they can 
get away with it. The more open a society is the harder that will be because 
the chances of exposure are greater. If they’re desperate, very greedy or 
arrogantly clever some people will still take huge risks – and some (we must 
assume) will get away with it.

In every scandal it’s all too often the little guys – the currency traders or 
the drug mules – who get caught and go to jail, not the top folk. In 2013, the 
parliamentary commission on banking standards proposed that senior managers 
should be held responsible for their underlings’ misconduct, even if they had 
no specific knowledge of it (they should have done). At the time the government 
agreed, but is now backtracking under industry pressure, just like the pressure 
from the press over its own regulation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fx84%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fx84%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52ed64858d6645b8d036371e0839ee33beb344d4%2F0_0_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trust%20is%20in%20short%20supply%20in%20our%20scandalised%20nation&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fx84%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trust+is+in+short+supply+in+our+scandalised+nation&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fx84%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52ed64858d6645b8d036371e0839ee33beb344d4%2F0_0_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
 Canary Wharf in London. Will the government stick to its promise to hold 
senior banking managers responsible for their underlings’ conduct? Photograph: 
Guy Corbishley/Demotix/Corbis 
The Americans are generally better at aiming high than European prosecutors. 
Without knowing much detail I think it’s safe to assume North Korea, a sealed 
hereditary tyranny, is pretty unaccountable and pretty corrupt. Sure enough it 
comes second (after Somalia, whose problems are alack of government) in 
Transparency International’sleague table 
<http://uk.businessinsider.com/most-corrupt-countries-in-the-world-2014-12?r=US&IR=T>
.

So what’s needed to keep folk honest, in track events as well as investment 
banking, is the prospect of being found out. What does that require? Relatively 
honest politicians and public officials, especially at lower levels, where 
corruption bites hardest in poor countries. The Arab spring of 2011 started 
when aTunisian street trader killed himself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/may/15/arab-spring-tunisia-the-slap> in 
2010 after a row with an official.

Decent regulation, properly enforced in ways that encourage enterprise rather 
than reward established business or cronies, is important too. So is a press, 
free enough, willing and able to take on the bad boys, arouse public opinion 
and see the challenge through to the courts despite the threats of overpaid 
gagging lawyers.

Given the oligarch ownership of much of the press (the BBC chased the IAAF 
story), independent courts may be the most important ingredient in the mix.

Apart from poorly enforced regulation (sex crimes as well as bank fraud, you 
may feel) Britain does fairly well on most of these counts. The unsatisfactory 
funding of political parties remains – as it does in the US and many other 
places – a troubling source of vulnerability to rich paymasters, unions and 
oligarchs not quite alike.

Related: 'Dark ages' warning issued over freedom of information changes 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/07/dark-ages-warning-issued-over-freedom-of-information-changes>

Where does this all leave FoI reform? Ministers want to see its packed review 
committee propose charges for FoI requests, to increase their own power to 
reject applications on grounds of cost and to exempt wider classes of 
discussions to permit greater candour inside government instead of resorting to 
“read and eat this” Post-it notes.

For hard-pressed local government and other public bodies, as well as for the 
grandees of Whitehall, there are real issues here of cost (time spent on FoI 
can be huge) as well as of confidentiality, commercial as well as personal, and 
policy varieties. The press, often keen to slap charges on any public service 
except parking, fails to acknowledge them or its own vested interest.

As with press regulation, grownups should be able to achieve sensible 
compromises that enhance public trust in both government and media. Alas, they 
don’t trust each other.
