
Gawker Media <http://www.theguardian.com/media/gawker-media>, the media 
website that thrived off scandal and controversy, filed for bankruptcy on 
Friday after losing a $140m lawsuit surrounding one of its most controversial 
stories: the publication of a sex tape involving former wrestler Hulk Hogan.


The website, founded by British journalist Nick Denton in 2002, filed for 
Chapter 11 bankruptcy on Friday 
<http://www.niemanlab.org/images/Gawker-bankruptcy-filing.pdf> listing Hogan – 
whose real name is Terry Bollea – as its biggest creditor.

The move came after a judge refused to allow Gawker more time to appeal, 
meaning it must put up a $50m bond toward Hogan’s damages.

Related: Bankrupting Gawker over a grudge isn't justice. It's censorship | 
Nicky Woolf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/10/bankrupt-gawker-over-grudge-not-justice-censorship>

In March, a Florida jury awarded $115m in damages to Hogan, more than the 
$100m he had demanded for the violation of his privacy over the publication of 
a sex tape involving him and the wife of a good friend. A jury later awarded 
him $25m more in punitive damages.


It was revealed last month that billionaire tech entrepreneur Peter Thiel had 
been funding Hogan’s legal costs as part of his latest attempt to close down 
the website, which outed him as being gay in 2007 with the headline:“Peter 
Thiel is totally gay, people.” 
<http://gawker.com/335894/peter-thiel-is-totally-gay-people>

Thiel, a co-founder of PayPal and a early investor in Facebook, said he had 
secretly funded a team of lawyers to track down “victims” of Gawker and help 
fund their lawsuits against the company. Thiel said he had funded Hogan’s legal 
costs to the tune of about $10m.

“It’s less about revenge and more about specific deterrence,” Thiel told the 
New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/26/business/dealbook/peter-thiel-tech-billionaire-reveals-secret-war-with-gawker.html>
. “I saw Gawker pioneer a unique and incredibly damaging way of getting 
attention by bullying people even when there was no connection with the public 
interest … I thought it was worth fighting back.”

Thiel said funding the lawsuit was one of the “greater philanthropic things 
that I’ve done”, and said he would further lawsuits brought people who said 
their lives had ben ruined by Gawker.

Denton, who is also gay, said he would continue to fight back and would not 
allow Thiel to silence Gawker’s writers. “Even with his billions, Thiel will 
not silence our writers,” he said on Twitter. “Our sites will thrive – under 
new ownership – and we’ll win in court.”
— Nick Denton (@nicknotned) June 10, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/nicknotned/status/741333560678854656> 
Even with his billions, Thiel will not silence our writers. Our sites will 
thrive — under new ownership — and we'll win in court.
 <https://twitter.com/nicknotned/status/741333560678854656> 
Gawker, which also owns Jezebel and Gizmodo, will be put up for auction with 
bidding starting at about $100m following interest from digital publisher Ziff 
Davis LLC. Ziff Davis owns a number of tech and gaming publications, including 
PC Magazine and IGN.

“We are encouraged by the agreement with Ziff Davis, one of the most 
rigorously managed and profitable companies in digital media,” Denton said. “A 
combination would marry Ziff Davis’ strength in e-commerce, licensing and video 
with GMG’s premium media brands,.”

Chapter 11 bankruptcy allows a company to “reorganize” its business, according 
tothe Securities and Exchange Commission 
<https://www.sec.gov/investor/pubs/bankrupt.htm>, meaning that the company 
continues to operate and pay staff but all “significant decisions must be 
approved by a bankruptcy court”. Entering bankruptcy freezes claims from 
creditors – including Hogan.
— Max Frumes (@maxfrumes) June 10, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/maxfrumes/status/741311229193523200> 
Gawker petition grab pic.twitter.com/I1SrCqcguA <https://t.co/I1SrCqcguA>
 <https://twitter.com/maxfrumes/status/741311229193523200> 
In the filing, Gawker said its assets are estimated to be worth $50m to $100m, 
whereas its liabilities are estimated to be between $100m and $500m.

In a statement Hogan’s legal counsel said: “We have every intention to 
continue to pursue our judgement against Gawker and to hold them accountable 
for violating Mr Bollea’s privacy whether it be in the bankruptcy court or any 
other court.”

Denton still owns the majority of the company, which was once valued at as 
much as $400m, but sold a minority stake to tech investment firm Columbus Nova 
Technology Partners to bolster its finances it ahead of the Hogan lawsuit. 
Gawker made $6.5m in profits on sales of $45m in 2014, the latest year 
available.

Gawker had not published a story about its demise, and it was not clear what 
the immediate effect would be on its staff.
— Max Frumes (@maxfrumes) June 10, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/maxfrumes/status/741314258479112192> 
See @HulkHogan <https://twitter.com/HulkHogan> listed as largest unsecured 
claim in Gawker bkpic.twitter.com/PsDAjBQYMW <https://t.co/PsDAjBQYMW>
 <https://twitter.com/maxfrumes/status/741314258479112192> 
Gawker started life in Denton’s Soho apartment in Manhattan with a mission to 
expose celebrities and the media elite. It quickly became popular for its 
“snarky” tone and abhorrence of PR and media spin.

The company employs about 300 people, and has grown from covering gossip to 
breaking big news stories 
<http://gawker.com/heres-what-gawker-media-does-1779858799> including 
significant developments in the saga surrounding Hillary Clinton’s emails and 
former Toronto mayor Rob Ford smoking crack cocaine.
