

The BBC <http://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> has defended its controversial 
helicopter pictures of the police raid on Sir Cliff Richard’s house after the 
singer said it was guilty of a “shameful” invasion of his privacy.


Richard said the “people at the top” of the BBC “have a lot to answer for” 
after the BBC screened footage of police officers searching his £3m Berkshire 
apartment as part of an investigation into sexual assault allegations.

The singer said he was considering taking legal action against the 
corporation, saying: “I do feel that they owe me something. The police have 
apologised but the BBC hasn’t, and it owes me that. What they did was shameful.”

Related: Cliff Richard inquiry was mired in controversy from the start 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/16/cliff-richard-inquiry-was-mired-in-controversy-from-the-start>

“Somebody at the top [of the BBC] said: ‘Good idea. Let’s get this story.’ And 
somehow they were able to get the police to tell them when they were coming,” 
Richard told the Daily Mail.

“It shouldn’t do that. I’m sure that was probably against the law. I always 
thought a police raid was supposed to be secret.

“Nobody should know. And yet the BBC were there. So they have a lot to answer 
for and that was real intrusion into my privacy. To actually film my apartment. 
It’s unforgivable.”

South Yorkshire police agreed a deal with the BBC after its reporter, Dan 
Johnson, received a tip-off about the raid on Richard’s home.

The BBC has said that the tip-off did not come from the South Yorkshire force. 
It filmed footage of the police operation from a helicopter which was broadcast 
on BBC1 news bulletins and the BBC News channel on 14 August 2014.

Related: Cliff Richard raid: police chief apologises for BBC deal on coverage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/sep/02/cliff-richard-raid-police-chief-apologises>

Richard said a “new generation” at the BBC “have a lack of respect of what’s 
happened before. A whole new group of people. They don’t care what we’ve done 
in the past”.

In a statement issued by the BBC earlier this week, after the Crown 
Prosecution Service said Richard would not not face charges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/16/cliff-richard-will-not-face-charges-over-sexual-abuse-claims>
 over allegations he sexually abused four boys more than 30 years ago, the BBC 
said it had applied “normal editorial judgments” to its reporting.

“We applied normal editorial judgmnts to a story that was covered widely by 
all media and continued to report the investigation as it developed including 
the CPS’s final decision – which ran prominently across our news output,” said 
the BBC.

The BBC’s director general, Tony Hall, and director of news and current 
affairs, former Times editor James Harding, defended its coverage when they 
appeared before MPs last year.

Hall said: “In a variety of different ways allegations of sexual abuse going 
back many, many years are sadly, regrettably a matter of public interest. What 
you saw from the air was a number of police cars and you saw the scale of the 
operation.”

Asked if he felt any sympathy for the singer because of the extent of the 
BBC’s coverage, Hall told MPs: “Our job was to make sure what Sir Cliff had to 
say about the search and about his own innocence was properly reflected.”

Richard said: “For me, the BBC is Paul Gambaccini, Gloria [Hunniford] when she 
worked for them, all the DJs that I’ve met, all the people who work on the 
Today programme, World at One. That’s the BBC. They are not to blame for what 
happened to me. It’s the people at the top.”

Richard said he was unaware of what he had been accused of until coverage of 
the raid appeared on BBC News.

He told the Mail: “That was my introduction to what they were doing and how it 
looked on the screen. It was really terrifying, really horrible, and of course 
that’s when I discovered what I was supposedly accused of.”

Labour MP Keith Vaz, chairman of the House of Commons home affairs select 
committee, said last year that the BBChad acted “perfectly properly” 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/sep/02/bbc-cliff-richard-police-keith-vaz>
 in its reporting of the affair.

Critics including broadcaster Michael Parkinson accused the BBC of 
participating in a “witch-hunt” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/aug/17/bbc-cliff-richard-witch-hunt-live-raid-broadcast>
 and behaving like the worst tabloid newspaper.

At the time of the raid, BBC insiders said it reflected the increasing 
competition 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jan/30/bbcs-controversial-cliff-richard-coverage-shortlisted-for-rts-prize>
 of 24-hour news and the pressure on the corporation’s news organisation to 
match the scoops of its rivals ITN and Sky.

The story was later shortlisted for the scoop of the year prize at last year’s 
Royal Television Society awards.
