
Why does fashion hate old people?

Name withheld, by email

You know, fashion gets a lot of grief from outsiders. Its fetishisation of 
skinniness, wealth, aesthetics, sexiness and, yes, youth, are all routinely 
used as sticks with which to beat it. Only last weekTopshop was roundly mocked 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jul/27/topshop-mannequin-customer-complaint-facebook>
 for using mannequins so skinny they barely made anatomical sense. And this is 
all perfectly to the right and well and good. Criticise away! Lord knows this 
column does it often enough.

But here’s the rather uncomfortable truth about fashion: all it actually does 
is take society’s own desires, own attitudes, and exaggerate them shamelessly. 
This is certainly not to excuse the fashion industry’s loopiness, stupidity and 
even occasional amorality. But it does explain why, despite the general 
consensus that fashion is demented, the industry is enormously successful. This 
also, I suspect, clarifies why people get so upset by it. If fashion items were 
sold on promises to make everyone, say, grow a third arm, no one would give a 
good god damn. Instead, they would look at the adverts featuring three-armed 
models brandishing wildly expensive handbags (an extra arm so you can carry 
more £1,500 bags – genius!), shrug, laugh and carry on with their day. They 
would not campaign against these adverts on social media and newspapers would 
not run long think pieces about how this three-armed fascism was corrupting the 
minds of our young.

The reason people – women, mainly, if we’re honest here – get so especially 
upset by the fashion industry’s obsession with youth and skinniness is because 
it is echoing that dark, cruel voice that lives in the heads of so many of us, 
the one that encourages our own self-loathing. For all that people criticise 
fashion’s obsession with thinness, the fact is it is very rare to find any 
non-fashion magazine that doesn’t in some way validate this view, by using very 
slim models or running nonsense articles about “detoxing” and “clean eating”. 
What the fashion industry does, really, is exploit our own worst thoughts about 
ourselves. Look, fashion is a billion–dollar industry, and you don’t make a 
billion dollars by being stupid (although an obvious exception to that rule 
comes in the form offuture US president Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/02/donald-trump-republican-debate-rnc>
.)

Which brings us, eventually, to its attitude towards old people and, in the 
fashion universe, this means anyone over the age of 40. Never mind the 
industry’s occasional inclusion of older women in advertising campaigns – such 
asCéline hiring Joan Didion 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/jan/12/celine-joan-didion-literary-hero-fashion-advertisement>
, say, orJoni Mitchell shilling for Saint Laurent 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2015/jan/09/joni-mitchell-the-new-face-of-saint-laurent-stylewatch>
 – because this is just about novelty, tokenism, faddishness, even. Having an 
older woman in a fashion campaign is the new having an overweight pop star 
appear in your fashion show, which was a very popular schtick about five years 
ago. It doesn’t mean the fashion industry actually thinks older women, or 
bigger women, are attractive, a point underscored by the fact that all the 
models on the runway are still themselves notably young and thin. It just means 
the industry wants to give itself a little pat on the back for being so deep it 
can occasionally deal with an older or bigger person (freaks) without actually 
vomiting all over its quilted Burberry jacket.

Sticking with just the ageism issue for the moment, this is clearly a 
ridiculous state of affairs. Forget about the moral issue – it’s not even 
logical. Only a very small percentage of women can afford to buy designer 
clothes and, of those, an even tinier percentage of them are under 40. And yet, 
designers still insist on having their clothes modelled by extremely young 
women – children, in some cases, such as 14-year-old Sofia Mechetner, who 
appeared in Dior’s couture show last month. Do many 14-year-olds now buy 
couture? Is this what the kids are doing in between WhatsApping and taking 
something the media insists on calling “hippy crack”? I’m going to go with “no” 
here, so quite why a 14-year-old should be held up as the couture ideal by a 
design house is beyond me. Honestly, they may as well say couture should only 
be worn by mermaids.

Related: Iris Apfel: ‘People like me because I’m different’ 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global/2015/jul/19/iris-apfel-interview-designer-fashion-film>

Which brings me to Iris Apfel 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global/2015/jul/19/iris-apfel-interview-designer-fashion-film>
, the 93-year-old fashion icon and designer, who worked for more than 40 years, 
with her equally impressive husband Carl, now 101, looking after the White 
House. Apfel is currently celebrated inthe lovely documentary, Iris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/02/iris-review-vibrant-sartorial-documentary>
, directed by Albert Maysles, which I honestly could not recommend more 
strongly. If I had the space, I’d talk about the film and Apfel all day, but 
the point is that what the film shows most strongly is not just how brilliant 
fashion looks on older women, and how it’s older women who generally have the 
best sense of style, because they know themselves so well, but how much they 
are patronised by the rest of the world, and not just the fashion industry. 
Repeatedly, we see people talking to Apfel as if she were a child, which is how 
older people generally are treated by all of us. Yet the fact is that Apfel on 
a bad day is sharper than pretty much anyone on a good day and this 
condescension is as ridiculous as the fashion industry treating age like a 
disease that needs curing. But only criticising fashion for doing this is to be 
wilfully blind. The scary thing about the fashion industry is that, in a 
horrible way, it holds up a mirror to the faults within far too many of us.

Post your questions to Hadley Freeman, Ask Hadley, The Guardian, Kings Place, 
90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Emailask.hadley@theguardian.com 
<mailto:ask.hadley@theguardian.com>.
