
If you need a mid-week after-work drink: 

The Sydney International Art series has your mid-week nights covered with Art 
after Hours <http://www.artgallery.nsw.gov.au/art-after-hours/> at the Art 
Gallery of NSW on Wednesday nights, andLights on Later 
<http://www.mca.com.au/series/lights-on-later/> at the Museum of Contemporary 
Art Australia on Thursdays, when the galleries stay open until 9pm.

These nights host free activities, talks and workshops, live music and film 
screenings, and an opportunity to experience the exhibitions at a quieter time. 
Grab a bite to eat and a cocktail or two at the Art Gallery of NSW’s pop-up 
bar, run by Matt Moran and his team, or head along to enjoy the view of 
Sydney’s night sky from the MCA’s rooftop terrace.

If you love to discover more with an insider’s guide:

Take the experience beyond the surface with Guided tours: Chuck Close 
<http://www.mca.com.au/events/guided-tour-chuck-close-nov-20/9981/> at the MCA 
andGuided tours: Pop to popism 
<http://www.artgallery.nsw.gov.au/calendar/guided-tour-pop-to-popism/> at the 
Art Gallery of NSW. They’ll reveal interesting stories, histories and secrets 
about the artists and their work.

If you’re a foodie:

The MCA Cafe <http://www.mca.com.au/visit/mca-cafe-sculpture-terrace/> 
features a special menu that pays homage to Chuck Close’s HQ – New York, while 
the Art Gallery of NSW’s new restaurantChiswick 
<http://www.artgallery.nsw.gov.au/visit-us/plan-your-visit/facilities/cafe-restaurant/>
 has pop dining packages on offer.

If you want to party like it’s 1969:

Get your best pop-themed fancy dress costumes ready for January when Art after 
Hours goes retro <http://www.artgallery.nsw.gov.au/art-after-hours/> at the Art 
Gallery of NSW. The event will span four decades in four nights covering 
boppers vs beatnik, mods vs hippies, punk vs disco, and new romantics vs 
yuppies.

And on the last Friday of every month, MCA Artbar 
<http://www.mca.com.au/series/artbar/> transforms the museum into a night of 
wonders under the direction of a selected artist or curator.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F438tk%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F438tk%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F19%2F1416373431979%2Fd26bdf40-9a72-427c-adbc-3e0813591b3d-1020x681.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sydney%20International%20Art%20Series%3A%20More%20than%20art&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F438tk%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sydney+International+Art+Series%3A+More+than+art&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F438tk%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F19%2F1416373431979%2Fd26bdf40-9a72-427c-adbc-3e0813591b3d-1020x681.jpeg>
 Party like it’s 1969 Illustration: Anna Madeleine/Supplied 
If you like to get your hands dirty:


Discover the techniques behind Australian pop artist Howard Arkley’s bold 
urban landscapes at thepop workshops 
<http://www.artgallery.nsw.gov.au/calendar/pop-painting-workshop/> at the Art 
Gallery of NSW, with the guidance of artist and tutor Dominique Hindmarsh.

 The MCA’s National Centre for Creative Learning hosts Portrait People 
<http://www.mca.com.au/events/special-events-portrait-people/10133/>, a day of 
making, where visitors can create portraits inspired by Chuck Close’s style.

If you want to hear from the artists themselves:

Download the MCA app <http://www.mca.com.au/apps/> from iTunes or GooglePlay 
to hear directly from Chuck Close as you view his work. Additionally the Art 
Gallery of NSW hostsOz pop talks 
<http://www.artgallery.nsw.gov.au/calendar/oz-pop-talks/>, a series of short 
talks from Australian artists and experts including Vivienne Binns, Wendy 
Whiteley, Jenny Watson, Garry Shead and Gareth Sansom.

If you are a true art nerd:

The Art Gallery of NSW presents Pop Ideas. International experts, including 
renowned American art critic and historian Hal Foster, discuss key aspects of 
pop.

Over at the MCA, the two day Contemporary Print Symposium 
<http://www.mca.com.au/events/contemporary-print-symposium/10110/> hosts 
special guests including Terrie Sultan, director of the Parrish Art Museum, 
Glenn Barkley, curator of Chuck Close: Prints, Process and Collaboration, and 
several of Close’s collaborators and master-printmakers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F438tk%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F438tk%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F19%2F1416373506432%2F8c31bcd8-2d68-47a8-bbf9-6d3305a0dcf6-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sydney%20International%20Art%20Series%3A%20More%20than%20art&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F438tk%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sydney+International+Art+Series%3A+More+than+art&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F438tk%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F19%2F1416373506432%2F8c31bcd8-2d68-47a8-bbf9-6d3305a0dcf6-1020x612.jpeg>
 Drive in cinema Photograph: Anna Madeleine/Supplied 
If you’re a film buff:

Don’t miss Film Picks: Chuck Close 
<http://www.mca.com.au/events/curator-film-picks-chuck-close/> at the MCA, a 
series of films inspired by Chuck Close, selected by curator Glenn Barkley and 
artists David Capra, Julie Fragar, Emily Hunt and Ben Quilty.

The Art Gallery of NSW hosts the film series Pop artists on screen 
<http://www.artgallery.nsw.gov.au/calendar/pop-artists-on-screen/> with 
features, documentaries and shorts that capture the lifestyles of pop artists 
and the culture of the pop era.

If you enjoy a stroll:

Take advantage of the galleries’ close proximity along with the world’s most 
spectacular harbour right in the middle.


Stroll through a food safari by stopping by Bistro Mint 
<http://www.bistromint.com.au/>, Mr. Wong <http://merivale.com.au/mrwong>, or 
theGlenmore Hotel <http://www.theglenmore.com.au/>; get back to nature with a 
walk throughthe Domain to Mrs Macquaries Chair 
<http://www.rbgsyd.nsw.gov.au/welcome/royal_botanic_garden/tours_education/self-guided_tours/domain_walk>
 or up toObservatory Hill <http://www.sydneyobservatory.com.au/>; or appreciate 
the city’s buildings atHyde Park Barracks 
<http://sydneylivingmuseums.com.au/hyde-park-barracks-museum>, Sydney Opera 
House <http://www.sydneyoperahouse.com/> and Aurora Place 
<http://www.auroraplace.com.au/Core/Content/Public-Home-Page/Content5483.aspx>. 
Pick up or download aSydney International Art Series guide map 
<http://www.urbanwalkabout.com/publications/sydney/SIAS/> to plot your route. 

For more information, visit Sydney International Art Series 
<http://www.sydney.com/events/sydney-international-art-series-9038997> 
