
That rarest of beasts, a reality-television star with real staying power, 
althoughpommes de terres fondantes are a firm favourite on the other side of 
the Channel, I’m slightly embarrassed to admit that my first encounter with 
them was sadly two-dimensional. Puzzlingly, though you won’t find them on many 
menus in this country, they pop up all the time on shows such asMasterChef 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/masterchef>, where, along with their 
chocolatey cousin, they’ve become a byword for impending doom.

Described by Bruno Loubet <http://www.theguardian.com/profile/bruno-loubet> as 
“a national classic” and the Gallic equivalent of the roastie,Michel Roux 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/michel-roux> sells them as “succulent, 
flavoursome and rich without being greasy, hence the name fondant (meltingly 
tender)”. Gently cooked in generous quantities of fat, done well they’re 
sublime, but somehow, despite Loubet’s claim that they’re “so easy to make”, 
they’re also remarkably easy to screw up. Years after I swore off MasterChef 
for good, I’m still haunted by the look on Gregg Wallace’s face as he chomped 
down on yet another semi-raw potato. But, should you wish to please our Gregg, 
or in fact almost anyone, with a delicious soft and buttery spud, here’s how to 
do it. Wannabe contestants and future festive cooks, take note.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dqj3%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dqj3%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5259c7288359feea87f5d453966ae21d0eb6677%2F0_20_3264_1960%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20fondant%20potatoes&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dqj3%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+fondant+potatoes&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dqj3%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5259c7288359feea87f5d453966ae21d0eb6677%2F0_20_3264_1960%2F3264.jpg>
 Gordon Ramsay’s fondant potatoes. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
The potatoes

According to Gordon Ramsay 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gordonramsay>, “you need a really nice 
robust potato”; he suggests Desirée or King Edward, both often cited as good 
all-rounders, though in reality the latter has a significantly higher starch 
content, and is classified by the Potato Council as a “fluffy” (or mealy) 
rather than a “smooth” (or waxy) variety. Desirée is also the potato of choice 
for Bordeaux-born chef Loubet, and a little detective work suggests that the 
Idahos recommended byAnthony Bourdain 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/anthonybourdain> in his Les Halles 
Cookbook are also towards the starchy end of the spectrum.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dqj3%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dqj3%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a8323ffc43c89bd60b8f18028040d6f965a15a1%2F0_189_3264_1960%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20fondant%20potatoes&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dqj3%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+fondant+potatoes&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dqj3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a8323ffc43c89bd60b8f18028040d6f965a15a1%2F0_189_3264_1960%2F3264.jpg>
 Anne-Sophie Pic’s fondant potatoes Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian
Confusingly Roux’s book The Essence of French Cooking calls for Bintje, a 
“firm to mealy” variety, or Belle de Fontenay, a waxy salad potato, while the 
three-Michelin-starred chefAnne-Sophie Pic 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2007/mar/25/foodanddrink.features11> 
uses waxy new potatoes in her Complete Cookery Course.Edward Schneider 
<http://dinersjournal.blogs.nytimes.com/author/edward-schneider/?_r=0>, writing 
in the New York Times, mentions one of my favourite waxy spuds, the Charlotte, 
so I give those a try, too, and find they work best; like new potatoes, their 
creamy consistency seems a better fit with the richness of the dish. The 
fluffier varieties taste more like roast potatoes; never a bad thing, 
obviously, but not what we’re looking for here. Bourdain doesn’t suggest 
peeling them but, though I love the flavour of potato skin, for a truly crisp 
finish, I’m sorry to say it has to go.

In their spiritual home, the classic French restaurant, pommes de terre 
fondantes tend to assume the form of a cylindrical slab of starch, though 
they’re occasionally also found whittled into diminutive little barrels, as 
Roux, Loubet and Bourdain demand. Whittling is tough work when you haven’t 
spent three years of your life on the veg station, and also creates a lot of 
waste destined for the dog’s dinner; I prefer Ramsay’s simple halved potatoes, 
cut to “give the largest surface area” for crisping, though I will be shaving a 
little off the tops too to maximise this.

(Note that when testing I could only find smaller Belles de Fontenays than 
Roux’s recipe called for, which is why his look rather dark. The size is 
important here.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dqj3%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dqj3%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F06b0dbc2cf7d5e35be54ff3015067441868c22a7%2F0_145_3264_1960%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20fondant%20potatoes&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dqj3%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+fondant+potatoes&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dqj3%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F06b0dbc2cf7d5e35be54ff3015067441868c22a7%2F0_145_3264_1960%2F3264.jpg>
 Anthony Bourdain’s fondant potatoes. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the 
Guardian 
The fat

I’m afraid this is not a dish where you can skimp on fat; fat is basically its 
raison d’etre. Bourdain uses duck fat, Ramsay olive oil with a little butter to 
finish, while Roux, Pic, Loubet and Schneider all stick with butter, the latter 
adding “you can use clarified butter, but you’re going to be very careful not 
to let anything burn, aren’t you?” Well, let me tell you, it’s very hard to 
crisp potatoes without burning butter; indeed, I rather like the hint of 
bitterness that this gives the end result, but the clarified variety, where the 
milk solids that have a tendency to catch have been removed, gives a more 
purely buttery, and pleasingly golden result. (Olive oil, of course, does not 
burn, and neither does duck fat, but both have too strong a flavour of their 
own; this is a dish where creamy potato and creamy butter are in perfect 
harmony.)


The liquid

Large slabs of potato, of course, require something in the way of liquid to 
cook through. Stock is traditional, usually chicken, as deployed by Ramsay and 
Bourdain, or a light veal variety of the kind suggested by Loubet. Both are 
delicious, but this tendency for everything on the plate to taste of meat is 
one of the things I like least about fancy French restaurants; in general, I 
prefer my vegetables to taste of themselves (OK, and perhaps fat) which makes 
me keener on Roux, Pic and Schneider’s versions.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dqj3%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dqj3%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe60e1bd5d167a272f02fa25ca867d98725a2e21%2F0_236_3264_1960%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20fondant%20potatoes&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dqj3%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+fondant+potatoes&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dqj3%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe60e1bd5d167a272f02fa25ca867d98725a2e21%2F0_236_3264_1960%2F3264.jpg>
 Michel Roux’s fondant potatoes. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Roux covers the spuds in water, and melts in a liberal amount of butter, 
Schneider uses a moderate amount and bastes the potatoes regularly with it 
throughout cooking, and Pic throws any health concerns to the wind and 
submerges them in pure melted butter. Yes, she boils them in butter. Move 
along, nothing to see here. I think, unless you’re to end up with what are 
essentially very rich roasties, some liquid is mandatory, but two packets of 
butter for 300g of potatoes feels excessive, especially when Roux’s version is 
so very delicious. Water and butter feels like the sensible, nay almost healthy 
compromise.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dqj3%2Fsfb%23img-6&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dqj3%2Fsfb%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b2d892cf2bf7abe905d67c0cf3635fed0ea0337%2F0_319_2448_1469%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20fondant%20potatoes&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dqj3%2Fstw%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+fondant+potatoes&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dqj3%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b2d892cf2bf7abe905d67c0cf3635fed0ea0337%2F0_319_2448_1469%2F2448.jpg>
 Edward Schneider’s fondant potatoes. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the 
Guardian 
The extras

Garlic, thyme and bay are the most popular additions, though Schneider keeps 
it purely potato, and Loubet lobs in some rosemary instead. Having decided very 
firmly that this is a dish that should let the spud shine, I’m powerless to 
resist the combination of garlic and butter, while thyme, which Ramsay proudly 
claims as a “bit of a chef’s secret” (who knew?), contributes a subtle, very 
Gallic herbaceousness which also works well. Rosemary proves overpowering.


The cooking method

There’s a surprising amount of variation in the cooking methods: both Ramsay 
and Loubet start their fondants on the hob before transferring the dish to the 
oven, but, like Bourdain’s stove-top version, Ramsay’s take far longer to cook 
through than his recipe suggests. (Indeed, Bourdain’s are cooked in such a 
small amount of stock that they dry out long before they’re done, and I have to 
keep adding more to stop them welding themselves to the pan.) Such misleading 
timing may explain why raw fondants pop up with such puzzling regularity on 
MasterChef; unless your potatoes are tiny, they’re not going to cook through in 
a few spoonfuls of stock in 20 minutes. Sorry Anthony, they just aren’t.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dqj3%2Fsfb%23img-7&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dqj3%2Fsfb%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec3321cde8996f902261cbdd4365a1e8137837a5%2F0_168_3264_1960%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20fondant%20potatoes&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dqj3%2Fstw%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+fondant+potatoes&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dqj3%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec3321cde8996f902261cbdd4365a1e8137837a5%2F0_168_3264_1960%2F3264.jpg>
 Bruno Loubet’s fondant potatoes. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Indeed, unless, like Loubet, Roux and Pic, you submerge them, you’ll end up 
with something very like roast potatoes. That gorgeous melting consistency 
demands liquid, and I think it’s more easily achieved on the stove, where you 
can keep an eye on the pan, than in the oven.

Most recipes start by crisping the potatoes, before undoing all their good 
work by adding water or stock; Roux starts by covering them with water, then 
proceeds to reduce this until the potatoes sizzle in an almost dry pan, giving 
them an outstandingly crunchy base. I’m going to follow his lead, but also take 
a tip from Schneider and turn them over at the end, to colour and crisp the 
tops as well. You can never, ever have too much crunchy potato. Trust me, I’ve 
tried.

The perfect fondant potatoes

(serves 4)


4 Charlotte or other waxy potatoes, about 120g each

1 garlic clove, crushed

1 sprig of thyme

150g clarified butter

Peel the potatoes, using the peeler in broad flat strokes to give as many flat 
planes as possible. Cut in half laterally.


Put the potatoes, flat-side down, in a deep, heavy-based frying pan just large 
enough to hold them in a single layer and add barely enough water to cover them 
(a few bits sticking out the top are fine), plus the garlic, thyme and 
clarified butter. Season generously.

Bring to the boil, then bubble over a high heat until the water has 
evaporated, leaving just the butter, and the potatoes are golden brown on the 
bottom. Very carefully, using a palette knife, turn over the potatoes and cook 
for a couple of minutes until browned on the other side. Serve immediately.

Fondant potatoes: fussy French cooking, or what roast potatoes want to be when 
they grow up? And, after my frustrating experience with Bourdain and Ramsay’s 
versions, which other dishes take much longer than the recipes claim? To kick 
off, I nominate caramelised onions, and risotto.

