
If the academies programme is making your head spin, you’re not alone. Back in 
March, every school in England was going have tohave to convert 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/15/every-english-school-to-become-an-academy-ministers-to-announce>
. Some 11 weeks and oneU-turn 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/06/government-backs-down-over-plan-to-make-all-schools-academies>
 (orZ-turn <http://schoolsweek.co.uk/morgans-academy-u-turn-is-a-z-turn/>) 
later, it was announced that only underperforming schools would be forced to, 
although the government held firm in its assertion that all schools should.

So if your school is considering becoming an academy what would it mean for 
you, your colleagues and your pupils? We spoke to three school leaders about 
the pros and cons of the process.

‘We are doing the Department for Education a favour’

Alex Smythe is headteacher of Newcroft primary school 
<http://www.newcroft-primary-school.co.uk/> in Leicestershire, which is set to 
convert and become part of a multi-academy trust of six schools on 1 September.

We are halfway through the process, so we’re in the thick of it. We were 
already supporting another school quite significantly and, to an extent, we 
were forced to form a multi-academy trust (MAT) because that school was close 
to being closed or taken over by others.

Related: When academies are failing, don’t pass the parcel – bring back local 
authorities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/aug/04/when-academies-are-failing-dont-pass-the-parcel-bring-back-local-authorities>

We offered to sponsor them – it would have brought £90,000 of funding to do 
the work that it takes to deal with a school that’s in trouble. But the 
Department for Education (DfE) rejected that because we weren’t an academy; 
they said we didn’t have any depth to the partnership and that forming an MAT 
would help.

We feel that we are doing the DfE a favour, to be honest. The other school was 
struggling, and the DfE needed a solution. Yes, they could have looked 
elsewhere – there are plenty of academy chains who could have stepped in, 
stripped everything back and sorted it out – but this is one of our partner 
schools and this is a local solution.

What has been frustrating is that we’ve had absolutely no funding to do this. 
When we stepped up and said we’d help to get the school back on its feet, we 
were left to it. There has been a little bit of extra funding because we 
applied for a grant to set up the MAT, but that doesn’t come anywhere near 
touching the staffing costs. It’s not just the academisation, it’s that we’re 
putting in intensive support to another school – that takes up a huge amount of 
my time. If my main school was struggling, I don’t know where I’d find the 
hours in the day to deal with it.

But this is a much better arrangement for the struggling school than being 
swallowed up by a chain where they come in and everybody has to wear a purple 
uniform and have exactly the same policies and they top-slice 10% of your 
budget to pay for a chief operating officer (CEO). The problem with frightening 
schools away from academisation and forming MATs themselves is that if they 
start to struggle, they will just get swallowed up by chains and lose their 
identity.

You need to get together with people you trust and schools you know really 
well. Define what you want your MAT to look like and make sure that you don’t 
lose your autonomy. You have to be steadfast about what you believe in.

‘Joining a multi-academy trust is like marriage without the option of divorce’

Rob Campbell is principal of Impington village college 
<http://www.impington.cambs.sch.uk/>, a secondary academy in Cambridgeshire, 
which became an academy in 2012 and is currently forming a MAT.

We were initially reluctant and it did take a while for us to consult and then 
convert – there was quite a lot of resistance. The staff sessions were 
remarkably benign; the big concerns came from the local community. It was a 
combination of local democrats, people who were interested about the college’s 
community identity, and some politicos who were anti-academy as it was 
perceived as a flagship Tory policy. It was an interesting collection of the 
left, the right and the middle – some of their fears were reasonable and 
grounded and some were just ridiculous.

Related: School governors vs academy trustees: what's the difference? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/may/25/school-governors-vs-academy-trustees-whats-the-difference>

But we saw that most other schools in Cambridgeshire were converting, so we 
couldn’t see any value in staying. And at that time, the funding you got as a 
converter was quite good so it seemed to be the pragmatic decision to make. 
Then it was business as usual, which is running a good school.

I think you have to embrace change and let it happen, but that means getting 
to the point that you know and understand the risks involved and can make sure 
that they are understood by everyone else. To be honest, we struggled in that 
regard because there was that lack of knowledge and understanding. It’s that 
Donald Rumsfeld thing; you don’t know what you don’t know until you come across 
it.

Moving into a MAT is even more complex; are you the lead school? How are you 
working together? What’s your scheme of delegation? Becoming part of an MAT is 
like marriage without the possibility of divorce – and let’s face it, most of 
us would think very carefully if there was no divorce. Talk to as many people 
who have gone through it as you can. You really need to know and understand the 
process, and if you don’t yet, find a way to make damn well sure that you do.

You have to engage staff in the process

Kim Johnson is principal of Bradfields Academy 
<http://www.bradfieldsacademy.co.uk/page/default.asp?title=Home&pid=1>, a 
special school in Kent, which became an academy in 2014.

When I arrived at the school in 2006, it was in the social care directorate 
rather than education, so the interaction with the local authority (LA) was 
negligible. When it became clear that we could convert, we put together a 
committee to look at the pros and cons of becoming an academy.

There were issues around pay and salaries, for example. We decided that our 
staff are our greatest resource and we wanted to invest in that beyond the 
recommendations that came from the LA. So we have created a structure where 
people can see opportunities for advancement and they feel that the salary 
they’re getting is commensurate with the job they do.

There’s been a lot of “if it aint’ broke, don’t fix it” talk about the 
academies programme, but for us it was about taking the opportunity to put the 
future of our academy in our hands. As practitioners, we didn’t feel that the 
LA had the expertise or ambition for us. We felt that we would be in a better 
place if we took charge and that has been the case. The staff have a sense of 
ownership and investment now – they feel that they’re working for Bradfields, 
not the LA.

If academisation is something that you’re thinking about, or being steered 
towards, you have to engage your staff in that process. There was no politics 
or union angst in the way that we did it, it was very much a democratic 
process, and a painless one. We made sure that the staff, as well as parents 
and students, knew all the positives and negatives, so that they could make an 
informed decision.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
