
It’s a truism to say that most of what we hear or read about in the papers has 
no effect on us, the readers. But often what we read should have some bearing 
on what we do, because it is not always going to be apparent to our eyes. Life 
may give us an entirely wrong view of what’s going on.

I’ve been reading about Philip Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/philip-green> selling BHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs>, and the company collapsing with a 
huge hole in its pension fund, yet the stores keep going, at least for the 
moment. The vast empire of shops is being kicked about like a football, but if 
you hadn’t read the news you’d never guess from the stores themselves that 
there was anything untoward.

I bought a pair of trousers from my local BHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> last week. Earlier I’d also bought 
from a different branch the excellently frivolous hat I wore for a Buckingham 
Palace event.

Whatever is happening to the group’s finances, the shops are the same as 
before. Which is astonishing given what the staff must be going through, with 
their worries about the future.

It makes me wonder how many other familiar organisations may be considering 
enormous changes to the way they operate – without any aspect of that change 
being obvious to us outsiders due to the heroic staff; or without the staff 
knowing themselves.

I suppose half the time we’ve no need to know what financial upheavals are 
underway in the back rooms, but BHS shows how ignorance is anything but bliss. 
I just hope the shopkeepers get through. We ought, as humane shoppers, to be 
concerned about the staff. We could stay away because they’re having a bad 
time, but alas it’s not clear that would actually help them if we did.

What do you think? Have your say below?
