
“The air we’re breathing right now is the freshest in the world,” says Marcel 
Noé, an expert on Mauritian maritime history and culture, as we sail across 
Mahébourg Bay. “There’s nothing but open ocean between here and Antarctica.”

Related: Beyond beaches: the hidden gems of Mauritius 
<https://www.theguardian.com/ba-guide-to-mauritius-2016/2016/mar/23/beyond-beaches-the-hidden-gems-of-mauritius>

 Our boat is a traditional, handmade fishing pirogue with a painted 
jackfruit-wood hull and a bamboo mast. In recent years, a flurry of heritage 
regattas has prompted Mauritian sailing enthusiasts to build boats like this 
once more, reviving a dying art.

 “Boat races were high society occasions on Mauritius, right up to the 
mid-20th century,” says Marcel. “In winter you’d have a flutter at the 
Mauritius Turf Club at the Champ de Mars in Port Louis, the oldest horse-racing 
club in the southern hemisphere, then in summer you’d decamp to the regattas.”

Rekindled in 2008, Mahébourg Bay’s Régate Ile Maurice is the peak of the 
sailing season and a highlight of the flamboyantFestival International Kreole 
<http://www.festivalinternasionalkreol.mu/>, the island’s main annual cultural 
celebration. The 2015 regatta was bigger than ever, with around 50,000 
spectators, mostly local families, gathering to watch pirogues hurtle across 
the bay, their brightly coloured sails billowing in the breeze. Fishermen and 
talented teams of underprivileged youngsters from the local Pointe Jérôme 
Sailing School take part. “It’s not just about sailing – it’s a big social 
event,” says Marcel. “There are stalls selling wonderful traditional food – the 
kind you rarely find in restaurants.”Galettes de manioc (cassava pancakes), 
briani (savoury rice) and the seasonal delicacy salmi tang (hedgehog-like 
tenrec, cooked in a spicy stew) top the menu.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkh2%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkh2%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F925ef5d1a012abdf87a5e2eb833f79db70720e79%2F234_472_4354_2612%2F4354.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Creole%20cooking%20and%20cannon%20smoke%3A%20how%20Mauritius%20keeps%20its%20heritage%20alive&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkh2%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Creole+cooking+and+cannon+smoke%3A+how+Mauritius+keeps+its+heritage+alive&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkh2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F925ef5d1a012abdf87a5e2eb833f79db70720e79%2F234_472_4354_2612%2F4354.jpg>
 Local maritime historian, Marcel Noé. Photograph: Emma Gregg 
To the island’s first settlers, Mahébourg Bay in the southeast was a natural 
haven; the Dutch built a fort here in 1638. For one bitter week in August 1810, 
the air was thick with smoke and cannon fire, as British and French frigates 
fought for possession of Grand Port, the original harbour.

“It must have been quite a spectacle,” says Marcel. “Ships burning in the bay, 
blood on the water…” A maze of reefs and sandbanks made the bay as tricky as a 
lobster pot and the British miscalculated, suffering a crushing defeat. The 
first and last battle in which the French defeated the British Royal Navy 
during the Napoleonic Wars, Grand Port is the only naval victory commemorated 
on the Arc de Triomphe in Paris.

The story of Mahébourg Bay unfolds in the collection of paintings, maps and 
historic accounts atFalaise Rouge 
<http://www.lavalleedeferney.com/falaise-rouge/index-en.html>, a Creole 
restaurant with stunning views over the glossy, turquoise waters, and at Vieux 
Grand Port’s tiny Frederik Hendrik Museum, one of agrowing network of cultural 
centres <http://www.mauritiusmuseums.mu/> recording Mauritius’s history as a 
prize for seafarers, timber traders and sugarcane farmers. Others include 
Mahébourg’s venerable National History Museum, a stately mansion containing 
dodo bones, corsairs’ weapons and Ming porcelain hauled from wrecks. Marcel 
hopes that, in time, a boat-building museum could open in Mahébourg, too.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkh2%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkh2%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1594b29ca5ae425da01ece183c611a8c295ac1ff%2F0_384_6159_3696%2F6159.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Creole%20cooking%20and%20cannon%20smoke%3A%20how%20Mauritius%20keeps%20its%20heritage%20alive&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkh2%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Creole+cooking+and+cannon+smoke%3A+how+Mauritius+keeps+its+heritage+alive&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkh2%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1594b29ca5ae425da01ece183c611a8c295ac1ff%2F0_384_6159_3696%2F6159.jpg>
 The natural haven of Mahébourg Bay. Photograph: AMK/Getty Images 
In the meantime, he’s helping to organise the 2017 Festival of the Sea, a 
major event featuring tall ships from all over the world, led by theHermione 
<http://www.hermione2015.com/lafayette.html>, a replica of the frigate that 
carried the Marquis de Lafayette from France to America in 1780. The festival – 
which takes its cues from a maritime festival that took place 30 years ago, 
when the First Fleet Re-enactment stopped over at Mauritius en route from 
Portsmouth to Sydney – is set to become a biannual event.

 Our cruise around the bay is blissfully peaceful, marred only by the 
occasional drone of speedboats. “Now, if I could encourage more people to 
switch to solar-powered boats,” says Marcel, “that would be another big step 
forward.”

The 11th edition of the Festival International Kreole takes place from 
Wednesday 23 November to Sunday 4 December 2016. Most events are free.

British Airways flies direct three times a week from Gatwick to Mauritius. For 
more information and to book, visitbritishairways.com/mauritius 
<https://ad.doubleclick.net/ddm/clk/302966546;130080452;z>
