
Beaches

I would recommend a visit to Margate as a start for anyone exploring the Kent 
coast, and time your visit to catch a special "Turner sunset".JMW Turner 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/J._M._W._Turner>, who had a deep connection with 
Margate, boasted that Thanet's skies were "the loveliest in all Europe".

Along the coast, between Ramsgate and Sandwich, is Pegwell Bay. You can walk 
to Pegwell Bay from Ramsgatevia a coastal path 
<http://bertuchi.co.uk/thanet3.php>. This spectacular sweeping bay is a great 
spot for kite-surfing and itslarge nature reserve makes it a unique bird 
watching location 
<http://www.kentwildlifetrust.org.uk/reserves/sandwich-and-pegwell-bay> 
(kentwildlifetrust.org.uk).

Beaches such as Botany Bay <http://www.britishbeaches.info/botany-bay-kent>, 
just outside Margate, with its chalk stack, as well as Broadstairs and 
Ramsgate, are clean and the water is warmish for sea swimming. Do check out the 
tide timetable and swim on a high tide.

Culture and arts
 Limbo Arts 
Art flourishes in Margate with Limbo <http://www.limboarts.co.uk/> (Substation 
Project Space, 2 Bilton Square), an artist-led organisation that provides 
affordable artist studios, a gallery/project space and a programme of 
exhibitions, artist residencies, events and off-site projects. The Old Town 
also has a range of other small galleries.

Things to see and do

Tucked off the seafront Margate's Shell Grotto <http://shellgrotto.co.uk/> 
(Grotto Hill) is not to be missed. Discovered in 1835, the underground cave is 
decorated with millions of shells. The origins of the grotto remain unknown but 
it is a fascinating place which continues to inspire artists and audiences.

The Secret Gardens in the medieval town of Sandwich were originally designed 
by Edwin Lutyens and Gertrude Jekyll and at the heart of them lies the Grade 
I-listed manor house, now a boutique hotel, called The Salutation (Knightrider 
Street. Doubles from £160).

Cycling in this part of Kent is easy given that the terrain is flat. Take the 
cycle path which runs from Kingsdown, past Walmer and Deal castles and 
continues to Deal pier. I particularly like the beautiful gardens atWalmer 
Castle 
<http://www.english-heritage.org.uk/daysout/properties/walmer-castle-and-gardens/>
 (Kingsdown Road, Deal).

Where to eat and drink

In Cliftonville, Fort's <http://www.fortscafe.co.uk/> Cafe (8 Cliff Terrace) 
serves home-cooked food using locally-sourced produce such as vegetables from 
the town's Windmill Allotment Project.

The No Name Shop <http://nonameshop.co.uk/> (1 No Name Street), in one of 
Sandwich's oldest buildings, offers delicious French cheeses and charcuterie as 
well as freshly-baked bread and pastries. Pop upstairs for lunch atLe Bistro 
<http://nonameshop.co.uk/bistro/>. I like the ambiance at The Black Douglas 
Coffee House <http://www.blackdouglas.co.uk/> (83 Beach Street) in Deal.

The cliffs around St Margaret's Bay and Dover are spectacular and the National 
Trust cafe <http://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/white-cliffs-dover/> (Langdon 
Cliffs, Upper Road) at the White Cliffs serves great tea and cake with 
wonderful views out onto the busy the Channel.

• Victoria Pomery, director of Turner Contemporary 
<http://www.turnercontemporary.org/>. The current exhibition 'Curiosity: Art 
and the Pleasures of Knowing 
<http://www.turnercontemporary.org/exhibitions/curiosity-art-and-the-pleasures-of-knowing>
' runs until 15 September. This Hayward Touring exhibition, curated by 
Brian Dillion, transformed the gallery into a cabinet of curiosities as science 
and art, reality and fiction, ancient and modern coincide. Follow on Twitter
@TCMargate <https://twitter.com/TCMargate> 
