
The BBC has denied that Alan Yentob 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/alan-yentob> tried to influence a Newsnight 
report into scandal-hit charity Kids Company, of which he is the chairman.

Yentob, the BBC’s creative director, allegedly called Newsnight staff hours 
ahead of the broadcast of its probe into Kids Company to “influence the 
direction” of the report,according to the Daily Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3184493/Alan-Yentob-tried-halt-BBC-probe-kids-charity-Corporation-s-330-000-year-creative-director-phoned-Newsnight-staff-hours-aired-damning-report-Kids-Company.html>
.

“The fact that BBC <http://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> broke this story 
shows that our journalism has been impartial and in the public interest,” said 
a spokeswoman.

Yentob subsequently joined embattled Kids Company chief executive, Camila 
Batmanghelidjh <https://www.theguardian.com/society/camilabatmanghelidjh>, at 
the studios of Radio 4’s Today programme when she was interviewed following the 
Newsnight report.

The BBC denied that Yentob has displayed a conflict of interest, and said that 
he is free to comment on the activities of Kids Company.

“We are not going to comment on gossip but everyone knows that Alan Yentob is 
the creative director of the BBC and doesn’t have any editorial control over 
BBC News,” said the spokeswoman. “He is chair of Kids Company and can speak to 
media outlets about issues related to them.”

Batmanghelidjh is to stand down as chief executive by 31 October.

Kids Company is said to have told ministers that it will close 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/aug/05/childrens-charity-kids-company-close-financial-concerns>
, just days after it received a £3m grant from the government.

Ministers agreed to give the extra cash to help restructure the charity 
despite objections from a senior civil servant who warned they did not think it 
would be “value for money”.

Mayor of London, Boris Johnson, said “there have been questions raised about 
some of the financial management of the organisation” but stressed the charity 
has done important work for troubled children.

He told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “It’s a great shame that it doesn’t 
seem to be working in the way that I think everybody who supports the idea 
would like.

“What I want to happen is to ensure that all the kids who’ve been receiving 
care and attention from Camila and her team will have some kind of safety net.”
