
For many pupils sitting exams this summer the next few weeks of cramming will 
be aimed at one thing – securing a university place. But, for universities, 
admissions decisions have become about far more than exam grades.

Changes to A-levels <http://www.theguardian.com/education/alevels>, combined 
with ambitious government targets to raise the number of students from 
disadvantaged backgrounds, greater competition for the highest achieving 
students and worries about league table positioning are making the admissions 
process increasingly complex. “A lot more is happening now than someone looking 
at a bunch of applications and making a decision,” says Janet Graham, director 
of Supporting Professionalism in Admissions (SPA), which offers advice to 
universities. “They have to know much more than they used to.”

Related: So much for A-level ‘rigour’: universities are taking anyone 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/dec/14/alevel-changes-universities-unconditional-offers>

In many ways, these changes have put applicants in a more favourable position. 
For many courses and universities the chief difficulty is not deciding between 
multiple applicants but ensuring they have enough. A fall in the number of 
18-year-olds in the UK is projected to continue for the next six years. At the 
same time, the government has lifted its cap on the number of students each 
institution can recruit, which has left many scrabbling for the top applicants. 
This means candidates can be fairly confident of gaining a place somewhere.

But there are still many courses – architecture at Cambridge, maths at 
Warwick, physics at Imperial College London, mechanical engineering at Bath, 
medicine almost anywhere – where competition for places remains fierce, and 
often stronger than ever. Applications to Oxford have increased over the past 
10 years from 13,000 to more than 19,000 for 3,200 undergraduate places.

Universities have had to rethink admissions procedures and find new ways to 
select students. They must mostly still make an offer of a place before they 
know a student’s grades, after numerous failed attempts to introduce a 
post-qualifications system. But research by theCambridge Assessment 
<http://www.cambridgeassessment.org.uk/news/prediction-is-a-difficult-art-cambridge-assessment-research-finds/>
 exam group shows that most A-level predictions made by teachers are wrong. It 
suggests accuracy has fallen since the removal last year of the majority of 
January exams, which teachers had used to help their predictions. And further 
changes to A-level courses over the next few years are likely to make 
predictions even harder, particularly with the removal of AS-levels as part of 
A-level courses, which has led to some schools dropping them altogether.
 Simon Beeston, director of Cambridge Assessment’s admissions testing service. 
Photograph: Rowan Lamb 
Mary Curnock Cook 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/education/universityeducation/12138373/Teachers-over-predict-results-in-race-for-university-places.html>
, Ucas chief executive, revealed earlier this year that more than half of 
students accepted on to degree courses had missed their required results by two 
or more grades.

Increased competition for applicants means more universities are also making 
unconditional offers – although some question the wisdom of telling 
17-year-olds halfway through a course that their final results won’t matter – 
and theUniversity of Reading <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-35550788> 
announced in February that if applicants missed their offer by one A-level 
grade it would still guarantee admission.

An applicant’s GCSE results remain important to universities, but Paul Teulon, 
director of admissions and registry services at King’s College London, argues 
some students can change significantly between GCSE and A-level, which is why 
he is concerned about the loss of AS-levels. He sees them as a way of students 
exploring where their strengths and interests really lie: “How easy will it be 
for students who change their minds, who make a false start?”

The loss of AS-levels has been felt particularly by Cambridge which, 
unusually, used a detailed breakdown of AS grades in its admissions decision 
making. As a result it announced it will be setting its own admissions tests 
for all candidates from next year.

“AS-levels have been a source of information that has been really, really 
useful and we are sad to see it go,” says Sam Lucy, director of admissions of 
the Cambridge colleges.

Cambridge is not alone in opting for entrance exams. Oxford already sets its 
own tests in most subjects and SPA is investigating whether more universities 
will follow. It is researching the extent to which institutions already use 
their own tests, what value they add and how well applicants and their advisers 
understand them. It plans to publish preliminary findings in June.

“There probably will be some people doing this [introducing their own tests],” 
says Graham. “There is a lot of uncertainty about the new qualifications.”

Related: Fears over unfair university admissions as AS-levels disappear 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/sep/08/university-admissions-as-levels-sixth-form-exams>

Simon Beeston, director of Cambridge Assessment’s admissions testing service, 
which is developing the new tests for Cambridge, says it has seen renewed 
interest in admissions testing and will launch a new admissions test for maths 
in November for Durham and other universities.

The number of universities listed on Ucas’s website 
<https://www.ucas.com/ucas/undergraduate/getting-started/entry-requirements/admissions-tests>
 that set additional tests for applicants already ranges from computer 
animation arts at Bournemouth University to engineering at Edinburgh. They are 
common in most law schools and in nursing to test for skills beyond those 
involved in GCSE.

Beeston says admissions tests help show that institutions are committed to 
selecting the best candidates, and that candidates are committed enough to take 
an extra test. “There is a benefit for students and parents as well, because an 
investment in higher education is exactly that these days,” he says. “You want 
to know you are likely to do well on a course before you incur £50,000 worth of 
debt.”

But others are concerned about the implications for social mobility, 
especially since the announcement by David Cameron that he wants to double the 
number of young people from disadvantaged backgrounds entering higher education 
by 2020.

“For admissions you don’t want to put up barriers,” says Graham. “Anyone who 
does these things has to be very careful.”

Beeston says his organisation, a not-for-profit, non-teaching department of 
Cambridge University, has tried to address the potential unfairness of some 
schools and companies tutoring applicants for the tests, by making as much 
learning support material as possible freely available online.

Bur Steven Jones, senior lecturer at the Manchester Institute of Education, 
Manchester University, says: “The more unregulated it is the more it becomes a 
game and the more strategies become important. In the long term that advantages 
established institutions and students from advantaged backgrounds.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tcjd%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tcjd%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d7af9d6a2e6d5c14308cdf01b75e7e321e19cdc%2F55_114_2415_3625%2F2415.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20new%20university%20admissions%20procedures%20boost%20social%20mobility%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tcjd%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will+new+university+admissions+procedures+boost+social+mobility%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tcjd%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d7af9d6a2e6d5c14308cdf01b75e7e321e19cdc%2F55_114_2415_3625%2F2415.jpg>
 Samina Khan, director of undergraduate admissions at Oxford University 
He has conducted research 
<http://www.suttontrust.com/researcharchive/the-personal-statement/> into 
personal statements that shows they are heavily weighted in favour of those 
from advantaged backgrounds and argues interviews can be similarly problematic 
because interviewers tend to look for candidates with similar qualities to 
themselves.

Jones’s research found some institutions in the Netherlands and Greece dealt 
with this difficulty by using a lottery system to admit students who reached a 
certain academic level, but he suggests one of the fairest ways of 
distinguishing applicants is through so-called contextual admissions – 
assessing candidates’ performances in GCSEs and A-levels in the light of 
detailed data about their schooling and backgrounds.

This is becoming an increasingly important part of the university admissions 
process as data collection and analysis improve and evidence emerges that 
students from disadvantaged backgrounds often do better than more advantaged 
peers with the same entry qualifications.

Related: Oxford University admissions interview questions – and answers – 
revealed 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/oct/12/oxford-university-admissions-interview-questions-and-answers-revealed>

At Oxford, Samina Khan, director of undergraduate admissions and outreach, 
says Oxford admissions officers will look at the Ofsted reports of the schools 
that applicants attended, including whether they have had teacher shortages or 
been in special measures, and will speak to teachers if they feel they need 
more details about a candidate.

Teulon says the government’s lifting of the cap on student numbers has made it 
easier to use contextual admissions, because taking a candidate with lower 
grades no longer means rejecting another, suitably qualified, from a more 
advantaged background. But Jones says university league tables, which often 
take account of average entry requirements, can deter institutions from this.

A report published last week by the Institute for Fiscal Studies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/apr/13/richer-students-have-higher-graduate-income-study-finds>
 linking graduates’ earnings to what and where they studied could add another 
complication. If the employment and salary prospects of their graduates become 
a key measure of universities’ success, as the government suggests they should, 
admissions officers could come under further pressure to admit those most 
likely to earn well. And the IFS report shows the high earners tend to be those 
from more privileged backgrounds.
