
Robert Peston <http://www.theguardian.com/media/robert-peston> has been 
confirmed as ITV’s new political editor this afternoon after signing a contract 
that includes presenting a new Sunday morning politics show.

The BBC <http://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> economics editor has spent the 
last two days finalising details of a full-time staff contract with the 
commercial channel that will see him appear across all ITV’s news and current 
affairs shows.

It is believed he will earn up to £350,000. Andrew Marr, his soon-to-be BBC 
rival on Sunday mornings 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/mediamonkeyblog/2015/oct/07/andrew-marr-take-on-robert-peston>
, is reported to earn significantly more. Earlier suggestions that Peston would 
be earning closer to £750,000 were rejected by ITV insiders.

In a heartfelt post on his BBC blog 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-34463444>, Peston called working for BBC 
News “the high point of my working life”, adding that “its unrivalled 
commitment to objectivity, seriousness and relevance is a beacon”.

After thanking his colleagues for turning his “pigs ears into almost-silken 
purses” the man responsible for a string of scoops including the collapse of 
Northern Rock said: “I’ve never had a dull moment since I joined. I will miss 
the BBC terribly.”

His move ties in with ITV’s plans to relaunch News at Ten later this month 
with formerITV <https://www.theguardian.com/business/itv> political editor Tom 
Bradby as main anchor.

In a statement Peston said: “I am very excited by ITV’s plans to create a 
distinctive and authoritative new voice in news and political coverage. Leaving 
the wonderful BBC has been the hardest career decision of my life, but it’s 
impossible to turn down an opportunity like this.” He was expected to address 
new new colleagues at ITV on Wednesday afternoon.

Peston, who began his career as a print journalist working at the Financial 
Times and the Sunday Telegraph, spent the last 10 years at the BBC. He is said 
to have beentempted to leave 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/oct/04/robert-peston-leave-bbc-itv-political-editor>
 as a result of the changing political environment in the UK as well as the 
chance of hosting his own show.

Related: Will Robert Peston's move be hit or miss? Switching from BBC to ITV 
has been tried before ... 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/oct/05/robert-pestons-move-bbc-to-itv> 

It is not yet known whether the new show, with a working title of Peston on 
Sunday, will be shown opposite BBC1’sAndrew Marr 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/andrewmarr> programme when it launches some 
time next year.

The appointment comes after years in which ITV has ceded ground in public 
service broadcasting, with the likes of Sky News going head-to-head with the 
BBC over public service reporting.


The channel once dominated the space 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/sep/22/itv-at-60-where-next-for-the-home-of-brideshead-corrie-and-the-x-factor>
 with the likes of Brian Walden’s Weekend World and Frost on Sunday but, after 
its public service obligations were loosened in the 1990s, the channel started 
to show repeats of children’s television programmes on a Sunday morning.

The Andrew Marr 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/oct/07/andrew-marr-bbc-collapse-without-shows-like-strictly>
 Show, which airs at 9am, regularly attracted between 1.2 million and 1.4 
million viewers in September, compared with fewer than 185,000 on ITV for shows 
such as the children’s programme Horrible Science and Murder She Wrote.

Peston on Sunday is expected to run for much of the year and, according to 
ITV’s director of news and current affairs, Michael Jermey, it will “offer 
viewers a fresh and distinctive approach to political discussion at the 
weekend”.

Jermey also said Peston’s “distinctive and intelligent approach to journalism 
will fit well with ITV’s news and current affairs output. Robert’s 
conversations on News at Ten with Tom Bradby will be essential viewing for 
everyone who wants to be well informed about politics.”

It is not thought to be money that induced Peston to move to ITV, despite the 
best efforts of the BBC, which offered him stints on Newsnight if he stayed.

Peston is expected to report to Geoff Hill, the editor of ITV News, who said: 
“I’m delighted that Robert is joining us at such an important time as we 
continue to develop News at Ten. He is a hugely respected and competitive 
journalist, renowned for agenda-setting journalism.“

