
On 5 December the star at the top of the Christmas tree in Manger Square, 
Bethlehem was lit, signifying the start of the festive season. The Palestinian 
city, home to the holy sites of the Church of Nativity believed to be the 
birthplace of Jesus, is a symbol of peace for those who celebrateChristmas 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> around the world. The 
symbol is very significant this winter, with relations between Israel and 
Palestine once again increasingly volatile.

“We had a message to give to the world, and we did,” says Vera Baboun, mayor 
of Bethlehem. “When we lit the tree, we gave a message that we cannot be 
without hope. We have to be with hope, despite everything surrounding us: the 
political situation, the situation in the middle east, and war.


“This political situation cannot take away the joy for the children, nor 
prevent us from celebrating.”

True peace can never prevail in the world as long as the city of peace does 
not live in peace
Vera Baboun 
Recent violent incidents 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/interactive/2015/10/mapping-dead-latest-israeli-palestinian-violence-151013142015577.html>
 have tempered this year’s Christmas celebrations in the holy city. Fewer 
streets were decorated, some festivities were cancelled and there was no 
fireworks display, which traditionally marks the lighting of the Christmas tree.

Instead, Baboun, a Christian, looked for a different method to mark the 
festive season. Churches around the world were invited to ring their bells at 
the same time, as a symbol of peace and solidarity. “Sixty nine churches rang 
their bells when the Christmas tree of Bethlehem was lit,” says Baboun. “If 
humanity remains silent, let the bells of Bethlehem speak instead. The bells 
ring to reflect the mosaic of the city: they reflect the joy, the existence, 
the danger that we’re living in – everything.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f28x%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f28x%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8428c57bcda3b31a0199712c94e0d983cbd00c6d%2F0_79_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mayor%20of%20Bethlehem%3A%20'We%20light%20our%20Christmas%20tree%20as%20a%20message%20of%20peace'&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f28x%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mayor+of+Bethlehem%3A+%27We+light+our+Christmas+tree+as+a+message+of+peace%27&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f28x%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8428c57bcda3b31a0199712c94e0d983cbd00c6d%2F0_79_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 The Christmas tree in Bethlehem, beside the Church of Nativity. Photograph: 
Abdelrahman Younis/Reuters 
The day we speak, Baboun has returned from a memorial service for a teenager 
who was killed by Israeli soldiers 
<https://en-maktoob.news.yahoo.com/israeli-soldiers-kill-palestinian-teenager-bethlehem-075227924.html>
 in a refugee camp just south of Bethlehem. She is clearly affected, and her 
voice echoes sadness and frustration. “This is the reality that we live, the 
challenge that we live,” she says. But there is hope. “We have to keep on the 
message that we carry.”


Baboun has an enduring love for the city and its inhabitants. She was a 
lecturer in English literature and language at Bethlehem university for 20 
years before becoming the city’s first elected female mayor in 2012. She sees 
this not only as a personal achievement, but a reflection of a developing 
society. “It is the way my people, my nation, my citizens think: trusting in a 
woman, supporting the women,” she says.


As mayor and leader of the governorate of Bethlehem, she is president of the 
water authority and resident council, among others. It’s a challenge because 
“you work on the national level and the universal level. The mayor of Bethlehem 
is responsible for both, and to keep Bethlehem and its message in contact with 
different parts of the world. And at the same time to lead the process 
nationally, which includes development, services, looking for resources.”


During her time as mayor there have been significant developments. Manger 
Square has been renovated and the borders of Bethlehem municipality have been 
increased. There has also been progress in gender equality: according to 
Baboun, a majority of students at Bethlehem University are women and there’s an 
equal number of men and women employed by the municipality.

Related: Palestine, Israel, Scotland … firefighting that knows no borders 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2015/dec/11/palestine-israel-scotland-firefighting-borders-west-bank>

But in some ways progress is limited: 82% of Bethlehem falls inside Area C, 
which is territory under direct Israeli military and administrative control. 
“You are leading an authority in a place that you are not fully authorised to 
lead,” says Baboun. “It cripples your authority, cripples your capacity.”

The economic strains add another level to the importance of Christmas. 
“Bethlehem depends on tourism,” Baboun says. “During Christmas we have 
visitors, tours, pilgrims; that’s why the celebration is also important for our 
economic continuity.” She hopes for cultural understanding between 
Bethlehemites and the hundreds of thousands of tourists and pilgrims who 
descend on the city at this time of year. “It’s important to interact with 
others. What is civilisation about? What is culture about? It is about 
interaction of people from different nations. What I love in Bethlehem is the 
very secure ambiance, people are very giving, so you feel it around.”

As the city continues to celebrate the festive season throughout December – 
albeit under the shadow of political tensions and violence – Baboun hopes it 
will act as a symbol of what she believes to be the true meaning of Christmas. 
In her 2015 Christmas message, she writes: “True peace can never prevail in the 
world as long as the city of peace does not live in peace. We remain hopeful 
that the star of Bethlehem will be forever sparkling.”

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.

