
Careering out of thick cloud came a large husky, tugging a skier behind him. 
The man flew over a bump and arced through the air, skis inches from my chest, 
then pelted at breakneck speed down the slopes. As the Slovak saying has it, he 
was “skiing like a Hungarian”.

My Slovak hosts here in the ski resort of Tatranská Lomnica were dubious when 
I told them what had happened. “This, no, I never saw,” said hotel manager 
Michal. But he had seen bears passing outside his lobby, he said, and 30 wild 
boar on the roadside one night.

Related: Top 10 affordable ski chalets and lodges 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/oct/23/top-10-affordable-ski-chalets-lodges>

This wild landscape was shrouded in cloud during my visit, so I had to take 
much of what they told me on trust. The panaroma from the 2,364-metre Lomnický 
peak, a cablecar ride from the top of the ski area, is apparently dramatic on 
clear days. Despite the heights, the skiing here in the High Tatras (including 
its Starý Smokovec and Štrbské Pleso resorts) is limited, and suitable mostly 
for beginners and families.

But if that’s for you, organising a weekend ski trip here is easy, thanks to a 
new Wizz Air flight from Luton to Poprad, a 10-minute taxi ride from these 
slopes. And more experienced skiers can drive 40 minutes further to the Low 
Tatras, home to Slovakia’s biggest and best ski resort, Jasna. With 29 pistes, 
Jasna is smaller than many Alpine resorts, but has long runs and decent 
off-piste potential.

Any outdated preconceptions of old eastern European infrastructure are soon 
dispelled: the lifts are modern, with heated seats and bubble covers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F46vx3%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F46vx3%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F18%2F1424264754901%2Fdef8525d-18a8-4437-9419-945d6a929680-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Skiing%20in%20the%20Tatra%20mountains%2C%20Slovakia&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F46vx3%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Skiing+in+the+Tatra+mountains%2C+Slovakia&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F46vx3%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F18%2F1424264754901%2Fdef8525d-18a8-4437-9419-945d6a929680-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Jasna has pistes up to about 2,000 metres. Photograph: Gwyn Topham 
Being below 2,000 metres, Jasna relies on artificial snow to keep all the 
pistes open, and during my visit, scant January falls meant no real off-piste. 
But with decent snow, the designated freeride zones on the rock-free southern 
slopes of 2,024-metre Chopok form a broad, accessible bowl.

I encountered two rare British visitors, Katie and Mark from London, who had 
skied the fresh stuff under blue skies here. They were smitten by Jasna, even 
though their usual choice is Jackson Hole, one of America’s top resorts. They 
appreciated the lower costs here: a free bus serving the lifts runs along the 
valley road to Liptovský Mikulas, along which B&Bs can cost as little as €25 a 
night (visitliptov.sk 
<http://translate.google.co.uk/translate?hl=en&sl=sk&u=http://visitliptov.sk/&prev=search>
). And a beer costs a magical €0.70 at the bar in Demanova village – nicknamed 
Club Tropicana by British visitors (“because drinks are almost free”, said 
Mark).

Eating on the slopes is also good value: at the pricier end, Von Roll 
<http://www.jasna.sk/en/activities/bars-restaurants/von-roll-restaurant/>, a 
converted lift station, serves mains including homemade pasta from about €10. 
Beside the blue run, a Slovakkoliba (mountain hut) cooks the halusky (the 
national dish of sheep-cheese gnocchi with lardons) for €5 a portion. Ski hire 
and lift passes each cost around €20 a dayeach for longer stays), a hefty sum 
by Slovakians standards - many choose instead to hike up the pistes on touring 
skis. There appears to be an appetite for more strenuous physical activity 
here: the Spartan race, a kind of cross-country mountain slog dotted with 
barbed wire obstacles to climb over or crawl under, was having its first 
snowbound outing here, with the locals emerging victorious from an 
international field

.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F46vx3%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F46vx3%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F18%2F1424264885050%2F71f18523-8f16-4226-8a7e-daae5bd9311e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Skiing%20in%20the%20Tatra%20mountains%2C%20Slovakia&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F46vx3%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Skiing+in+the+Tatra+mountains%2C+Slovakia&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F46vx3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F18%2F1424264885050%2F71f18523-8f16-4226-8a7e-daae5bd9311e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Jasna has some 46km of piste 
There is an abundance of hotel spas and waterparks. Alarming posters for 
Tatralandia <http://www.tatralandia.sk/>, linked on the free ski-aqua bus from 
Jasna, shows a scantily clad woman wearing a python, but it is very much a 
family place. Saunas and spa rooms give way to a wealth of pools and 
startlingly rapid slides.

Related: Skiing in eastern Europe on a budget: the best resorts 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/feb/14/eastern-europe-skiing-budget-resorts>

The High Tatras have a gentler side, with lovely Austro-Hungarian empire 
establishments that could double as the Grand Budapest Hotel – the sort of 
place where Ralph Fiennes’ concierge entertains wealthy octogenarians: all 
wallpaper, chandeliers and reproduced artworks In 2008, Prince Philip stayed at 
theGrandhotel <http://grandhotel.sk/en/> in Stary Smokovec; Harold Wilson, who 
has a lounge named after him, presumably stayed, too. The Wilson bar is 
upstaged by the hotel’s Castro cafe, though: pictures showing Fidel stripped to 
the waist were taken on a 1972 visit, when he hunted chamois before an epic 
table tennis duel against the hotel’s boiler man.

It’s a history that smacks of surreal Wes Anderson fantasy, were it not for 
the photographic evidence.

• Accommodation was provided by Tatry Mountain Resorts <http://www.tmr.sk/> , 
with nights at Jasna’s Ostredok hotel (doubles from €105 in ski season,
ostredok.sk <>) and the Grandhotel in Stary Smokovec (doubles from €80, 
grandhotel.sk <http://grandhotel.sk/en/>). Flights were provided by WizzAir 
<https://wizzair.com/en-GB/Search>, which flies from Luton to Poprad-Tatry from 
£47 return
