
It’s fair to say that Bucharest is unlikely to win any awards for beauty or 
style, yet the Romanian capital surprises many first-time visitors with its 
cosmopolitan vibe and energy.

During the period between the wars, Bucharest’s epithet as the “Paris of the 
east” was accurate, up to a point. However, today’s cityscape is largely one of 
imposing socialist architecture, the result of former dictator Nicolae 
Ceauşescu’s savage redevelopment project during the 1980s – the bleakest of 
communist years for Romanians.

Things are much brighter these days, however, and lurking among this tangle of 
concrete are some wonderful art nouveau buildings (many housing terrific 
museums), ancient churches and monasteries, lush parkland, lakes and elegant 
boulevards. Bucharest’s culinary scene is at last worth getting excited about, 
while the city has few peers anywhere in the Balkans when it comes to nightlife.

Above all, though, the old town – also called Lipscani after the main street 
that crosses the area – has become the city’s go-to party place and, on any 
given night, you’ll find the bars full to bursting.

With the ferocious summer heat just a hazy memory, late autumn is the perfect 
time to explore this compelling city’s unexpected delights.

What to do and see

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dfvj%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dfvj%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff4508200b69cce9cc2803fcf187b479b279e009f%2F0_0_640_418%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bucharest%20city%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%20plus%20the%20best%20bars%2C%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dfvj%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bucharest+city+guide%3A+what+to+see+plus+the+best+bars%2C+hotels+and+restaurants&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dfvj%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff4508200b69cce9cc2803fcf187b479b279e009f%2F0_0_640_418%2F640.jpg>
 The scale of the Palace of Parliament, or Casa Poporului, beggars belief. 
Photograph: Alamy 
Bucharest’s old town was mercifully untouched by second world war bombs and 
Ceauşescu’s bulldozers and is the city’s most charismatic neighbourhood. 
Although much of the area remains agreeably tatty, a massive regeneration 
project has transformed many of its hitherto grubby-looking streets and 
buildings, the most spectacular example being the newCărtureşti Carusel bookshop
 (carturesticarusel.ro <http://carturesticarusel.ro/>) on strada Lipscani. The 
pint-sizedStavropoleos Church, with ornate carvings in stone and wood both 
inside and out, is another architectural must-see.

Whether you consider it a thing of beauty or (more likely) brute ugly, the 
Palace of Parliament (aka the People’s House, cdep.ro 
<http://www.cdep.ro/pls/dic/site.page?id=10>) is indisputably jaw-dropping. 
Constructed at Ceauşescu’s behest, its scale and opulence are head-spinning: 12 
storeys (including four underground levels, one a nuclear bunker), 1,100 rooms, 
4,500 chandeliers, and so on – although apparently not even 700 architects 
could satisfy Ceauşescu’s, or rather his wife’s, ever-changing whims. Guided 
tours (£5) take in a dozen or so of the largest and most extravagant rooms and 
conclude on the balconied terrace, affording fabulous views down bulevardul 
Unirii.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dfvj%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dfvj%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48d5ae1fa7de724c1ecfa29b051a0e2129f82d1a%2F0_0_640_486%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bucharest%20city%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%20plus%20the%20best%20bars%2C%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dfvj%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bucharest+city+guide%3A+what+to+see+plus+the+best+bars%2C+hotels+and+restaurants&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dfvj%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48d5ae1fa7de724c1ecfa29b051a0e2129f82d1a%2F0_0_640_486%2F640.jpg>
 The new Cărtureşti Carusel bookshop. Photograph: Alamy 
For more Ceauşescu-linked culture, head to the piata Revolutiei and check out 
the pockmarked buildings. The square was the focal point of fighting during the 
1989 revolution, which led to the end of the dictator’s regime.

The National Village Museum (adults £2, seniors £1, children 50p, 
muzeul-satului.ro <http://www.muzeul-satului.ro/>) is on the shores of lake 
Herăstrău and exhibits vernacular architecture from all over Romania. 
Comprising some 300 dwellings – churches, workshops, windmills and so on – 
there’s much ground to cover, so keep a keen eye out for the ingenious dug-out 
(or “pit”) homes from Oltenia and the iconic wooden churches from Maramureş in 
northern Romania.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dfvj%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dfvj%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82d0850570d9e3855618b8fc7a84ed65a5714ec8%2F0_104_5150_3087%2F5150.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bucharest%20city%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%20plus%20the%20best%20bars%2C%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dfvj%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bucharest+city+guide%3A+what+to+see+plus+the+best+bars%2C+hotels+and+restaurants&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dfvj%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82d0850570d9e3855618b8fc7a84ed65a5714ec8%2F0_104_5150_3087%2F5150.jpg>
 National Village Museum. Photograph: Alamy 
Take a stroll around Cişmigiu Gardens, the oldest and largest park in central 
Bucharest. It’s a welcome dollop of green space in the city and there’s a 
boating lake for would-be rowers.

For a break from the noise of downtown, make your way to the enchanting 
Mogoşoaia Palace(entry £1, palatebrancovenesti.ro 
<http://palatebrancovenesti.ro/en/>), which is about 10km north-west of the 
centre. Designed by the 17th-century ruler of the Wallachia region, Constantin 
Brâncoveanu (who occasionally resided here), it’s a red-brick structure typical 
of the region, and the interior retains some lovely detail, not least dazzling 
Venetian mosaic flooring and carved wooden doors. After, it’s worth taking a 
walk around the grounds and woods.

Where to eat 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dfvj%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dfvj%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6effddff5407223a4d0c387d04024a3326b852b9%2F0_0_4288_2848%2F4288.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bucharest%20city%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%20plus%20the%20best%20bars%2C%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dfvj%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bucharest+city+guide%3A+what+to+see+plus+the+best+bars%2C+hotels+and+restaurants&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dfvj%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6effddff5407223a4d0c387d04024a3326b852b9%2F0_0_4288_2848%2F4288.jpg>
 Beca’s Kitchen 
Fine dining remains something of a novelty concept in Bucharest, but elegantly 
understatedThe Artist (13 strada Nicolae Tonitza, +40 728 318871, theartist.ro 
<http://theartist.ro/>), discreetly tucked away on one of the old town’s 
quieter streets, is leading the way. The restaurant’s young Dutch chef creates 
inventive dishes such as roasted quail and crab with apricot and white 
chocolate (£12), and elderflower parfait with black cherries and prosecco (£5); 
and if choosing between the dishes proves impossible, have a cheeky bash at the 
spoon-tasting menu (£12), for a little taste of everything.

Home-style cooking doesn’t come much better than at Beca’s Kitchen (80 strada 
Mihai Eminescu, +40 744 344 700,becaskitchen.ro <http://www.becaskitchen.ro/>), 
a little family-run restaurant on an unassuming residential street, a short 
walk north of the city centre. Dishes – around half a dozen starters and a 
similar number of mains – are chalked up on a blackboard, which Beca herself 
will bring to the table and delight in explaining. There’s nothing particularly 
fussy or complicated about the food – for example, baked seabass with roasted 
veg and beetroot (£10), or rhubarb tart with vanilla sauce (£3) – it’s the 
simplicity, much like the place itself, that makes it a winner.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dfvj%2Fsfb%23img-6&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dfvj%2Fsfb%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1745dd3d60f45790339996b7378dc1657443a7f%2F0_0_3888_2333%2F3888.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bucharest%20city%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%20plus%20the%20best%20bars%2C%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dfvj%2Fstw%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bucharest+city+guide%3A+what+to+see+plus+the+best+bars%2C+hotels+and+restaurants&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dfvj%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1745dd3d60f45790339996b7378dc1657443a7f%2F0_0_3888_2333%2F3888.jpg>
 Pukka Tukka Photograph: Victor Arsene 2015/Pukka Tukka 
The location isn’t the most exciting but that shouldn’t dissuade anyone from 
venturing toPukka Tukka (13 piaţa Amzei 13, +40 733 145034, pukkafood.ro 
<http://www.pukkatukka.ro/?utm_source=site_pukkafood&utm_medium=banner&utm_content=am_deschis_pukkatukka_allpages&utm_campaign=promovare_incrucisata>
), a super organic food bar. Try a cooked “Pukka Tukka” breakfast (£6), or a 
lunch of salmon with baby spinach (£8). All the drinks, including coffee, fresh 
apple juice and a selection of local wines, are 100% organic, too. The 
wicker-walled interior features barely half a dozen small tables, each with 
stools made from cork, but there is a pleasantly shaded patio for alfresco 
eating.

Caru’ cu Bere (5 strada Stavropoleos, +40 213 137560, carucubere.ro 
<http://www.carucubere.ro/ro/>), literally “beer cart”, is the first restaurant 
many tourists make a beeline for but it’s also where the locals go, which says 
much about its authenticity. Chic waiting staff scuttle around the ornate 
restaurant, doling out Romanian standards such asmittitei (grilled spiced 
sausages, £3) andtochitură (pork stew, £7), while the house musicians belt out 
Romanian folk tunes. Great fun.

Where to drink

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dfvj%2Fsfb%23img-7&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dfvj%2Fsfb%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70cc022d13656c125b92aacfa28b12d5a76f2230%2F0_0_5184_3108%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bucharest%20city%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%20plus%20the%20best%20bars%2C%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dfvj%2Fstw%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bucharest+city+guide%3A+what+to+see+plus+the+best+bars%2C+hotels+and+restaurants&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dfvj%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70cc022d13656c125b92aacfa28b12d5a76f2230%2F0_0_5184_3108%2F5184.jpg>
 Abel’s Wine Bar. 
Old town cafés are ten-a-penny, but bright and buzzy Cremeria Emilia (38 
strada Franceză,facebook.com/cremeriaemilia 
<https://www.facebook.com/cremeriaemilia>) knocks spots off all of them. The 
all-white interior looks fab but, on a sunny day, sitting at one of its 
pavement tables is the thing to do. The menu lists an irresistible selection of 
ice-creams, and enticing bowls of semifreddo and panna cotta, all of which are 
freshly made on the premises. The coffee’s not bad, either.

Romanian wine remains something of a mystery to outsiders, so Abel’s Wine Bar 
(10 strada Nicolae Tonitza,abelswinebar.ro <http://abelswinebar.ro/>) – one of 
several to have emerged recently – is just the spot to begin your education by 
sampling the many varieties of wine, most of which are available by the glass.

Of all the old town bars in which to while away the night, Bordello (9 strada 
Şelari,bordellos.ro <http://www.bordellos.ro/>) stands out. Packed most nights, 
it’s a bit of an all-rounder, variously staging live music, cabaret, burlesque 
and quiz nights. Most people, though, are happy just to tuck into a plate of 
tapas (from £2) and a good old-fashioned pint (from £3).

Lots of coffee houses have opened recently but Origo (9 strada Lipscani, 
origocoffee.ro <http://origocoffee.ro/>) is the one to aim for. It’s a small, 
easy-going joint run by an enthusiastic team of baristas who really know their 
beans; be it a cappuccino, ristretto or lungo, the quality is consistently high 
and the service impeccable. At dusk, the venue morphs into a brilliant 
cocktail-cum-wine bar.

Where to stay

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dfvj%2Fsfb%23img-8&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dfvj%2Fsfb%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4fdd3ec6f18ca767f3f5a5fccaad27b602624505%2F0_10_800_480%2F800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bucharest%20city%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%20plus%20the%20best%20bars%2C%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dfvj%2Fstw%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bucharest+city+guide%3A+what+to+see+plus+the+best+bars%2C+hotels+and+restaurants&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dfvj%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4fdd3ec6f18ca767f3f5a5fccaad27b602624505%2F0_10_800_480%2F800.jpg>
 Hotel Christina. 
Dating from 1914, the Athenee Palace Hilton (doubles from £250, 
hiltonbucharest.com 
<http://www3.hilton.com/en/hotels/romania/athenee-palace-hilton-bucharest-BUHHITW/index.html>
) was formerly a hotbed of conspiracy and espionage – in short, the sort of 
place you’d expect James Bond to stay. It’s infinitely more refined these days, 
though no less glamorous, with its magnificent marble lobby and luxury rooms. 
Facilities include a gym, spa and basement pool and the hotel’s English Bar is 
one of the most sophisticated – and expensive – rendezvous points in the city.

Tucked away on a sleepy residential street, Hotel Christina (doubles from £79, 
hotelchristina.ro <http:>) looks rather anonymous but it’s genuinely something 
a little bit special. The solar-panelled roof gives you some idea of the 
hotel’s orientation: its eco-driven ethos extends to its rooms, which come in 
four fetching colour schemes: pink, yellow, lilac and grape-green. There are 
ergonomically designed beds and LED strip lighting, and forget paper – menus 
are presented on iPads. Oh, and it’s got free bike hire.

Bucharest is short on decent guesthouses, but the charming Flowers B&B 
(doubles £35,flowersbb.ro <http://www.flowersbb.ro/en.html>) is an exception. 
It’s in a tranquil spot, 20 minute’s walk from the city centre, and its 22 
rooms are painted in warm, peachy tones. In warmer weather, breakfast is served 
on its shady terrace.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dfvj%2Fsfb%23img-9&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dfvj%2Fsfb%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6fd1624106f62a2e0efe1b793fa8bd873df2d5c2%2F0_0_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bucharest%20city%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%20plus%20the%20best%20bars%2C%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dfvj%2Fstw%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bucharest+city+guide%3A+what+to+see+plus+the+best+bars%2C+hotels+and+restaurants&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dfvj%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6fd1624106f62a2e0efe1b793fa8bd873df2d5c2%2F0_0_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
 Umbrella Hostel. 
At the lower end of the scale, arty Umbrella Hostel (dorm beds from £10, 
umbrella hostel.com <http://umbrellahostel.com/>), occupying a beautiful early 
20th-century house, offers a mix of four- and eight-bed rooms, alongside a 
couple of doubles, all with handcrafted wooden beds, individual lockers and 
reading lights; shower facilities are shared. Although breakfast isn’t 
provided, there’s a large kitchen for guests to use, and the shady courtyard is 
a lovely spot to kick back with a beer.
