
President Muhammadu Buhari’s first foreign trip was a symbolic one. He crossed 
the border to Niger, where his counterpart, Mahamadou Issoufou,gave Buhari a 
horse 
<http://www.thescoopng.com/check-out-buharis-new-horse-and-the-governors-who-joined-him-on-his-first-foreign-trip-photos/>
. It seemed an appropriate present for a leader who, since taking the reins of 
government, has been riding roughshod over some entrenched self-interests in 
the Nigerian state.

Since then, Buhari has kept an eagle eye on security contracts through the 
presidential committee,indicting more than 300 companies 
<http://www.channelstv.com/2016/03/24/nsa-fund-scandal-presidential-committee-indicts-over-300-contractors/>
 and recovering $35m (£24m) stashed away by the elite. He has started reviewing 
deals for any signs of money laundering, with bank chiefs already quizzed over 
opaque agreements fronted on behalf of politicians. Nigeria’sex-national 
security adviser <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-34973872>, former 
defence chief 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/07/nigeria-former-defence-chief-alex-badeh-denies-10m-fraud-charges>
,opposition party leaders 
<http://www.premiumtimesng.com/news/top-news/196241-efcc-arrests-pdp-spokesperson-olisa-metuh-over-alleged-corruption-2.html>
 and some bank chiefs have been investigated by the economic and financial 
crimes commission. They deny any wrongdoing.


Related: Nigeria not seeking a Cameron apology, but 'wants its assets back' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/11/nigeria-not-seeking-cameron-apology-wants-assets-back>

Buhari has also been tackling corruption at the Budget Office. Civil servants 
had been accused of padding the 2016 budget 
<http://www.premiumtimesng.com/news/top-news/199953-breaking-budget-padding-buhari-removes-22-top-directors-budget-office.html>
 – a system open to abuse where the budget proposal is at wide variance with 
prevailing market rates. Buhari sacked the head of the Budget Office and 
relocated directors to re-examine the budget,which was signed a shameful five 
months into the year 
<http://www.premiumtimesng.com/news/top-news/202996-highlights-2016-budget-signed-buhari.html>
.

Some are concerned that the president is not fighting corruption as avidly as 
is warranted to bring change; that the old guard, rather than being destroyed, 
is being driven underground, and likely to resurface. By focusing on those at 
the top, Buhari is neglecting the other conduits, offices and laws through 
which corruption is perpetrated and perpetuated.

Many agencies mandated to fight corruption are underfunded and non-transparent 
themselves. The Code of Conduct Bureau, which receives asset declaration forms 
from politicians,keeps these locked away 
<https://www.naij.com/604309-public-officers-assets-wont-available-nigerians-ccb.html>
, with citizens unable to access them – even using the Freedom of Information 
law. Publishing assets is critical to understanding the net worth of 
politicians, but Buhari has shown no interest in publishing his own assets 
beyond a press release – below the required level of disclosure. Despite his 
campaign promise for ministers and National Assembly members to reveal their 
worth, Buhari hasnot been able to convince them 
<http://aitonline.tv/post-my_100_days_covenant_with_nigerians_____muhammadu_buhari>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jxn9%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jxn9%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F002e8d8884cc94352de7d331feffda320109644a%2F320_95_2408_1446%2F2408.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Finish%20line%20far%20out%20of%20sight%20in%20Nigeria's%20race%20to%20beat%20corruption%20%7C%20Oluseun%20Onigbinde&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jxn9%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Finish+line+far+out+of+sight+in+Nigeria%27s+race+to+beat+corruption+%7C+Oluseun+Onigbinde&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jxn9%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F002e8d8884cc94352de7d331feffda320109644a%2F320_95_2408_1446%2F2408.jpg>
 Muhammadu Buhari is attending an anti-corruption summit in London.UK prime 
minister David Cameron has described Nigeria as ‘fantastically corrupt’ 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/10/david-cameron-afghanistan-nigeria-possibly-most-corrupt-countries>
. Photograph: Leon Neal/AFP/Getty Images 
The auditor general office <https://www.oaugf.ng/home> is moribund, with none 
of its audit reports in the public domain since 1999, when Nigeria returned to 
democracy. In other words, the more Nigeria progresses into democratic 
governance, the more secretive its auditors become.

Fortunately, the extractive industries transparency initiative 
<http://neiti.org.ng/> (NEITI) fills the reporting gap for this sector with its 
independent audits. NEITI unearths loopholes,like the $966m (£670m) lost to 
crude oil swaps recently 
<http://www.premiumtimesng.com/news/headlines/191287-nigeria-lost-966m-in-4-years-to-crude-oil-swap-deals-neiti.html>
, but no legislative teeth have been added by the government to hold corrupt 
people accountable.

Then there’s the National Assembly, which spends $600m every year without any 
detailed record being made available to the public. This is despite repeated
promises by the senate president 
<http://www.premiumtimesng.com/news/top-news/200104-national-assembly-budget-published-next-week-saraki.html>
, Bukola Saraki,who is on trial for corruption and denies the charges 
<http://allafrica.com/stories/201605100823.html>, that these trends will change.

Related: Afghanistan and Nigeria ‘possibly most corrupt countries’, Cameron 
lets slip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/10/david-cameron-afghanistan-nigeria-possibly-most-corrupt-countries>

Enshrining transparency across the board is the only way to send Nigeria’s 
elite the clear message that withholding information is just as corrupt as 
stealing money. This should begin with making government contracts and any 
beneficial owners public along the entire chain. This approach to instil 
transparency has latent power to improve citizen access to data and strengthen 
the work of investigative journalists.

Using technology such as Tracka <http://www.tracka.ng/> and Budeshi 
<http://www.budeshi.org/>, as civil society is pushing for, will be critical to 
track projects from contracting to service delivery. Buhari, speaking at an 
event in London on Wednesday ahead of theinternational anti- 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/topical-events/anti-corruption-summit-london-2016>
corruption summit 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/topical-events/anti-corruption-summit-london-2016>
, promised that Nigeria will join theOpen Government Partnership 
<http://www.opengovpartnership.org/countries>– being part of an inclusive 
network should help Nigeria as it pushes for reform.

It is difficult to fight corruption in Nigeria. Buhari needs to democratise 
data access 
<http://www.channelstv.com/2016/04/30/government-urged-embrace-data-democracy-end-corruption/>
 and make institutions work independently. This could be achieved via 
system-wide transparency initiatives, direct communication with citizens, and 
revising laws that undermine the independence of institutions fighting 
corruption. It is not enough to target corrupt individuals; systemic corruption 
itself must be tackled.
