
Russian media including a state-owned news agency have quoted tweets from fake 
Twitter accounts as the basis for false stories claiming English fans provoked 
violence atEuro 2016 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016>.

Tweets from a Twitter account claiming to be Simon Rowntree 
<https://twitter.com/Simon_Rowntree>, a “football writer for @ForestEchoNews 
<https://twitter.com/ForestEchoNews>”, were the basis for reports on the 
England v Russia game in Marseille on Saturday from at least seven outlets 
including state-owned news agency RIA Novosti.

Stories from at least seven outlets claimed that English fans were singing 
offensive chants designed to provoke the Russians before there was violence at 
the match.

Related: Euro 2016: England's opener year's highest rated programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/13/england-euro-2016-opener-years-most-watched-programme>

RIA Novosti’s report 
<http://ria.ru/euro2016/20160612/1446013084.html#ixzz4BfeSgKKy 
http://ria.ru/euro2016/20160612/1446013084.html#ixzz4BfeSgKKy 
http://ria.ru/euro2016/20160612/1446013084.html> said “riots in the stands ... 
where the match of the European championship was held ... between the national 
teams of Russia and England, broke out after the English fans started to insult 
the Russians told British sports journalist Simon Rowntree.”

Another account quoted by some outlets 
<http://www.aif.ru/sport/football/angliyskie_fanaty_oskvernili_rossiyskiy_flag_i_oskorblyali_putina_-_smi>
 isMartyn Macintyre <https://twitter.com/MartynMacintyre>, supposedly chief 
football writer for ForestEchoNews.
— Simon Rowntree (@Simon_Rowntree) June 11, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Simon_Rowntree/status/741739292066746372> 
Chants of "Commie scum, Putin stole Crimea" and "Sharapova takes dope up the 
arse" being heard and#RUS <https://twitter.com/hashtag/RUS?src=hash> fans then 
beat up#ENG <https://twitter.com/hashtag/ENG?src=hash> supporters
 <https://twitter.com/Simon_Rowntree/status/741739292066746372> 
Chants the Twitter accounts claimed were sung included “Commie scum, Putin 
stole Crimea” and “Sharapova takes dope up the arse”, the later referring to 
Maria Sharapova’s disqualification from competitive tennis for using banned 
substances.

A quick review of the Forest Echo News website and the accounts claiming to be 
run by journalists working for it reveals a number of red flags, despite their 
repeated denials that they are fake accounts.

The picture used on the Rowntree account is from stock photo agency 
Shutterstock 
<http://www.shutterstock.com/pic-61290517/stock-photo-portrait-of-happy-smiling-businessman-isolated-on-white.html?utm_campaign=Idee%20Inc.&tpl=77643-108110&utm_medium=Affiliate&utm_source=77643&irgwc=1>
, described as “portrait of happy smiling businessman”, while the Macintyre 
account usesa picture of House of Cards showrunner Beau Willimon 
<http://www.vulture.com/2015/02/house-of-cards-beau-willimon-season-three.html?mid=facebook_vulture>
.

Previous tweets from the Forest Echo News account and those claiming to work 
for it, many highly offensive, are also almost all false reports of events or 
distortions.

England, Russia and local fans had clashed with French police earlier in the 
day in Marseille. Uefa threatened to disqualify both England andRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> if there was any further violence. 

 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Fengland-fans-embroiled-third-day-violence-marseille-euro-2016-video&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Fengland-fans-embroiled-third-day-violence-marseille-euro-2016-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=England%20fans%20embroiled%20in%20third%20day%20of%20violence%20in%20Marseille%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Fengland-fans-embroiled-third-day-violence-marseille-euro-2016-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=England+fans+embroiled+in+third+day+of+violence+in+Marseille+%E2%80%93+video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Fengland-fans-embroiled-third-day-violence-marseille-euro-2016-video&media=>
England fans embroiled in third day of violence in Marseille 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/jun/11/england-fans-embroiled-third-day-violence-marseille-euro-2016-video>
Russia was later handed a suspended ban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/11/england-fans-charged-russia-violence-marseille-euro-2016>
, which could see the team thrown out of the tournament if there are further 
outbreaks.

The false stories in the Russian media were first picked up by Meduza 
<https://meduza.io/shapito/2016/06/15/rossiyskie-smi-tsitiruyut-feykovogo-britanskogo-zhurnalista-s-izdevatelskimi-tvitami>
, and earlier fake and offensive reports from the Simon Rowntree account were
previously highlighted by Joe.co.uk 
<http://www.sportsjoe.ie/football/forest-echo-news-simon-rowntree/50275>. 
