
India <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> is set to start work on a 
massive, unprecedented river diversion programme, which will channel water away 
from the north and west of the country to drought-prone areas in the east and 
south. The plan could be disastrous for the local ecology, environmental 
activists warn.

The project involves rerouting water from major rivers including the Ganges 
and Brahmaputra and creating canals to link the Ken and Batwa rivers in central 
India and Damanganga-Pinjal in the west.

The minister of water resources, Uma Bharti, said this week that work could 
start in a few days. A spokesperson from her department told the Guardian that 
the government is still waiting for clearance from the environment ministry.

Related: India's drought migrants head to cities in desperate search for water 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/27/india-drought-migrants-head-to-cities-in-desperate-search-for-water>

The project will cost an estimated 20tn rupees (£207bn) and take 20 to 30 
years to complete.

The government of Narendra Modi, the prime minister, is presenting the project 
as the solution to India’s endemic water problems. For years, parts of India 
have suffered from devastating spells of drought.As average temperatures in 
India rise 
<http://indiaclimatedialogue.net/2015/11/06/across-india-minimum-temperatures-rising-far-more-than-maximum/>
, andthe growing population <http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.POP.GROW> 
puts increasing demands on water resources, millions of people are without a 
reliable water supply.

This year, 330 million Indians have been affected by drought 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/20/india-drought-affecting-330-million-people-weak-monsoons>
. State governments used emergency measures to deliver water by train in the 
western state of Maharashtra; in other areas, schools and hospitals were forced 
to close, and hundreds of families were forced to migrate from villages to 
nearby cities where water is more easily accessible.
Graphic: India’s rivers 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/05/india_rivers_map/giv-12515n0eVo0JmrNnn/>
According to the National Water Development Agency 
<http://www.nwda.gov.in/index2.asp?slid=3&sublinkid=3&langid=1>, which will 
oversee the rivers project, “the water availability even for drinking purposes 
becomes critical, particularly in the summer months … On the other hand excess 
rainfall occurring in some parts of the country create[s] havoc due to floods.”

The scheme is a pet project 
<http://www.livemint.com/Politics/f0JrBub3F88aATney45ciI/Narendra-Modi-pursues-1980s-plan-to-solve-Indias-water-shor.html>
 of Modi, who has made severalpromises to end India’s long-term water problems 
<http://www.dnaindia.com/india/report-centre-working-for-permanent-solution-to-drought-pm-modi-2199692>
. In the first few months of his premiership, Modi’s cabinetrevived 
<http://www.scidev.net/global/farming/news/plan-to-divert-indian-rivers-angers-neighbouring-nations.html>
 the idea of linking 30 rivers across India. The water resources ministry 
spokesperson said: “The idea is old, but the Modi government has done all the 
work on it.”

Plans to link rivers were drawn up in the 1980s by Indira Gandhi’s government, 
and were gathering dust as central governments repeatedly failed to win the 
approval of states. Now, with asupreme court mandate 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/science-environment-17555918>, and government 
backing, save the rubber stamp of the environment ministry, the project could 
get under way in a matter of days.

Related: Linking India’s rivers: critics rally to protest ‘illegal and 
unnecessary’ plans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jan/14/linking-indias-rivers-critics-rally-to-protest-illegal-and-unnecessary-plans>

Scientists say the government needs to do a full audit of its existing water 
resources and analyse the environmental impact of linking rivers before 
pressing on with its plans.

Dr Latha Anantha, from the River Research Centre 
<https://www.facebook.com/Cholayar/info/?tab=page_info>, said the project could 
be catastrophic for India’s river-dependent ecology. “The government is trying 
to redraw the entire geography of the country,” she said. “What will happen to 
communities, the wildlife,the farmers who live downstream of the rivers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2003/jul/24/water.india>? They need to 
look at a river not just as a source of water, but as an entire ecosystem.

“They will have to dig canals everywhere and defy the ecology of the country. 
It is a waste of money and they have overestimated how much water there is in 
the rivers they want to divert.”

Governments have toyed with the idea of redrawing river routes since the 
1800s, when the country was still under colonial rule. Theresulting disputes 
still play out today 
<http://indianexpress.com/article/india/india-news-india/keralas-mullaperiyar-dam-inches-towards-permissible-limit/>
. The Mullaperiyar dam, which diverted water from the southern state of Kerala 
to neighbouring Tamil Nadu, was built in the late 1800s, and was considered at 
the time to be one of the most extraordinary feats of engineering ever 
achieved. Now, the two state governments continue to dispute control of the dam.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jb2v%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jb2v%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d2c813573e1c03297cedabc9d7d694e2db2d284%2F0_0_3888_2333%2F3888.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=India%20set%20to%20start%20massive%20project%20to%20divert%20Ganges%20and%20Brahmaputra%20rivers&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jb2v%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=India+set+to+start+massive+project+to+divert+Ganges+and+Brahmaputra+rivers&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jb2v%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d2c813573e1c03297cedabc9d7d694e2db2d284%2F0_0_3888_2333%2F3888.jpg>
 A man washes in the river Buriganga at Kamrangir Char in Dhaka. Bangladesh has 
raised concerns about India’s plans to divert the course of its rivers. 
Photograph: Abir Abdullah/EPA 
The river-linking project could lead to further disputes not just between 
states, but with the neighbouring government of Bangladesh. India’s plans will 
affect 100 million people in Bangladesh, who live downstream of the Ganges and 
Brahmaputra and rely on the rivers for their livelihoods. On Monday, 
Bangladesh’s minister of water, Nazrul Islam, urged the Indian government to
take Bangladesh’s water needs into consideration 
<http://bdnews24.com/bangladesh/2016/05/17/india-urged-to-keep-bangladesh-in-mind-before-diverting-river-water-to-drought-hit-places>
noting that 54 of 56 Indian rivers flowed through the country.

“India is giving a lot of importance to its own people hit by drought,” he 
said, “but it must not ignore our rights.”

The Indian water resources ministry spokesperson said: “The Indian government 
is addressing Bangladesh’s water problems too,” adding that ministers from the 
two countries had discussed the water issue in the past. “We don’t have the 
details, but we will ensureBangladesh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bangladesh> gets its share of water too.”
