
In Dante <https://www.theguardian.com/books/dantealighieri>’s time, books were 
sold in apothecary shops: literature as medicine. I learned this when I was 
very ill, during an acute episode ofmanic depression 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/bipolar-disorder>, and I was struck by the 
profound metaphor behind this commercial fact. The apothecary of literature can 
heal, and I would need it desperately.

I had experienced a psyche-fracture, which included hallucinations of wings, 
seeing my own and others’, these wings a metaphor for thought, the wings of the 
mind. Although I felt compelled to enact the urges of mania, I had a greater 
wish to hold very still and see what would happen if I let this madness take a 
metaphoric route. What happened?Poetry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/poetry>.

I don’t normally write poetry, but in this illness I could write nothing 
except poetry. I never normally write at night, but I could write only in 
darkness.

The ancient Greeks thought the gods inspired poets through madness, and in Ion 
<http://classics.mit.edu/Plato/ion.html>, Plato 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/plato> has Socrates say: “For the poet is a 
light and winged and holy thing, and there is no invention in him until he has 
been inspired and is out of his senses.” Thisfuror poeticus was honoured in the 
Renaissance as the “fine madness” that “should possess a poet’s brain”, in the 
words of the Elizabethan poetMichael Drayton 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poems/detail/57127>.

In the illness I could write nothing except poetry

For me, poetry is medicine. The poet Les Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/nov/22/les-murray-poet-life-profile> 
writes: “I’d disapproved of using poetry as personal therapy, but the Black Dog 
taught me better. Get sick enough, and you’ll use any remedy you’ve got.” In 
the 19th century, people in asylums were encouraged to write poetry, while
William Cowper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/feb/01/my-hero-william-cowper-harris> 
(1731-1800) wrote that, in his depressions, “I find writing, especially poetry, 
my best remedy.” Orpheus was both healer and poet and his lyre could vanquish 
melancholy.

I was also taking psychiatric medication, but in medicine I saw the science of 
pain, whereas in poetry I saw pain’s art. Medicine has an anaesthetic 
relationship to pain – it wants to rid the patient of it. Poetry’s relationship 
is aesthetic – it wants pain to speak. And the condition that seems to speak 
more than any other is manic depression. Arguably, it may be the refusal to 
create one’s art that causes distress in the first place.John Keats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/johnkeats>, a licensed apothecary, as was 
Dante <https://www.theguardian.com/books/dantealighieri>, trained unhappily as 
a doctor and experienced depression accordingly: his brother feared that if 
John didn’t become a poet he would kill himself. An unanswered calling can take 
its revenge, and Gwyneth Lewis’s memoir of depression,Sunbathing in the Rain 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/sunbathing-in-the-rain.html>, notes that it 
was her resistance to writing poetry that made her ill: “If you don’t do what 
your poetry wants you to, it will be out to get you. Unwritten poems are a 
force to be feared.”

The first book I could read in “recovery” was Richard Holmes’s biography of 
Coleridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jan/27/samuel-taylor-coleridge-richard-holmes>
, and I cried for the poet, born before the modern apothecary of psychiatric 
medication that could have saved him so much pain.Coleridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/samuel-taylor-coleridge>, describing 
Shakespeare <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/shakespeare>’s Mercutio, also 
describes himself, or indeed many a mercurial writer: “possessing all the 
elements of a poet: high fancy; rapid thoughts; the whole world was as it were 
subject to his law of association”. Mercutio is moody then soaring; his mind is 
in flight with the imagery of wings.

In Shakespeare I feel understood, for he catches the signatures of manic 
depression in many of his characters, from Cleopatra to Timon, Lear to Antonio 
inThe Merchant of Venice. Touchstone, merry-mad in motley, suggests mania, 
while Jaques, melancholy in his black, stands for depression. The most deft 
description of mania I have ever read – “frantic-mad with evermore unrest” – is 
Shakespeare’s, while his love for puns and word creation, his tender empathy, 
his connotative mind, word association and lapidary compression all suggest to 
me that he either experienced it or understood it intimately in another. If not 
Shakespeare himself, my money is on the actor Robert Armin, Shakespeare’s 
clever clown, the probable author ofA Pill to Purge Melancholy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y8j4%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y8j4%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2ac4b33d236cc60bb41a9c4b41c08400d414edb%2F552_1009_2889_1734%2F2889.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Poetry%20can%20heal%20%E2%80%93%20it%20helped%20me%20through%20depression&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y8j4%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Poetry+can+heal+%E2%80%93+it+helped+me+through+depression&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y8j4%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2ac4b33d236cc60bb41a9c4b41c08400d414edb%2F552_1009_2889_1734%2F2889.jpg>
 Jay Griffiths. Photograph: Graham Turner for the Guardian 
During my long months of convalescence, I walked alone across Spain on the 
Camino de Santiago 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2011/apr/02/spain-camino-santiago-compostela-pilgrimage>
. I took with me as little as possible, but the single most essential thing was 
an anthology of poems created for me by my friends, who had each chosen one 
that they cherished and that would console, including work byRumi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2009/nov/30/rumi-masnavi-muslim-poetry>
,Rilke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/may/12/letters-rainer-maria-rilke-review>
,Borges <https://www.theguardian.com/books/jorgeluisborges>, Yeats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/wbyeats>, Lorca 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/federico-garcia-lorca>, Edip Cansever 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/feb/26/turkey>, Alice Oswald 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alice-oswald>, Mary Oliver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/oct/06/featuresreviews.guardianreview27>
,EE Cummings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/apr/23/featuresreviews.guardianreview31>
,Frank O’Hara 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/mar/09/selected-poems-frank-ohara-review>
 andTomas Tranströmer <https://www.theguardian.com/books/tomas-transtromer>. 
Every day, I would read one, learning some of each by heart, not just to 
understand but to be understood. Poetry heals the reader as well as the writer.

To heal is, etymologically, to make whole, and poetry can heal the connective 
tissues of the mind, making it whole and reuniting it with the world. In the 
awful loneliness of depression, poetry is the kindest companion when one is 
keening to be comprehended. The contemporary practice of bibliotherapy makes 
this explicit, asking people to read specific texts as medicine, and inBlack 
Rainbow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/may/04/black-rainbow-review-rachel-kelly-moving-account-depression>
, Rachel Kelly explores the curative power of poetry for her savage depression. 
Sufi stories have long been used as remedies and in Australia I met an 
indigenous “story‑doctor” who would diagnose someone’s psychological state and 
prescribe a particular story for them to cure their situation.

Coming home, I bought all three anthologies Staying Alive, Being Alive and 
Being Human, so I could read a poem chosen by Neil Astley every day. Astley 
saves lives, I thought, many times. The subtitle ofStaying Alive is “real poems 
for unreal times”: crisis, grief, love and, yes, madness, that state of 
unreality or – as I prefer – irreality.

For me, writing poetry at night was an enactment of a metaphoric truth: I 
could see better in the dark.

• Jay Griffiths is the author of Tristimania: A Diary of Manic Depression 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/392534/s/tristimania/>
, published by Hamish Hamilton.

• In the UK, the Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the 
National Suicide Prevention Hotline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis 
support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. Hotlines in other countries can be 
foundhere <http://www.suicide.org/international-suicide-hotlines.html>.
