Which of these countries is not in the Commonwealth?  Cameroon  Uganda  South 
Africa  Rwanda  Zimbabwe What’s the highest soldier rank in the British army?  
Staff sergeant  Corporal of horse  Warrant officer class 1  Warrant officer 
class 2  Colonel Who is commander in chief of the army?  Chief of the general 
staff  Chief of the defence staff  The Queen  Secretary of state for defence  
The prime minister Which of the following is not a military vehicle?  Terrier  
Wolfgang  Foxhound  Coyote  Husky The Queen’s summer residence is at:  Balmoral 
Castle  Windsor Castle  Sandringham  Holyrood House  Buckingham Palace Titania 
is a character in which of these Shakespeare plays?  Hamlet  A Midsummer’s 
Night Dream  The Tempest  Othello  Macbeth Which American president was in 
office during the Bay of Pigs crisis in 1961?  Gerald Ford  Richard Nixon  
Edward Kennedy  John F Kennedy  Lyndon B Johnson The Straits of Hormuz separate 
which geographical feature?  The Gulf of Oman and the Persian Gulf  The Red Sea 
and the Gulf of Aden  The Red Sea and the Mediterranean Sea  The landmass of 
the Indian subcontinent and Sri Lanka Which of the following is not an infantry 
regiment?  Grenadier Guards  Scots Guards  Irish Guards  Scots Dragoon Guards  
Welsh Guards Which of the following is not an Olympic Sport?  Squash  Canoeing  
Beach volleyball  Water polo  Handball Which of the following organisations are 
currently part of the aid programme in Sierra Leone?  British army Medical 
Services  Save the Children  Medicine san Frontier  Street Child  All of the 
above Which TV Celebrity hosts Carpool Karaoke?  Jimmy Kimmel  Jimmy Fallon  
James Corden  LL Cool J  You got…  Challenge your friends Submit answers 