
Higher education <http://www.theguardian.com/education/higher-education> is 
facing more challenges than ever before, so it needs leaders who can motivate 
staff and ensure the sector remains relevant in a competitive global context. 
And for that to happen, we need clarity about what good leadership looks like.

Our latest study 
<http://www.lfhe.ac.uk/en/research-resources/publications/HELMs/index.cfm> 
found that more than four in five staff in the sector believe that developments 
are needed in this area. So how can we make improvements?

Related: Oxford vice-chancellor: ‘Tackling elitism can be done. I mean, I went 
to a rural school in Ireland’ 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jan/05/oxford-vice-chancellor-louise-richardson-university-admissions>

1. Create development opportunities

A strong and sustainable sector relies on opportunities for those with the 
ambition and potential to progress. Yet many currently working in the sector 
feel that the pathways to formal leadership positions are unclear: more than 
half of employees that we surveyed said they would need to leave their 
university in order to progress in their careers.

Leadership opportunities must be accessible and communicated proactively to 
prevent high staff turnover and a deficit of potential leaders. Formal 
mentoring schemes can be particularly effective – our study found that almost 
nine out of ten staff who had a mentor felt they benefitted from the 
relationship.

2. Be proactive in improving diversity 

Women and those from black and minority ethnic groups (BME) are 
under-represented in leadership and management positions, and many staff 
reported an awareness of the difficulties faced by these groups in progressing 
to senior levels.

But universities need a much greater understanding of the experiences of women 
and BME staff: fewer than one in ten governors in our study identified 
increasing diversity as a means through which leadership in the sector could be 
improved.

Raising this as a priority issue for governors could lead to more targeted 
support and improvement, helping to ensure that higher education adequately 
reflects the society it serves.

3. Address work-life balance, particularly for women

Heavy workloads can put enormous pressure on the personal lives of many who 
occupying leadership positions, but there is a clear gender difference in 
work-life balance. Our survey found that about two-thirds of female academic 
leaders feel unhappy with their work-life balance, compared with about a third 
of male academics. This can be a serious deterrent for those looking to step up 
and risks limiting the number of women in leadership positions.

Universities are generally good at flexible working policies. However, active 
implementation of them and systematic monitoring of individual workloads would 
do much to improve this. Leadership teams have an important role in influencing 
organisational culture, to ensure that it values and rewards outputs, and 
serves academic enterprise above presenteeism.

Related: University leadership: we need a new breed of turtle-neck 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2012/jul/27/skills-for-successful-university-leadership>

4. Attract leaders with outside experience

Leaders with a wider range of professional backgrounds provide higher 
education institutions with new insights and experience, which helps them to 
tackle ever-evolving challenges, particularly around areas such as managing 
reputational risk. Our study found that a third of governors believe leadership 
within the sector could be improved by increasing the number of leaders with 
diverse experience and expertise.

We already see increasing numbers of appointments in professional services 
from business. Mirroring this on the academic side and creating opportunities 
for leaders with management experience would help to address this, and could be 
achieved through secondments, work shadowing and mentoring opportunities.

5. Analyse the motivations of potential leaders

An in-depth understanding of the motivations for aspiring to leadership is 
essential to ensure the right development opportunities are available. Our 
research shows that engaging in challenging work, having opportunities for 
growth and exercising autonomy are important motivating factors for potential 
leaders, alongside the desire to contribute to the sector more generally.

Universities can act on this by ensuring the development of roles and projects 
that allow staff to challenge themselves, and by providing training programmes 
that offer on-the-job opportunities for growth. Engaging staff at all levels 
with strategic direction and decision-making will also help to encourage more 
people to pursue leadership roles. For women and younger staff, there is a 
particularly strong desire for clarity around career progression.

Universities will put themselves in a better position to attract and retain 
talented employees if they can provide clarity, job security and proactively 
communicate the opportunities for development.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
