
Chard

White-stemmed forms tend to be hardier than their red counterparts, so expect 
the latter to turn to mush in harsh frosts (but if you're lucky they'll 
re-sprout a crop of new leaves in spring before running to seed). I'm never 
without a row or two of Swiss chard. The 'Bright Lights' selection (Marshalls 
<http://www.marshalls-seeds.co.uk/swiss-chard-bright-lights-seeds-pid2584.html>
) is a cheery mix of whites, yellows and reds. The best chard I've found for 
eating quality is red-stemmed 'Fantasy' (Thompson & Morgan 
<http://www.thompson-morgan.com/vegetables/vegetable-seeds/beetroot-and-chard-seeds/leaf-beet-fantasy/gww4969TM>
) – if anyone's got any experience of how robust this is, I'd love to know as I 
sowed it in a mild winter. A tunnel cloche of fleece is handy.

Leeks

I have memories of helping to cut acres of these as a child, the aroma when 
leaves chopped and ends trimmed making my eyes sting. I remember my fingers 
being numb, too… But leeks are an absolute must on a winter plot, as they're 
great for combining with, for example, potato for soup, chicken for pies, a 
rich cheese sauce – they're also excellent just sweated off with butter and 
black pepper. If rust is a problem in your area (it tends to be more 
problematic in mild, moist autumns) choose a variety showing strong resistance 
such as 'Oarsman' (Marshalls 
<http://www.marshalls-seeds.co.uk/leek-oarsman-seeds-pid2373.html>). Leek moth 
is more widespread these days (it used to be just confined to the south), so if 
it's known in your neighbourhood, cover plants with fine mesh netting or fleece 
to thwart it. Purple-leaved varieties tend to be hardier, such as the French 
classic 'Bleu de Solaise' (Real Seeds <http://www.realseeds.co.uk/leeks.html>) 
and the British bred 'Northern Lights' (Dobies 
<http://www.dobies.co.uk/Garden/Vegetables/Vegetable+Seeds/All+Vegetable+Seeds/Leek+Seeds+-+Northern+Lights_436375.htm>
). Having been sent up the field to lift leeks for an order on Christmas Eve, I 
can confirm that it's sensible to harvest in batches before the soil freezes 
solid, heeling the plants into a sheltered, unfrozen spot in the garden.

Kale
 Grow some kale and they'll stand through the winter before running to seed in 
spring. Photograph: Kevin Summers/Getty Images 

A row of black Tuscan kale (such as 'Nero di Toscana', from Real Seeds 
<http://www.realseeds.co.uk/kale.html>, who have a mouth-watering selection of 
kale varieties) is a welcome treat on any plot. The leaves are of the darkest 
bottle green and the taste is as robust as the veg itself – great with liver 
and bacon or a hearty lamb stew. Grow yourself some sturdy plants by autumn, 
and they stand there, proud as you like, till they run to seed in spring. By 
that time you'll have had multiple winter harvests from them.

Savoy cabbage

I say savoy because that's my personal preference; I'm sure there are other 
great winter cabbages available, but there's something incredibly appetising 
about those deep green crinkly leaves. The outer foliage may well get ravaged 
by caterpillars and dirtied by soil, but the tightly-packed heart will escape 
unharmed, ready to be sliced, lightly boiled or steamed and dressed with butter 
and black pepper – casserole fodder like no other. Winter-cropping plants are 
incredibly forgiving, as long as they're given the chance to build up a strong 
root system in summer. Good-sized heads will naturally follow. 'Alaska' (
Marshalls <http://www.marshalls-seeds.co.uk/cabbage-alaska-seeds-pid2272.html>) 
is a favourite of mine because it's compact and stands incredibly well through 
the winter. It's an F1 hybrid and an RHS AGM (Award of Garden Merit) winner, to 
boot.

Brussels sprouts

Again, I've memories engrained about standing in a large field of sprouts on 
freezing cold days. My brother and I were given the job of removing the lower 
leaves as they yellowed and would be bent over double in our oilskins, in fits 
of laughter, as we grabbed the leaves and threw them over our shoulders to 
cover whichever poor soul happened to be standing behind us (generally a 
parent). Childish I know, but it makes me smile whenever I pick sprouts these 
days. Anecdotes aside, 'Montgomery' (Dobies 
<http://www.dobies.co.uk/Garden/Vegetables/What+Veg+to+Plant+in/May+Veg+Planting/Brussels+Sprout+Montgomery+F1+Seeds_432891.htm>
) is always the variety we choose to grow – it's an F1 hybrid with a 
deliciously mild taste. The RHS like it, too, and have given it an AGM. 
Beginner growers take note: plants need to be sown in April for a winter 
harvest; sprout tops are delicious, too.

Spinach

I was recently surprised how hardy annual spinach is – to me it looked quite a 
delicate, soft leaf but as an experiment, I left an August sowing of 'Tetona' (
Nicky's Nursery 
<http://www.nickys-nursery.co.uk/garden-shop/seeds/baby-leaf-vegetables/spinach-tetona-500-seeds>
) over winter last year on the allotment, alongside 'Reddy' (Kings 
<http://www.kingsseedsdirect.com/spinach-reddy-f1/p92>). Both provided pickings 
all through winter (uncloched) and well into spring – I'll definitely be doing 
that again. 'Tetona' is a classic arrow-shaped green spinach; the leaves 
developed a beautifully meaty thickness and deep colour as the weather cooled, 
but they remained incredibly tender. The foliage widened and hugged the ground 
for warmth so needed a good wash. 'Reddy' is a different beast altogether – its 
leaves became much more spear-like (a little like a dandelion), and the taste 
wasn't as buttery, but the prolific harvests of melting foliage let me forgive 
that fact.

Parsnips

Coming in to a steaming bowl of curried parsnip soup is blissful after a spell 
out in the cold, so make sure you have a row of these hearty roots handy. There 
are a few things to watch for: the seed's shelf life is short so buy fresh each 
year; avoid over-rich soils, as this can give excess leaf at the expense of 
root; don't sow too early as germination will be poor on cold soils and it also 
increases the likelihood of canker disease; sow seeds in clumps in the soil, 
then thin to the strongest seedling. Don't let all this put you off – just sow 
little clusters of fresh seeds in May and avoid being heavy-handed with the 
fertiliser. There are some great canker-resistant varieties out there: 
'Gladiator' (D T Brown 
<http://www.dtbrownseeds.co.uk/Vegetable-Seeds-1/Parsnip-Gladiator-F1-AGM-Seeds.html>
) and 'Countess' (Mr Fothergill's 
<http://www.mr-fothergills.co.uk/Vegetable-Seeds/Parsnip-Seed/Parsnip-Countess-F1.html>
) being two.

Jerusalem artichokes
 Jerusalem artichoke plants make the perfect windbreak on the plot. 
Photograph: Jill Mead for the Guardian 

I've never bought Jerusalem artichoke tubers, they've always been volunteer 
plants on my plots (so you could probably get smoother-skinned varieties than 
I've experienced). This is the thing with these sunflower relatives – once 
you've got them you're never without them which, if you like them, is rather 
handy. The swollen tubers can reach deep into the soil, especially sandy ones, 
so despite all your digging efforts you'll never get them all out. Plants grow 
tall – 6-8ft at least – so utilise this by making them into a windbreak for 
more delicate crops. Introduce them gradually into your diet, because they 
contain inulin rather than starch and once this reaches our large intestine, 
digestive bacteria have a bit of a party converting this into gas. Lots of gas. 
They're delicious roasted, having a sweet, nutty, melting flesh a little like a 
mild parsnip. I've not tried them as a soup yet but apparently this is good, 
too.

Sprouting broccoli
 Purple sprouting broccoli seeds need to be sown in April to guarantee a good 
crop. Photograph: Frank Baron for the Guardian 

Most of us are familiar with the purple form of this brassica (affectionately 
referred to as PSB) and it is one of my favourites. There is also a white form, 
which is underrated, prolific and delicious (try 'White Sprouting Early' from
Kings 
<http://www.kingsseeds.com/vegetable_seeds/Broccoli%20White%20Sprouting/P-10705>
). Both types make large plants when grown well – at least 1m tall and wide – 
and they need to be sown in April in order to give you crops worth waiting for. 
The classic season for this plant is early spring (when growing, for example, 
'Purple Sprouting Early' fromThompson & Morgan 
<http://www.thompson-morgan.com/vegetables/vegetable-seeds/brassica-and-leafy-green-seeds/broccoli-early-purple-sprouting/360TM>
) and such old types are reliably hardy. Improvements in spear size and 
expansions of seasons have led to some varieties being less hardy, so a harsh 
frost would knock things on the head (a bit frustrating when you've waited so 
long for those precious pickings). I'm an old stick in the mud here and like 
the ones I grow.

Cauliflowers

Beginner gardeners take note: winter- and spring-cropping caulis are far 
easier to grow than summer or autumn ones. Pop yourself a few plants in, in 
June or July, water well to avoid any check in growth, and await impressive 
curds come the cool season. Wider spacings (80-100cm) will give you larger 
curds – great for big families. Plant closely (20cm apart each way in a grid) 
for mini-curds, ideal for one person portions. 'Moby Dick', 'Aalsmeer' and 
'Mayflower' (all MrFothergill's 
<http://www.mr-fothergills.co.uk/Vegetable-Seeds/Cauliflower-Seed/> and all 
with an RHS AGM) will together give a good harvest over a long period. Try
'Clapton' 
<http://www.mr-fothergills.co.uk/Vegetable-Seeds/Cauliflower-Seed/Cauliflower-Clapton-F1.html>
 if clubroot is a problem in your area, because it shows resistance to this 
troublesome disease.

• Lucy Halsall is the editor of Grow Your Own magazine 
<http://www.growfruitandveg.co.uk/magazine/>, which contains a wealth of 
information about growing your own vegetables. There are even more resources on 
thewebsite <http://www.growfruitandveg.co.uk/>, including the new growing 
guides section <http://www.growfruitandveg.co.uk/how-to-grow>.
