
The question of whether a seven-year-old girl, caught up in an international 
dispute between her estranged lesbian mothers, should be subject to British 
justice is to be decided bythe supreme court 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/uk-supreme-court>.

The child, known only as B, was conceived as a result of IVF 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/ivf> and removed by her biological mother, 
who is her sole legal parent, toPakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> in February last year.

The second woman considers herself a “de facto” parent and has launched legal 
action, seeking to have her daughter made a ward of court and returned to the 
UK. Theparents <http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/parents-and-parenting>’ 
relationship broke down in 2011, three years after the girl was born.


The high court and the court of appeal 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/court-of-appeal> declined to intervene. They 
considered that they did not have jurisdiction because B was no longer resident 
in the UK when the proceedings, brought under the Children Act, were started.


 Supreme court justices have now been asked to consider exercising an ancient 
common law power,parens patriae. David Williams QC, who represents the second 
woman, said the rule gave the state responsibility for citizens who owed 
allegiance to the crown and would enable a judge in England to oversee the 
girl’s case.


Five justices – Lady Hale, Lord Clarke, Lord Wilson, Lord Sumption and Lord 
Toulson – are analysing the case at the supreme court in Westminster. 
Submissions will continue on Wednesday but judgment is likely to be reserved.


Two years ago, supreme court justices used parens patriae to offer protection 
to a two-year-old boy who had been born in Pakistan after his mother was 
“imprisoned” by her estranged husband and his family while visiting.


In that case, it was decided that parens patriae could be invoked to give a 
high court judge in England the right to make orders relating to the boy even 
though he was living abroad, on the basis that he had British nationality.


In its judgment earlier this year, the court of appeal  
<http://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWCA/Civ/2015/886.html>turned down the second 
woman’s application <>, remarking that: “We are very willing to accept that the 
attenuation or even – if this is, regrettably, what happens – the ultimate loss 
of her relationship with the appellant will be a real detriment to [the child], 
quite apart from being a great grief to the appellant herself.


“But it has to be recognised that the respondent has always been [the girl’s] 
primary carer, that the appellant had not been part of the household for some 
time before [the child and her biological mother] left for Pakistan and that 
the appellant has never even in this country had any legal parental rights.

“The situation falls short of the exceptional gravity where it might indeed be 
necessary to consider the exercise of the inherent jurisdiction.”

 The supreme court case continues on Wednesday.

