
There’s been much said <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> 
recently over the effect of a Brexit on UK jobs and industry. Whileeconomists 
say 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/14/brexit-what-would-happen-if-britain-left-eu-european-union-referendum-uk>
 the two industries most likely to be scaled back if we leave the EU are the 
automative industry and financial services, leading to a loss of up to950,000 
jobs 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/21/brexit-could-cost-100bn-and-nearly-1m-jobs-cbi-warns>
, others are more optimistic about our chances if we leave the European Union.

“The effect on the composition of jobs will really depend on the relationship 
we have with the EU after the referendum. If we remain part of the European 
Economic Area, and the full single market, there will be almost no change,” 
says Ryan Bourne, head of public policy at the IEA and author ofthe EU jobs myth
 <http://www.iea.org.uk/publications/research/the-eu-jobs-myth-0>.

So how can we work out what’s most likely to happen? And what impact would 
leaving the EU have on your job or industry? Join us onWednesday 25 May from 
1pm-2.30pm BSTfor a live chat with the experts. We’ll be discussing:

 * Which industries would be most affected by a Brexit. 
 * What a Brexit would mean for UK jobs. 
 * Things you need to know about careers in the aftermath of a Brexit. 
The Q&A will take place in the comments section below this article. Taking 
part is easier than ever: to commentcreate a free Guardian account 
<https://id.theguardian.com/register?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>, or log in 
using your Twitter or Facebook profiles. Alternatively, tweet us@GuardianCareers
 <https://twitter.com/GuardianCareers> or email your questions to 
charlotte.seager@theguardian.com 
<https://mail.google.com/mail/u/0/?view=cm&fs=1&tf=1&source=mailto&to=charlotte.seager@theguardian.com>
, who will post them for you.

Panel

Swati Dhingra is assistant professor of economics at the London School of 
Economics <http://www.lse.ac.uk/home.aspx> and co-author of reports on Life 
Outside the EU, published by the Centre for Economic Performance. Her research 
interests are international economics, globalisation and industrial policy. Her 
work has been published in top economic journals and she is associate editor of 
the Journal of International Economics.

Dr Catherine Barnard is professor in European Union law at the University of 
Cambridge <http://www.cam.ac.uk/>. She is author of EU Employment Law, The 
Substantive Law of the EU: The Four Freedoms, and European Union Law; and has 
edited various collections of essays on EU law. Barnard has also advised the 
government over the Balance of Competence review and is a senior fellow in the 
ESRC’s UK Changing Europe project.

Angus Armstrong is director of macroeconomics for the National Institute of 
Economic and Social Research <http://www.niesr.ac.uk/> and ESRC senior fellow 
on the UK and Changing Europe programme. Previously he worked as chief 
economist and managing director for Deutsche Bank and head of macroeconomic 
analysis for HM Treasury.

Dr Steve Coulter teaches political economy at the European Institute of the 
London School of Economics <http://www.lse.ac.uk/home.aspx>. He researches and 
writes on labour markets and growth policies in the UK and Europe and 
co-convened the labour markets strand of the LSE’s Commission on the Future of 
Britain in Europe, which publishes in June 2016.

Diego Zuluaga is the financial services research fellow at the Institute of 
Economic Affairs <http://www.iea.org.uk/about/what-we-do> and also head of 
research atEpic Center <http://www.epicenternetwork.eu/about-2/>, the 
pan-European thinktank network. He regularly writes for CityAM, CapX and 
EurActiv on many topics concerning economics and financial services including 
Britain’s relationship with the EU and the single market generally.

Catherine Mann is chief economist and head of the economics department for 
OECD. She is also responsible for maximising current products like the OECD’s
Global Economic Outlook and Interim Economic Outlook 
<http://www.oecd.org/eco/outlook/economicoutlook.htm>, country-based economic 
surveys <http://www.oecd.org/economy/surveys/> and the Going for Growth 
<http://www.oecd.org/eco/growth/goingforgrowth.htm> report.

Anthony Robinson is principal campaigns and communications adviser at the 
Confederation of British Industry (CBI) <http://news.cbi.org.uk/>. In this role 
he works to communicate the views of businesses on the EU referendum.

Mike Hill is chief executive at Prospects <https://www.prospects.ac.uk/> and 
theHigher Education Careers Services Unit 
<http://www.hecsu.ac.uk/hecsu_in_the_media_charlie_ball.htm>. Hill has held a 
number of board positions in higher education, including chair of the National 
Association of Student Employment Services, the National Council for Work 
Experience, and of the National Centre for Entrepreneurship in Education, which 
he co-founded with HM Treasury.

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
