
In late 2014, the Mexican government asked a group of experts from the 
Inter-American Commission on Human Rights <http://www.oas.org/en/iachr/> 
(IACHR) to provide technical assistance with its investigation into anattack on 
43 students from the Ayotzinapa teacher training school 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/20/mexico-43-killed-students->. The 
experts delivered two devastating reports, which dismantled the government’s 
official investigation – especially its insistence that the students’ bodies 
had been burned in a funeral pyre.

For families of the students – farmers from impoverished Guerrero state – the 
IACHR’s intervention offered the opportunity to keep alive a case causing 
enormous embarrassment for the image-conscious government. The IACHR also 
“provided a complete picture of the shortcomings in the Mexican justice 
system”, says Santiago Aguirre, deputy director of the Miguel Agustin Pro 
Juarez Human Rights Centre, which worked with the students’ families.

Related: Development banks need to wake up to the human rights crisis in 
Honduras | Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/20/development-banks-human-rights-crisis-honduras-agua-zarca>

The government thanked the experts for their work, though it disputed many of 
the findings, and clung to the fire theory. Government officials responsible 
for the case skipped the report’s official presentation. The IACHR experts said 
they weresubjected to a smear campaign 
<http://www.oas.org/en/iachr/media_center/PReleases/2016/044.asp>. 

Since then, Mexico has not contributed to the IACHR, according to the 
commission’s list of donors 
<https://www.oas.org/es/cidh/mandato/finanzas/RecursosFinancieros-2011-2016.pdf>
 (pdf).

The government disputes any suggestions of non-support or that it is seeking 
retribution, and says it paid $2m (£1.4m) for the experts’ work on the 
Ayotzinapa case.

But Mexico <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico> is not the only country 
in South America and the Caribbean apparently wavering in its support for the 
IACHR, which has confronted governments often reluctant to address human rights 
issues and increasingly uncomfortable with scrutiny of press freedom, political 
violence and infringements on indigenous people’s land.

The commission is now facing a financial crisis 
<http://www.oas.org/en/iachr/media_center/PReleases/2016/069.asp> that could 
result in the loss of 40% of its personnel by the end of July, which would have 
a devastating impact on its work.

As well as leaving a skeleton staff to handle more than 6,000 petitions, the 
IACHR faces the prospect of having to halt investigations; not having its staff 
appear before theinter-American court of human rights 
<http://www.corteidh.or.cr/index.php/en>; postponing country visits and 
cancelling hearings in which activists and victims have a voice and countries 
are called to account. It would also have to disband a team evaluating and 
granting protective measures for activists coming under threat.

Related: Mexican journalist shot dead, the sixth in 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/may/19/mexican-journalist-shot-dead-the-sixth-in-2016>

The commission’s future is expected to be discussed this week at the general 
assembly of the Organisation of American States (OAS) in Santo Domingo. The 
IACHR is an independent body of the OAS.

Last month, the UN high commissioner for human rights, Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein, 
expressed concern at the funding crisis 
<http://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/GlobalhumanrightsupdatebyHC.aspx> and 
urged countries to commit resources.

“What’s at stake is the functioning of the commission,” said the IACHR 
president, James Cavallaro. “The whole machine of international human rights: 
increasing visibility, making things international, providing a forum for 
victims, all that goes away.”

Inadequate funding is not a new issue for the commission. It operates on an 
annual budget of $10m-12m (£7m-8.5m) –smaller 
<https://twitter.com/CIDH/status/742371025980035073> than commissions in Europe 
and Africa.

Roughly half of its funding comes from the OAS operating budget; voluntary 
contributions from OAS members and observer states make up the rest.

Contributions from member states in Latin America amounted to only $199,600 
(£141,000) last year – a sum surpassed byDenmark, which has donated $1.7m 
<https://www.oas.org/es/cidh/mandato/finanzas/RecursosFinancieros-2011-2016.pdf>
 since 2013. Latin American countries gave $13.7m to the international criminal 
court in 2015, even though no cases from the region were pending, according to 
the IACHR.

The US, which has not ratified 
<http://www.oas.org/dil/treaties_B-32_American_Convention_on_Human_Rights_sign.htm>
 theAmerican convention on human rights 
<https://www.oas.org/dil/treaties_B-32_American_Convention_on_Human_Rights.htm>
, has given $2m annually, on average over the last four years, while Canada, 
not a signatory to the convention, has donated in the past, although it has not 
committed funds for 2016.

Related: How Mexico's attack on human rights undercut an international 
investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/06/mexico-human-rights-ayotzinapa-missing-students-iachr>

Observers such as Spain, Sweden, the Netherlands and the EU have been filling 
the funding void, but the refugee crisis has prompted many European countries 
to focus funding closer to home.

“The truth is that only a handful of countries in the region are seriously 
committed to having a strong commission,” says José Miguel Vivanco,Americas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/americas> director at Human Rights Watch.

“Many others would appear to prefer a commission that looks more like a human 
rights thinktank, instead of an effective international human rights mechanism 
that is able to denounce abuses wherever it sees them and protect the victims.”

Some countries such as Brazil face budget crises. But even before its recent 
recession, in 2011 Brazilwithdrew funding and recalled its ambassador 
<http://www.coha.org/brazil-disregards-charges-from-the-inter-american-commission-on-human-rights/>
 to the OAS after the IACHR requested the government delay the licensing 
process for theBelo Monte dam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/dec/16/belo-monte-brazil-tribes-living-in-shadow-megadam>
 to allow consultations with indigenous groups.

The Brazilian reaction “opened the way to much harsher criticism from 
countries like Bolivia, Ecuador, Venezuela and Colombia”, says Maurício 
Santoro, international relations professor at Rio de Janeiro State University. 
Criticism of the commission “cuts across right and left”, he adds.

In Mexico, a source familiar with the commission said the government was 
working to dissuade others from funding the commission.

“Of course there is a relationship between the work of the [experts] and what 
was said and suddenly they’re not giving enough money,” the source said. “It’s 
not that they’re just not giving enough money. They’re working behind the 
scenes to make sure that others don’t give money.”
