
When I hear the word aperitivo, I’m transported back to the 1970s. It brings 
to mind those Cinzano adverts with Leonard Rossiter and Joan Collins, racing 
cars emblazoned in Martini colours and I can almost picture my late aunt 
sipping Campari at Ronnie Scott’s. Well, the 70s are back. Classic vermouths 
such as Cinzano, Martini andCocchi <http://www.cocchi.it/en/> are winning new 
fans both as cocktail ingredients and as standalone drinks. I’m particularly 
partial to a Cocchi Americano on the rocks. It’s the nearest thing now 
available to the defunctKina Lillet 
<http://www.thejamesbonddossier.com/content/drink/kina-lillet.htm>, an 
essential ingredient in the Vesper cocktail. What all these drinks share is a 
certain bitterness, which can be something of an acquired taste.

Bitterness is a complicated thing, as I was telling my therapist the other 
day. We have two receptors on our tongues to taste sweet but over 20 for bitter 
(scientists disagree on exactly how many.) Some people are very sensitive to 
bitter flavours, but just to confuse things might enjoy black coffee but find 
grapefruit completely unpalatable. That bitter taste is there to warn us that 
we are potentially swallowing something poisonous, which is why we react so 
strongly to it. We are going against our instinct when we consume bitter 
things. In order to fight the incoming poison, our body reacts by producing 
saliva and stomach acid, which is why bitter drinks make such good aperitifs. 
They awaken your appetite.

We’re no strangers to bitterness in Britain. After all, our national beer is 
called bitter and we enjoy Seville orange marmalade. But that’s nothing 
compared to the Italians. They have a long and profound love affair with 
bitterness that stretches back to the Romans. If you detect a not unpleasant 
bitter note in a wine, chances are it’s Italian. It’s there in Chianti, 
Valpolicella and Barbera from Piedmont. There’s a grape from Puglia called 
Negroamaro – “black and bitter” – and a wine from Veneto called Amarone, – 
“great bitter”. Then there are the amari,amaro meaning simply “bitter” – a 
family of drinks made all over Italy, such as Fernet Branca from Milan, Amaro 
Montenegro from Bologna and Cynar, which gets some of its bitterness from 
artichokes. They used to be drunk mainly by old Italian men, but recently have 
become the drinkdu jour for trendy things around the world. There are now 
boutique amari made in London by Stellacello and Asterley Brothers.

The standard bearer for the bitter renaissance is Campari, especially in the 
form of the Negroni. I remember feeling very likeMarcello Mastroianni 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0000052/> when ordering one 10 years ago. Barmen 
would give me a knowing look, as if to say: “We recognise that you are 
extremely cool” – or maybe I was just drunk. Since then it’s become a bit of a 
hipster cliche, but don’t let that put you off – it’s a very versatile drink.

Bar Termini <http://www.bar-termini.com/location/> in London’s Soho, sister 
bar to Islington’s69 Colebrooke Row <http://www.69colebrookerow.com/#about>, 
has launched a series of aged Negronis, including two that play with our 
perception of bitterness. There’s theSuperiore, made with pink peppercorns, 
which counterintuitively make the drink mellower. Then there’s theRosato, made 
with rosebuds, which accentuate the bitterness.World of Zing  
<http://www.worldofzing.com/>offers a cask-aged Negroni that dispenses with the 
Campari entirely in favour of Sacred’sRosebud Cup 
<https://www.masterofmalt.com/liqueurs/sacred/sacred-rosehip-cup-liqueur/> 
liqueur. It has all the initial power of a traditional Negroni but it’s 
smoother and more complex.

The Negroni has crossed over from cult drink to the mainstream, but others, 
such asFernet Branca <http://www.fernetbranca.com/>, may be too bitter to make 
the leap. Part of the appeal of bitter drinks is that they’re an acquired 
taste. You feel like you’re in an exclusive club for appreciating them. Because 
our body thinks they’re poisons, there’s an element of what Max Venning from 
Bar Termini calls “flirting with danger” when we drink them. Ooooh sexy! Then 
there’s fashion. The bitter, brooding Negroni seems diametrically opposed to 
sugary concoctions popular in the 90s. Beware though, bitterness ameliorates 
sweetness. A Negroni contains a lot more sugar than a Cosmopolitan. There are 
lighter alternatives, such as the Death in Venice – made from Prosecco, Campari 
and grapefruit bitters; or the Bicicleta – simply white wine and Campari. But 
they are still chock-full of sugar. For those who prefer something drier I’ve 
come up with a cocktail that’s a cross between a Martini and a Negroni. I call 
it the Martoni. Here’s the recipe:

The Martoni

Serves 1-2
3 shots of gin (I use Martin Miller or Beefeater)
1 tbsp Campari
1 tbsp vermouth (I use Noilly Prat Ambre)

1 Stir in a cocktail shaker with loads of ice, strain into a frozen martini 
glass with some orange peel.


Just the one should stimulate your appetite as reliably as a Negroni but 
without all that sweetness. Have two and you’ll want to head down to Ronnie 
Scott’s to catch Oscar Peterson in his prime.


 * Henry Jeffreys is a drinks writer. His first book, Empire of Booze will be 
published by Unbound on 3 November 2016.@henrygjeffreys 
<https://twitter.com/HenryGJeffreys?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
