
Earlier this year, I applied for a job. I didn’t get it. This was hardly 
unexpected; I only attained my PhD recently and I hadn’t really expected to be 
successful. I had, however, expected to get an interview – the Russell Group 
university I’d applied to is a “Two Ticks 
<https://www.gov.uk/recruitment-disabled-people/encouraging-applications>” 
employer. This means that they are positive about employing people with 
disabilities and are committed to offering interviews to them when the minimum 
requirements are met.

I met the requirements and have a disability, which I had declared on the 
application form. When I wasn’t offered an interview, I decided to email the 
human resources department. Not because I felt angry that I wasn’t off to work 
in an amazing job so soon after graduation, but because organisations that 
receive accolades for their positivity in disability employment ought to stick 
to the policies that got them those accolades.


HR said it was nothing to do with them and forwarded the query to the academic 
in charge of recruiting. That email contained my name and the fact that I was a 
candidate with a disability, and it was sent – without my consent – to a senior 
academic in my field. My right to disseminate information about my disability 
had been taken away and handed to a stranger who could potentially wield quite 
a bit of influence over my future.


Related: I've finally admitted that I'm a dyslexic academic – and I'm terrified
 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/feb/19/ive-finally-admitted-that-im-a-dyslexic-academic-and-im-terrified>

My disability is invisible; you wouldn’t be able to tell from looking at me 
that I have a condition which has a profound and long-term impact on my life. I 
spend quite a bit of time either in bed or working way below what I consider to 
be my “normal” productivity.

I always look wide-eyed and alert at conferences, but that’s usually less to 
do with the paper in question and more to do with the lancing pain that comes 
from looking at artificial light for too long. I have some gaps on my CV but 
when I’m working, my output is impressive. Neither me nor my work history seems 
“disabled”.


When you have a disability, there are a number of issues around applying for 
jobs, most of which are supposed to be covered by legislation such as the
Equality Act 2010 <http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2010/15/contents>. For 
job seekers, this covers practical areas such as application forms and 
interview arrangements. Employers, meanwhile, have the right to make limited 
enquiries about your disability and health to assess whether you can perform 
tasks vital to the role; for monitoring; and to ascertain if you can undertake 
an interview.


But it is still difficult to decide when to declare a condition. We’re under 
no legal obligation to disclose, but there are a number of things to consider:

 * Not declaring a disability in an application can lead to problems in the 
future if there is an employment tribunal. An employer cannot be expected to 
make reasonable adjustments if they do not know that you have a disability. 
 *  The revelation of a disability at the interview can lead to the interview 
being all about your disability and not about your abilities. 
 * If you don’t declare, how do you explain gaps in your CV? (You also miss 
the opportunity to explain that you are so super-amazing that you managed to 
finish every project on time despite having to rest or deal with inaccessible 
environments). 
Related: Forget equality and diversity, my university only cares about 
appearances 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jan/29/forget-equality-and-diversity-my-university-only-cares-about-appearances>

One of the major issues of looking for a job in academia, whoever you are, is 
the oversubscription of applicants. When too many people meet the minimum 
requirements, some have to be weeded out. But when you have a disability, it’s 
hard not to feel that you are being rejected because of able-body bias.

In almost a year of job-seeking, I’ve had two interviews and more than 30 
rejections. I know that these numbers aren’t unusual – what is telling is that 
I had not disclosed my disability to the two universities that chose to 
interview me.

My graduate school offered all kinds of training for post-university life, 
from public engagement (useful) to Microsoft Word (not so useful) – but nothing 
on disability and job-seeking.


It’s hard to know your rights, and it’s harder still to exercise them when 
you’re working in a narrow field in which reputation matters above all. We need 
real engagement with these issues and real, useful training, for students, 
staff and recruiters.


Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
