
Parkour

Fear rating *** 

Watching a free runner scale walls and leap ledges, landing with catlike 
grace, it’s obvious that parkour is a spectacularly cool sport. Derived from
parcours du combattant, the French military term for obstacle course, I’m not 
even sure it is a sport – it feels more like an outlaw discipline or a 
philosophy.

Sébastien Foucan is one of the founding fathers of parkour, and later free 
running – an offshoot incorporating a greater range of movements. He agrees 
parkour is a state of mind as much as a sport. “It’s about expressing yourself, 
seeing the world as a playground,” he says. We’re at his academy, at Oxygen 
Freejumping, 3,000 sq ft of trampolines, tumble tracks and gymnastic equipment. 
It looks like a training ground for baby ninjas, and is possibly the greatest 
place I have ever been.

For the next hour he teaches me basic techniques of footwork, catching and 
rolling. We practise crawling, jumping, swinging. I wobble on a slackline to 
improve my balance and learn to land on the balls of my feet. He teaches me a 
wall-rebounding jump called tic tac. For another move,saut de chat, I plant 
outstretched arms atop an obstacle and pass my body between them at full dive.

At 41, Foucan is an incredible advert for free running’s physical benefits. 
He’s familiar to many as Daniel Craig’s acrobatic adversary in the opening 
scene of Casino Royale, and has toured with Madonna. He has the face of a man 
half his age, the energy of a boy half that. But while his discipline is 
associated with flips and tricks, Foucan isn’t interested in showing off. He 
doesn’t have time for untrained enthusiasts who imitate risky stunts, jumping 
between buildings.

Time to test my skills in the real world, where there is greater risk. Foucan 
and a handful of others created parkour in their early teens. “The purpose is 
to become the explorer you were as a child,” Foucan tells me. Its legitimacy is 
an open question, though: “No free running” reads a sign within eyeshot. He 
checks our route and reminds me to start slowly. We pick up speed, balancing on 
bollards, scrambling up walls. It’s exhilarating; we tic tac off an underpass, 
leap low pillars, swing around street lamps.

I’m learning new ways to move. My body feels woken up. “People think cities 
are depressing,” says Foucan. “They’re not.” Suddenly a police car rolls up. 
I’m nervous. Am I an outlaw now? No. They’ve recognised the guy from James Bond 
and want a photo. When they hear what we’re doing, they join in for a few 
minutes, vaulting over a railing with us.

We resume our lesson. I’m clunky, conducting myself with neither grace nor 
speed, but my confidence grows. I’ve always found going to the gym or jogging 
boring. Could free running change the way I exercise? Surely, it becomes 
impossible after a certain age? “When does a bird retire?” retorts Foucan, 
balancing one-legged on a narrow rail. “This is what your body is meant to be 
doing.”oxygenfreejumping.co.uk <http://oxygenfreejumping.co.uk/>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ck56%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ck56%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F29%2F1443541449402%2Ffd4e55a8-0fb9-40b9-a28d-95a6b28b0476-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20worrier%E2%80%99s%20guide%20to%20extreme%20sport&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ck56%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A+worrier%E2%80%99s+guide+to+extreme+sport&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ck56%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F29%2F1443541449402%2Ffd4e55a8-0fb9-40b9-a28d-95a6b28b0476-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Trapeze students at the Gorilla Circus, Regent’s Park. Photograph: Antonio 
Olmos for the Guardian 
Trapeze

Fear rating ****

Growing up with anxiety, I’ve been scared of many things in my life. Panic has 
set in on planes, in lifts, climbing the Eiffel Tower, even in small crowds. My 
ability to worry about new adventures is familiar to all who know me. But in 
the past couple of years I’ve changed the way I deal with anxiety. I try to 
tackle the activities that scare me. It’s been an amazingly successful tactic, 
so when I saw the Gorilla Circus trapeze school setting up in Regent’s Park, 
London, I booked straight away.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ck56%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ck56%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F6%2F1444149229232%2F419a0f08-c21a-49ad-aa63-71d9f0911986-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20worrier%E2%80%99s%20guide%20to%20extreme%20sport&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ck56%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A+worrier%E2%80%99s+guide+to+extreme+sport&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ck56%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F6%2F1444149229232%2F419a0f08-c21a-49ad-aa63-71d9f0911986-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Arghhhh!!! ... Bella Mackie gets to grips with the trapeze. Photograph: 
Antonio Olmos for the Guardian 
I turned up one afternoon, feeling oddly excited … until I looked up at the 
trapeze. Why did it look so high? Why did the net look so fragile?

We were fitted with harnesses, given a run through on a small practice frame 
and then lined up to do it for real. The instructions were simple. We would 
climb the stepladder, be welcomed on to a wooden ledge by an instructor, 
clipped onto a rope, given the trapeze handle bar, and then … we’d jump. Once 
you swing off the ledge, you wait for the call then hook your legs over the bar 
and hang upside down until it’s time to drop to the net.

As I climbed the ladder, I could feel my old companion, panic, join me. My 
vision started to go and the air suddenly felt thin. As I shuffled my feet over 
the ledge, I could feel the beginnings of a full-blown anxiety attack circling 
about me. Now was the moment. I could get down, go home and lie on the floor 
for a couple of hours. I wish I could say that I grew brave, but in reality I 
could only think of the eight-year-old boy who had gone before me and I 
couldn’t face being vanquished by a child.

I jumped. I swung, I … couldn’t hook my legs over the bar. “One more time!” 
yelled the instructor, as I dropped to the net. Up I went again, and again 
failed to hook my legs over.

As I watched the rest of the group climb and swing in front of me, my resolve 
hardened. I would not go home a failure. Up I climbed. I jumped. I swung, I 
hooked my legs over the bar. I held on. “Let go!” everyone yelled. I let go. 
And I swung upside down. And, just like that, my anxiety left me. Exhilaration 
kicked in: I felt like I’d climbed a mountain.

By the time I got home, I felt a yearning to do it all over again. 
gorillacircus.com <http://www.gorillacircus.com/flyingtrapezeschool/> 

Ice climbing
Fear rating ***

There’s no need to risk avalanches while hacking your way up the north face of 
the Eiger; you can have a go at ice climbing at an indoor centre in the UK. Ice 
Factor in Kinlochleven, Scottish Highlands, has the biggest indoor ice wall in 
the world, with 500 tonnes of real snow and ice to a height of 12 metres. There 
are also walls in Glasgow, Manchester and London. £30 for a beginner’s taster 
session. ice-factor.co.uk <https://www.ice-factor.co.uk/climbing-for-beginners/>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ck56%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ck56%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fadfa4032e35680294ee25ddd1de6b4cf3c3398d2%2F0_0_2200_1319%2F2200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20worrier%E2%80%99s%20guide%20to%20extreme%20sport&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ck56%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A+worrier%E2%80%99s+guide+to+extreme+sport&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ck56%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fadfa4032e35680294ee25ddd1de6b4cf3c3398d2%2F0_0_2200_1319%2F2200.jpg>
 Kitesurfing: the learning curve is gratifyingly fast Photograph: Toby 
Melville/Reuters 
Kitesurfing
Fear rating ****

Watching the experts perform huge jumps and dizzying spins can be daunting, 
but kitesurfing starts sedately. A typical beginner’s course involves lots of 
kite control skills, mostly from the safety of the beach, and “body dragging” – 
being pulled through the water by the kite. You only get on the board when 
you’re ready and the learning curve is gratifyingly fast.
britishkitesports.org 
<http://www.britishkitesports.org/training/learn-to-kite/>

Fatbiking
Fear rating **

While mountain biking can be a bit hairy, fatbiking gives you all the fun of 
off-road riding without the fear, thanks to ultra-wide tyres, which mean they 
“float” over tough terrain. Fatbikes were invented to ride across snowy Alaska 
and sandy New Mexico, and today’s bikes will gobble up anything the UK can 
throw at them. £28 for a taster session in North Berwick. fatbiketours.co.uk 
<http://fatbiketours.co.uk/about/>

Compiled by Rachel Dixon

