
Tony Blair <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> is expected to 
defend his decision to join in the invasion of Iraq by asking his critics to 
think through the consequences for stability in the Middle East had Saddam 
Hussein been left in power, capable of developing weapons of mass destruction.

In the wake of the publication of the Chilcot inquiry report, friends of the 
former prime minister believe he will argue that the ultimate cause of the 
long-term bloodshed in Iraq was the scale of external intervention in the 
country byIran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> and al-Qaida rather 
than failures in post-conflict planning.

Blair <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair>, frustrated by the 
repeated delays in the production of the report, has been meeting his allies to 
discuss his response, but is not planning to make any speech or intervention 
before publication on 6 July.

Related: The Chilcot report shouldn’t be used to pin blame for Iraq on one man 
| Jackie Ashley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/11/chilcot-report-tony-blair-iraq>

Once the Iraq war inquiry <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/iraq-war-inquiry> 
report is out, Blair is likely to fight back by arguing the need to look at 
counter-factual scenarios, including the consequence of leaving Saddam in 
power, and will continue to insist that the world is safer for the removal of 
Saddam.


Although no weapons of mass destruction were found, contrary to intelligence 
community forecasts, Blair is expected to say that Saddam retained the 
expertise and capacity make such weapons.

The former Labour <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> leader has also 
previously expressed concern that the inquiry has shifted from being a “lessons 
learned” process to one in which errors of judgement, or deception, are 
identified.

The findings – still unknown to the Blair circle – have the potential to lead 
to an explosive civil war inside the Labour party just a fortnight after the 
European referendum result is announced.

Jeremy Corbyn, the Labour leader, has vowed Labour will officially apologise 
for taking the UK to war in Iraq on the basis of a deception and in breach of 
international law. He has been less explicit about whetherBlair could plausibly 
be sent to the International Criminal Court for war crimes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/aug/05/tony-blair-could-face-trial-illegal-iraq-war-jeremy-corbyn>
.

Corbyn’s determination to assert Blair deceived the British people about the 
nature of the threat posed by Saddam has infuriated some supporters of the 
former prime minister. It has led some Blairites to ask why the former prime 
minister is being treated by a war criminal by a man that refused to vote for 
action in the Commons against a known war criminal, the Syrian president Bashar 
al-Assad.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kgzv%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kgzv%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd1076549cf6480922e57469dd0e7cb7dbc80ff3%2F0_169_2960_1776%2F2960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tony%20Blair%20camp%20readies%20its%20defence%20to%20Chilcot%20report&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kgzv%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tony+Blair+camp+readies+its+defence+to+Chilcot+report&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kgzv%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd1076549cf6480922e57469dd0e7cb7dbc80ff3%2F0_169_2960_1776%2F2960.jpg>
 Demonstration against war in Iraq, London, 15 February 2003.
 Photograph: Sipa Press/Rex 
Many in the Labour party think the timing of the report’s publication is 
intended to divert attention from the likely turmoil in the Conservative party 
over the conduct of the referendum to a potentially equally vicious 
blood-letting inside Labour.

Blair has argued in his autobiography and in a major speech in June 2014 that 
the bulk of the bloodshed, and the cause of the civil war from 2004 was the 
decision of both Iran and al-Qaida to enter Iraq, and to destroy the western 
reconstruction ofIraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq>.

But he will again accept that the planning for the aftermath of the war was 
inadequate, and make a series of recommendations on nation-building and setting 
up democratic institutions after a corrupt or brutal state is overthrown. He 
also accepts that the west did not understand the degree to which the country’s 
political economy was not functioning, and more pessimistic assumptions should 
have been made about the capability of the Iraqi state.

He said it is best to assume the worst about a corrupt or brutal state’s 
infrastructure and the integrity of its governing systems.

In probably his most self-critical judgement, Blair has accepted the west did 
not foresee the degree to which complex tribal, religious and sectarian 
tensions would be uncorked once a strong, repressive, all-powerful leader such 
as Saddam was removed. It has led him to favour more evolutionary approaches if 
possible both to the Arab spring and to western interventions in Libya, but not 
to flinch from what he has described as a “hard, unremitting counter-terrorist 
and counter-insurgency strategy”.

But he has told friends he still insists that this uncorking of forces in Iraq 
was so devastating because of the unexpected degree to which malevolent Iranian 
and al-Qaida forces infiltrated the country stirring up sectarian hatreds.

A campaign to defeat Saddam gradually changed into a campaign to defeat 
terrorism and a form of Islamist extremism. He insists this was more important 
than failures of post-war planning, even if he does accept that the sudden US 
decision to transfer responsibility from the State Department to the Defense 
Department on the eve of the invasion set back post-war planning and 
wrongfooted Whitehall.

He is also likely to challenge those that claim he was warned by Middle East 
academics in a November 2002 meeting about the chaos the US and the UK was 
likely to unleash by deposing Saddam. Academics at that event said they gave an 
explicit warning about the sectarian tensions inside Iraq repressed by Saddam 
and it is likely that Sir John Chilcot will have had access to the minutes of 
that meeting.

It was only one of many warnings given privately to Blair, including by the 
Foreign Office about the level of post-war planning.

He is also understood to have argued that peace-building needs to be a 
two-part process in which the nature of forces required for the aftermath of 
regime change are radically different from those required for regime change and 
that the international community has not yet built structures or capabilities 
to help construct democracies.

Blair has also proposed a senior team work inside No 10, led by a senior 
figure reporting directly to the prime minister on the same level as senior 
policy advisers whenever UK forces are engaged either in military conflict or 
peace-building. He has also accepted the capacity to build civil policing in 
Iraq did not exist early enough.

Senior figures in the Blair entourage are also expecting the Chilcot report 
will include a searching examination of the “special relationship” with the US, 
including the risks of the UK entering a military conflict with the US, not as 
an equal partner and outside the structures of either the EU or the United 
Nations.

Blair is likely to argue that the relationship is always unequal in terms of 
military hardware, but partnership with the US is essential to UK national 
security, and wider UK influence in the world particularly since 9/11.






