
Although I’m a museum curator and archaeologist working in Egypt, it’s a 
museum without ancient monuments that fascinates me most. Off a busy street in 
the Dokki district of Cairo, within an almost unmarked garden compound, lie 
several buildings that make up the Agricultural Museum. Installed in the palace 
of Princess Fatima, the institution, which opened in 1938, was the first 
agricultural museum in the world.

It covers the history of agriculture from prehistoric to modern times, and the 
section which deals with the post-pharaonic period is astounding. Beneath a 
soaring central atrium sits an array of dioramas that you can walk around. An 
Egyptian cafe scene, a glassmaker’s workshop, a village shop, a procession on 
camel-back, all replete with objects evoking traditional, often rural, life. 
The static poses, expressive faces and dustiness make such displays a 
fascinating, ghoulish spectacle.

But the real treasures lie upstairs. Not the antique wooden showcases with 
stuffed birds carefully lined up in rows, trussed as if awaiting the charcoal 
grill. Nor the Sudanese python skin framed on the wall, or the room marked 
simply “Soil”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dfzp%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dfzp%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0beac1ec65f2129e9821db7f1f2667ba48818afe%2F0_120_5400_4998%2F5400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Where%20does%20the%20British%20Museum%E2%80%99s%20keeper%20of%20Ancient%20Egypt%20get%20his%20kicks%20when%20in%20Cairo%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dfzp%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Where+does+the+British+Museum%E2%80%99s+keeper+of+Ancient+Egypt+get+his+kicks+when+in+Cairo%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dfzp%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0beac1ec65f2129e9821db7f1f2667ba48818afe%2F0_120_5400_4998%2F5400.jpg>
 A corridor leading through rooms in the natural history building. Photograph: 
ArabianEye/Corbis 
Rather, delve into the rooms on disease, food and agricultural production. 
Models, farming paraphernalia, jars with diseased limbs or replica cuts of 
meat, information panels on lentil production …

The hand-painted wooden panels – one personal favourite shows “pests” from 
around the world (none from Egypt!) – and accompanying scenes are both 
effective and outmoded. This museological gem reflects the modernisation of 
Egyptian society and food production in the mid-20th century.

Egypt’s new museums – particularly the Grand Egyptian Museum currently being 
built by the Giza pyramids on the outskirts of Cairo and scheduled to be 
partially open in 2018 – will be shiny, dazzling, massive monuments with 
state-of-the art displays. Let us hope there remains space for places like the 
Agricultural Museum, evocative slices of Egyptian – and museological – history.

• Further information on the museum at touregypt.net 
<http://www.touregypt.net/featurestories/agriculturalmuseum.htm>. Neal Spencer 
is keeper of Ancient Egypt & Sudan at the British Museum in London, where the 
Egypt: Faith After the Pharaohs exhibition starts on October 29 (book tickets at
britishmuseum.org 
<http://www.britishmuseum.org/whats_on/exhibitions/faith_after_the_pharaohs.aspx>
)
