
La Villa Fabulite, Cap d’Antibes

The Cap d’Antibes ranks among the priciest places on Earth. Its glittering 
beaches (such as silky, sandy plage de la Salis) and stately homes (like Villa 
Eilenroc, where Woody Allen shotMagic in the Moonlight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/magic-in-the-moonlight>) are a short stroll 
away from Villa Fabulite. Open since 2014, it’s a – relative – steal. 
Franco-Mexican manageress Angelina welcomes guests to her 15 rooms with 
Asian-inspired decor; these ring a swimming pool and orchid garden. Local chef 
Cyrille – formerly of London’s Le Gavroche – serves up local octopus for €15 a 
platter at lunch and dinner. Angelina can also arrange a rented paddleboard, 
kayak, racing bike or shopping tour quicker than you can say “rosé by the pool”.
• Doubles from €130, +33 4 93 61 47 45, fabulite.com <http://www.fabulite.com/>

Le Roquebrune, Roquebrune Cap Martin

Owned by charming sisters Patricia and Marine, this petite hotel is well off 
the Riviera’s tourist radar. Each of the six chintzy guest rooms is light and 
airy and all boast a private sea-facing terrace. There’s a superb restaurant on 
site (reservation only) where Patricia will the seasonal menu with you in 
advance. Sweeping Mediterranean panoramas from the dining room take in Irish 
designer Eileen Gray’snewly renovated Villa E-1027 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/may/02/eileen-gray-e1027-villa-cote-dazur-reopens-lost-legend-le-corbusier>
 (“a lost legend of 20th-century architecture”) in the bay below. The 1929 
seafront home has been open to the public since June 2015. It features frescoes 
painted by iconic architect (and Gray’s eventual next-door neighbour)Le 
Corbusier <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/lecorbusier>.
• Doubles from €120, +33 4 93 35 00 16, le-roquebrune.com 
<http://www.le-roquebrune.com/>

Hôtel Villa Patricia, Villefranche-sur-Mer

The Patricia is an eco-chic bargain in a millionaire’s paradise. Keith 
Richards once lived in Villa Nellcôte, a 16-bedroom mansion almost next door. 
Yet bedrooms here start from £50 a night. Even the parking is free. As is the 
coastal path around the Cap Ferrat peninsula and the museums of Villefranche 
castle (both 10 minutes away on foot). The drawback is that the nine rooms in 
this rambling Provençal house aren’t big, and the coastal train (Nice is three 
minutes away, Monaco is 10) does ramble past within earshot – but 
Villefranche’s golden sweep of public beach is only three minutes’ walk away.
• Doubles from €65, +33 4 93 01 06 70, hotel-patricia.riviera.fr 
<http://www.hotel-patricia.riviera.fr/en/>

Hôtel Le Geneve, Nice

New addition Le Geneve is in the middle of the city’s most boho quartier, 
around pedestrian-only rue Bonaparte. Nicknamed “le petit Marais” after the 
gay-friendly area of Paris, the district has many boutique patisseries (such as 
Déli Bo at number 5) and boutique shoe shops (like Lucien Chausseur at number 
6). Chief among the stylish offerings is Le Geneve’s own bar-restaurant,Café 
des Chineurs 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Caf%C3%A9-des-Chineurs/1433853790186968>. It 
has flower-power wallpaper, brocante antiques and artfully mismatched 
armchairs. Upstairs, the 16 rooms are ultra-modern and have hefty windows to 
shut out the summer party noise from outside.
• Doubles from €65, +33 4 93 56 84 79, hotel-le-geneve-nice.com 
<http://www.hotel-le-geneve-nice.com/>

Nice Pebbles, Nice
 Apartment Valentina. 
Nice Pebbles manage the city’s finest collection of apartments, which often 
work out more affordable than a hotel when booked by the week. Each one of its 
180 properties is artsy, well equipped and near the beach. All have Wi-Fi and 
sleep from two to ten guests. New offerings for 2015 includeValentina 
<https://www.nicepebbles.com/nice-france-apartment/rentals/371/> (sleeps 4, 
from €135 a night,), a mammoth two-bedroom property in a belle-époque building, 
wrapped with balconies all round. Other picks includeSerenity 
<http://www.nicepebbles.com/nice-france-apartment/rentals/354/> (sleeps 6, from 
€195 a night), a three-bedroom palace beside the iconicNegresco Hotel 
<http://www.hotel-negresco-nice.com/>. Pebbles also manages a dozen wow-factor 
apartments in Antibes, Cannes and Villefranche.
• One-bedroom apartments from €90 a night, +33 4 97 20 27 30, nicepebbles.com 
<https://www.nicepebbles.com/>

Hôtel Mademoiselle, Juan-les-Pins

The sandy holiday resort that once hosted F Scott Fitzgerald (he lived in the 
ritzy Hôtel Belles Rives around the corner in 1925) is home to the Riviera’s 
nuttiest new hotel. Standard rooms at the Mademoiselle are decorated with 
plastic moose heads and golden robots; super rooms boast flock wallpaper and 
statues of Queen Elizabeth II. Equally fun is the 7am till 7pm tearoom that is 
run by young in-housepâtissière Alexandra. She also makes the homemade 
breakfast served in the orchard-like rear garden. For better or worse, 
Juan-les-Pins’ breathtaking beach, terraced restaurants and raucous clubs are 
less than a minute’s walk away. Or, to escape it, rent a vintageSolex scooter 
<http://so-solex.com/>, also new to town, from just around the corner.
• Doubles from €102, +33 4 93 61 31 34, hotelmademoisellejuan.com 
<http://www.hotelmademoisellejuan.com/fr>

Le Refuge, La Croix Valmer

On the southern shoreline of the Saint-Tropez peninsula, La Refuge offers 
simple guest rooms and studios (each with its own kitchenette) just 80m from 
the sea. Make no mistake: you won’t be crossing paths with Kate Moss or Beyonce 
here. The hotel decor is basic: wooden floors, white linens and plenty of 
communal outdoor seating – although as a nod to the 21st century Wi-Fi has 
recently been added. From the adjacent family-friendly beach of plage de 
Gigaro, coastal pathways unfurl in both directions, with direct access to 
pine-shaded coves and sandy swimming spots.
• Doubles from €68, +33 4 94 79 67 38, lerefuge-cotedazur.fr 
<http://lerefuge-cotedazur.fr/>

C2 Hotel, Marseille
 Photograph: Edwige Lamy 
C2’s 20 modernist rooms are over five floors of a carefully restored 
19th-century mansion in downtown Marseille. Each has high ceilings, exposed 
brick walls and a scattering of designer furnishings (such as armchairs by Arne 
Jacobsen and Patricia Urquiola). There’s a spa managed by French skincare brand 
Filorga, as well as a sleek bar and lounge occupying what was formerly the 
home’s ground-floor parlour. But C2’s pièce de résistance is its beach club, on 
the private Île Degaby just off of the Marseille coastline – with day access 
for hotel guests only (additional fee).
• Doubles from €189, +33 4 95 05 13 13, c2-hotel.com <http://www.c2-hotel.com/>

Les Appartés, Arles
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4akq9%2Fsfb%23img-1&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4akq9%2Fsfb%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F15%2F1436974482845%2F287e5e0d-3873-4914-9346-fd53840d7c95-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20hotels%20on%20the%20French%20Riviera&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4akq9%2Fstw%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top+10+hotels+on+the+French+Riviera&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4akq9%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F15%2F1436974482845%2F287e5e0d-3873-4914-9346-fd53840d7c95-1020x612.jpeg>
Double Michelin-starred chef Jean-Luc Rabanel has created a foodie wonderland 
on one of Arles’ atmospheric old town streets.L’Atelier de Jean-Luc Rabanel 
<http://www.rabanel.com/> wows serious gourmets, while Iode 
<http://www.iode-rabanel.com/> dishes up fresh seafood and Bistro A Côté 
<http://www.bistro-acote.com/> offers more affordable informal dining. Last 
year Rabanel opened Les Appartés, a four-bedroom guesthouse designed by the 
chef himself. Terracotta floors and arched ceilings give the accommodation a 
Provençal feel, and there’s also a communal living room and kitchen – although 
guests will be hard-pressed to self-cater with Rabanel’s delectable cuisine on 
the doorstep.
• Doubles from €160, +33 4 90 91 07 69, rabanel.com 
<http://rabanel.com/appart%C3%A9s.html> 

Hôtel Jules César, Arles

Last year, fashion icon Christian Lacroix 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/christian-lacroix> – who was born and 
raised in Arles – redesigned the Hôtel Jules César in its entirety. Originally 
a 17th-century Carmelite convent, today the hotel blends history (from the 
imposing columns out front and busts of Caesar himself to oversize photos of 
bull-fighting toreros) with contemporary art and textiles. Colourful suites are 
decorated according to three distinct themes: Provençal, Monastic, or 
fashion-tastic Lacroix. Also onsite are the convent’s original cloistered 
gardens, an outdoor swimming pool and a spa. The hotel’s location, on the edge 
of Arles’ old town, makes it an easy stroll to the city’s popular outdoor 
performance sights, such as theArènes <http://www.arenes-arles.com/>, or Roman 
amphitheatre.
• Doubles from €125, +33 4 90 52 52 52, hotel-julescesar.fr 
<http://www.hotel-julescesar.fr/uk/index.php>
