
A mysterious and deadly kidney disease has been plaguing labourers in the 
sugar fields of Central America 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/oct/14/kidney-disease-killing-sugar-cane-workers-central-america>
. In the past 20 years, some 20,000 workers have died of the disease, and the 
crisis has been growing worse.

At first the epidemic was thought to be caused by chemicals such as 
pesticides, but the disease only affected labourers in coastal areas – those 
working at higher altitude in hills were largely unaffected.

Related: Heat stress: the next global public health crisis? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/nov/20/heat-stress-public-health-prodcutivity-el-salvador-sugarcane-workers-chronic-kidney-disease>

A recent study found that hard work in the hot climate of the lowlands left 
workers dehydrated, putting such a heavy strain on their kidneys that it 
fatally damaged them. “When it’s extremely hot, the risk for kidney damage 
really begins to become evident,” saidRichard Johnson of the University of 
Colorado 
<http://www.ucdenver.edu/academics/colleges/medicalschool/departments/medicine/renal/Pages/RichardJohnson.aspx>
, Denver.

Similar epidemics of kidney disease were also found in farm workers in other 
hot climates, in Sri Lanka, Egypt and Andhra Pradesh in India. And as global 
temperatures rise and heat waves become more intense, so the new type of kidney 
disease is increasing, according to the study published in theClinical Journal 
of the American Society of Nephrology <http://cjasn.asnjournals.org/>.

Another impact of global warming is more cases of kidney stones 
<https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2008/07/080714172158.htm>. This painful 
condition results from salts crystallising in the kidneys, often caused by 
dehydration. In the US, around 50% more cases of kidney stones occur in the 
warm climate of southern regions than northern states.

And the number of cases has been rising since temperatures began to warm 
noticeably in the late 1970s, especially in the summer. As the climate warms 
further, the high-risk zone for kidney stones is expected to expand northwards, 
with many more new cases predicted.
