
Breakthroughs in genomic medicine are helping researchers to devise a new 
generation of personalised treatments for a range of diseases and conditions, 
including cancer, diabetes and HIV.

The cost of sequencing a human genome has fallen from $95m (£66m) in 2001 to 
just $1,345 (£870),according to the US National Human Genome Research Institute 
<https://www.genome.gov/sequencingcosts/>. This is enabling professionals to 
tailor treatments based on the results of genetic tests.


Cancer, caused by mutations in the genes of human cells, is well-suited to 
genomic medicine. Cancer Research UK is funding theNational Lung Matrix Study 
<http://www.cancerresearchuk.org/about-cancer/find-a-clinical-trial/a-trial-looking-at-different-drugs-for-non-small-cell-lung-cancer-national-lung-matrix-trial>
, also supported by the Experimental Cancer Medicine Centre, drug makers 
AstraZeneca and Pfizer and the University of Birmingham. It examines 28 genes 
in the DNA of the patient’s tumour, and uses the results to tailor treatment to 
“what makes that tumour tick”, according to Gary Middleton, professor of 
medical oncology at the University of Birmingham.

About 15%-20% of lung cancer tumours have a genetic abnormality that can be 
targeted, a proportion the Matrix trial hopes to expand.

“Lung cancer used to be a very simple disease,” says Middleton. “There were 
very few treatments and patients did very poorly. It’s really quite complicated 
now. Keeping on top of the new drugs and the new indications is difficult.” A 
specific drug may only be of use for one lung cancer patient in 100: “But for 
that one patient, it makes a huge difference.”

Related: Treatments for cancers and Alzheimer's on the verge of a breakthrough 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/apr/20/treatments-cancers-alzheimers-verge-breakthrough>

Diabetes is also benefiting from genomics. Researchers at the University of 
Exeter discovered the main cause ofneonatal diabetes 
<https://www.diabetes.org.uk/Guide-to-diabetes/What-is-diabetes/Other-types-of-diabetes/Neonatal-diabetes/>
, a very rare condition that affects babies: half possess a genetic variant 
that prevents insulin being released from the pancreas. “If you give them a
sulphonlylurea 
<https://www.diabetes.org.uk/Guide-to-diabetes/What-is-diabetes/Diabetes-treatments/Sulphonylureas/>
 tablet, these patients can release insulin and stop insulin injections,” says 
Prof Sian Ellard, head of molecular genetics at theRoyal Devon and Exeter NHS 
foundation trust <http://www.rdehospital.nhs.uk/>, which is the university’s 
partner for its medical school.

The trust’s laboratory has provided free testing for more than 1,500 neonatal 
diabetes patients around the world. It also runsNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> tests for other kinds of diabetes, as 
well as a single test covering more than 5,000 rare genetic disorders.

This work has implications for staff. Royal Devon and Exeter is a training 
centre for a national programme to develop NHS bioinformaticians to process the 
vast amounts of data produced by genomic testing. Genetics specialists need to 
keep up with rapid developments in the field and understand the limitations of 
these new tests.

“There are gaps, and we need to remember that a genetic variant causing a 
disorder might be in one of those gaps,” says Ellard. “We never know quite what 
we’re missing. It’s critical to understand the limitations, as well as the 
enormous benefits.” There is also a need to simplify and standardise the 
reporting of genomic test results so they are understandable by all healthcare 
professionals and patients, she adds.

These new genomic tests will affect staff working in nearly all medical 
specialties andHealth <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Education 
England (HEE) has developed a genomics education programme to run alongside the 
100,000 Genomes Project run by Department of Health-owned company Genomics 
England. “The aim is to reach all healthcare professionals, be they doctors, 
nurses, allied healthcare professionals or laboratory staff and increase 
everybody’s general understanding of genomic medicine, what it is and how it 
can bring benefits to patients,” says Ellard.

 Ten universities – including Exeter – offer a masters in genomic medicine, 
funded by HEE. The University of Exeter also supports education in monogenic 
diabetes through an annual international symposium,online education via a MOOC 
<http://www.diabetesgenes.org/> and hosts a national network of genetics 
diabetes nurses, trained in how to recognise patients likely to have monogenic 
diabetes, organise genetic testing, explain test results to patients, arrange 
testing for relatives and change treatments according to the test result.

Related: The price of health: the cost of developing new medicines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/mar/30/new-drugs-development-costs-pharma>

Genetic tests can also help avoid adverse reactions to drugs, something that 
is helping to spread their use across the NHS. HIV drug Abacavir causes a 
serious reaction in about 5% of patients, but in 2004 researchers including Sir 
Munir Pirmohamed, NHS chair of pharmacogenetics at the University of Liverpool, 
published research on a genetic test that identified those at risk. The test 
was implemented across the NHS in 2006, and now less than 1% of patients suffer 
adverse reactions.

The university has developed a similar genetic test covering Warfarin 
<https://www.bhf.org.uk/heart-matters-magazine/medical/drug-cabinet/warfarin> – 
an anticoagulant used by about 1% of population – for use in GP surgeries. 
“Some people require half a milligram a day, some 20 milligrams a day,” says 
Pirmohamed. The NHS in the north-west of England is running a pilot through 
which nurses run this test on a patient’s blood to find the dose they need, 
with results in 45 minutes.

Pirmohamed believes genomics will combine with other ways to personalise 
medicine, including use of electronic patient records and data from 
patient-worn sensors.

“Genomics gives you a result,” he says. “What you need to do is implement 
those findings into the clinical care pathway, and that can be extremely 
complex. It requires someone to implement the information technology, an 
appropriate prescribing system as well as education and training of the 
prescribers, nurses and pharmacists who look after patients.”

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
