
At the top of the list of frustrations media organisations share is the 
accelerated pace of advertising revenue slipping through their fingers. Mary 
Meeker’s latest internet trends report captures the story brilliantly in a 
single slide:
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yx52%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yx52%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86a1241e80be06102cfb31ed6b270fa2c24ce2b7%2F19_248_1461_877%2F1461.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Publishers%20can%20challenge%20Google%20and%20Facebook%20if%20they%20form%20a%20network&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yx52%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Publishers+can+challenge+Google+and+Facebook+if+they+form+a+network&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yx52%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86a1241e80be06102cfb31ed6b270fa2c24ce2b7%2F19_248_1461_877%2F1461.jpg>
 Advertising revenue and growth rates (%) of Google v Facebook v others – US 
2014-15. Photograph: Mary Meeker, KPCB 
Strategies for shifting from analog to digital media models seem too little 
too late already. Google andFacebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> are having no problem 
creating more ways to attract advertisers and more share of spend, over 75% of 
it, while everyone else is struggling.

Three major shifts in user behaviour are adding insult to injury: messaging is 
replacing web browsers, mobile is replacing desktop, and the adoption of 
adblockers continues apace.

Media’s existential crisis is taking on new proportions. The old analog model 
was already broken. Now the user reach and impression growth model is broken, 
too.

There are only two ways through this: retreat or collaborate.

Many media companies have put up paywalls and cut resources. Some who were 
resistant to that idea initially have run out of their own ideas and will 
follow soon.

If you are the director of a company your job is to keep it alive at all 
costs. The retreat model might just keep you on the board for a while longer 
and save your job. But good luck retaining talent if you plan to do that.

People running media companies that care about succeeding as well as surviving 
have an opportunity right now to do something that protects journalism and 
media as a function of society in addition to protecting their jobs.

The job won’t be easy. It’s going to require working together. For anyone 
outside the media industry it may seem silly that more collaboration hasn’t 
happened sooner. But there are some very good reasons for that.

Within each media company there are three forces pushing in different 
directions. Editors want to get the great story that changes the world. Sales 
people want to do the deal that saves the company. And the tech teams want to 
build the product that everyone uses.

Then there are smaller forces sitting between those pillars operating 
independently and putting demands on the core teams. Marketing wants everyone 
to think about whether or not the thing they are doing is increasing the 
customer base. Finance and IT departments want all the data in the company to 
be centralised so they can see where the problems are and fix them. Product 
teams want to win design awards so they breakthrough the noise of every other 
digital media thing getting pushed out there.

These smaller teams can’t do their jobs without some help of the other pieces 
of the company and spend a lot of time in meetings trying to get prioritised 
and fighting for resources.

With so many divergent agendas within each media organisation, how can 
competing media organisations possibly consider working together?

Most can’t see the forest through the trees and have failed to recognise that 
they are already optimised for the kinds of collaborative production and 
networked distribution models that the internet is so good at enabling.

Healthy networks typically have smaller individual teams fulfilling the needs 
of their own agendas. Those teams both share and compete for resources. And the 
work being produced adheres to known standards or at least common formats. It’s 
happening in small ways across the industry already.

The Panama Papers <http://www.theguardian.com/news/series/panama-papers> 
investigation is now the best example of editorial collaboration we’ve seen 
perhaps ever. The Washington Post offersa subscriber affiliate program 
<http://www.niemanlab.org/2015/04/congratulations-toledo-blade-reader-on-your-subscription-to-the-washington-post/>
 giving hundreds of local publishers the ability to offer access to Washington 
Post paywall content to their subscribers.Premium ad network initiatives have 
been deployed by the Guardian 
<http://www.theguardian.com/gnm-press-office/2015/mar/18/worlds-leading-digital-publishers-launch-new-programmatic-advertising-alliance-pangaea>
 in collaboration with other major news organisations such as the Financial 
Times and CNN. And the tech community is very good about sharing code and using 
open source licenses.

But the occasional toe-dipping collaboration is not going to cut it any more. 
The industry needs to embrace it as a core objective, a higher level purpose 
rather than an alternative add-on to the current ways of working.

To do this everyone in the others category on Mary Meeker’s slide needs to 
create a meaningful network, a self-serve marketplace with clear means of 
trade. The good news is that they already share something in common.

Media organisations share a value system. They want to be relevant in people’s 
lives. They want to matter. They want to have measurable impact.

Sharing a common value system is the basis for uniting competing organisations 
and even teams within complex organisations. Shared values enable bartering, 
sensible transactions and even joint investments.

The goal should be to form a unified market to compete with Google and 
Facebook instead of a mess of companies subjected toGoogle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> and Facebook. This could raise 
the advertising ceiling even higher, spreading proceeds across the market more 
evenly, strengthening media as a whole.

Related: From the Panama Papers to Facebook, cooperation is increasingly vital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/10/panama-papers-co-operation-transparency-facebook>

In the early 2000s many companies buried their heads in the sand hoping the 
internet would go away. The timing of their demise was misjudged by pundits. 
The storms passed, and they got a chance to try again.



The retreat strategy in 2001 involved a reinvestment in analog-based business 
models. There was plenty of life there to do interesting things. Today there 
are no safety nets to fall back on.

What’s exciting for those willing to think in terms of networks instead of 
destinations is that the arrows on Mary Meeker’s slides are all pointing up and 
to the right. There’s a massive advertising market that keeps getting bigger 
and, as the newcomers keep demonstrating, there are new ways to capture pieces 
of that market appearing every day.
