
Plans to boost the number of pupils in Britain studying foreign languages have 
faltered as the latest GCSE results showed steep declines in the numbers taking 
French, German and Spanish. The number of pupils taking German at GCSE fell to 
the lowest level on record in this summer’s exams, with a 10% decline on the 
previous year – meaning the total studying German has halved over the past 
decade. French – the most studied language – fared little better than German, 
with a drop of more than 6% in entrants this year, adding to a 40% decline 
since 2005.

Employers’ groups said they were concerned about the fall-off in languages, 
which came as the GCSE results showed an improvement in the numbers of pupils 
in England and Northern Ireland getting grades C or above,thanks to improved 
results in English language and maths 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/aug/20/gcses-results-2015-english-pass-rate-rises-jump-a-c-grades>
.

Representatives from the exam boards said that, while this year’s results were 
stable overall, the picture was complicated by changes in England that meant 
fewer 15-year-olds entered forGCSEs <http://www.theguardian.com/education/gcses>
 a year early, and more 17-year-olds who failed English and maths were made to 
retake them.

The falls in the three major modern foreign languages erased the big gains 
seen in 2013 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/education/educationnews/10259765/GCSE-results-ministers-hail-revival-of-foreign-languages.html>
 after the government gave modern languages a shot in the arm by including them 
in the narrow range of subjects included in its English Baccalaureate (Ebacc) 
performance measure.

One languages teacher told the Guardian many pupils were put off by a belief 
that it is harder to get a good grade in French than in mathematics. But that 
fear isn’t borne out by this year’s results, which showed that 63% of pupils 
got grade C or higher in maths, compared with nearly 71% in French and 74% in 
German.

Results improved for all three modern languages despite their fall in 
popularity, which the awarding bodies attributed to less enthusiastic pupils 
dropping the subjects.

Related: GCSE results 2015: pass rate rises but A* grades dip 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/aug/20/gcses-results-2015-english-pass-rate-rises-jump-a-c-grades>

“The reality is that as this general decline continues, the UK risks falling 
behind on the world stage,” said Vicky Gough, schools adviser at the British 
Council, which has long campaigned to improve language teaching in schools. 
“Employers are crying out for more language skills. We all need to realise that 
learning a language isn’t just a rewarding way to connect with another culture, 
but will boost job prospects too.”

Computing and information technology were the two subjects that showed the 
biggest increases in uptake.


“The main silver lining today is that we have seen some increases in the 
uptake of Mandarin Chinese, Portuguese and Arabic – three languages vital for 
the UK’s future – but sadly, this isn’t enough to compensate for the downturn 
in language learning across the board,” said Gough. While Mandarin and 
Cantonese entries rose by 18%, that was only an increase of 580 to 3,710 in 
total. German alone had more than 54,000 entries this year.

John Longworth, director general of the British Chambers of Commerce, said: 
“It is no longer possible to presume that business will be done in English, and 
we have to remember that our young people are competing for jobs in a global 
marketplace.”

The Department for Education highlighted 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/gcse-results-show-surge-in-pupils-taking-valuable-stem-subjects>
 the increase in the numbers taking science, technology, engineering and maths 
(Stem) subjects, which rose by 78,000. But the Russell Group of leading 
research universities was worried by the fall in those taking physics, biology 
or chemistry separately, as schools increasingly prefer combined courses such 
as further additional science.

“We hope the increase in further additional science also results in more 
students taking science A-levels in future. It would be a cause for concern if 
it does not,” said Wendy Piatt, the group’s director general.

In Wales, education minister Huw Lewis 
<http://gov.wales/newsroom/educationandskills/2015/10452253/?lang=en> announced 
that two-thirds of the 40 underperforming schools in the government’s School 
Challenge Cymru had seen improved results. “This really is incredible stuff and 
something that will make a very real and tangible difference to the futures of 
many of our young people living in less advantaged areas of Wales,” he said.

Headteachers in England complained that students of maths appeared to have 
achieved weaker results than expected, although the statistics showed an 
increase in the numbers awarded C grades and higher compared with last year.

Related: Why has there been a drop in students taking langauge GCSEs? 
Teachers' views 
<http://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/aug/20/why-drop-students-langauge-gcses-teachers-views>

Richard Thomas, executive director of the Association of Secondary Heads in 
Essex, circulated a letter to colleagues accusing the exam boards and regulator 
Ofqual of manipulating results in English and maths.

However, Essex county council said results in more than 40 of the county’s 75 
state schools had improved, including in English and maths.

Several state schools reported spectacular performances, among them King 
Solomon academy <http://kingsolomonacademy.org/> in Paddington, part of the Ark 
academy chain, which had 93% of its pupils achieve five or more good GCSE 
passes.

In Blackburn, Tauheedul Islam girls high school 
<http://www.tighs.com/news-story/2015-gcse-results/> had nearly 90% of students 
achieve five or more GCSEs at grades A* to C, continuing its impressive record 
with disadvantaged pupils, while two students each achieved 14 A* grades.

“We’re delighted that, once again, Tauheedul Islam girls’ high school will 
have achieved some of the best results in the country,” said Hamid Patel, the 
school’s executive principal.

Elsewhere, the Redmond triplets – Francesca, Nicholas and Elise – at St Mary’s 
College in Crosby achieved a combined 25 A* passes and 11 A grades between 
them. And in Hampshire, Bhunit Santhiramoulesan, a pupil at Bournehall primary 
school, celebrated his 10th birthday with an A* in maths.
