
Remittances are a hidden force in international development. The World Bank 
estimates 
<http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTPROSPECTS/Resources/334934-1199807908806/4549025-1450455807487/Factbookpart1.pdf>
 that $601bn (£424bn) was sent in remittances last year, $441bn of which was 
received in the developing world. This is three times the amount sent in 
international aid.

Today is the International Day of Family Remittances 
<https://www.ifad.org/documents/10180/a9322807-2129-49e3-9ad4-9309ad21f874>, 
started last year by theInternational Fund for Agricultural Development 
<https://www.ifad.org/> to celebrate the vital economic lifeline provided by 
the vast majority of the 250 million international migrants worldwide who send 
money to struggling families and communities back home.

Related: Are virtual currencies a plus for poor countries? – podcast transcript
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/09/global-development-podcast-transcript-virtual-currencies>

These remittances improve standards of living in countless ways and help to 
make vulnerable communities more resilient to shocks, like economic downturns 
and natural and man-made disasters.

However, with financial institutions charging transaction fees ranging from 1% 
to 20%, many of these potential benefits are lost due to high transaction costs.

The sustainable development goals 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive>
 (SDGs), adopted last year to chart a path to greater equality and an end to 
poverty, commit to reducing the cost of remittances to 3%, and closing all 
remittances corridors with costs of more than 5%. Despite some significant 
progress, the cost of sending remittances remains unreasonably high for many 
nations, averaging 8% globally.

The amounts received by family members are also being limited by poor 
information services for migrants, who do not get accurate data on low-cost 
options, hidden costs and safety risks.

To address these issues effectively, collaboration is required. It has long 
been recognised that better results are achieved when different sectors work 
together, and many have a stake in remittances, from migration and development 
organisations to money transfer operators. All can help to improve the ways in 
which remittances are sent.

We need to work together to give migrants better, more transparent information 
about transfer channels and their costs. We also need to press for the 
development of regulatory frameworks, not only for financial organisations but 
also in areas that protect migrants’ interests and promote increased transfer 
options, for instance telecommunications.

Cross-sector approaches are not always easy: they require a concerted, 
collaborative effort between governments, regulatory bodies, the private sector 
and the international community. Government regulation of cross-border money 
transfers needs to ensure that transfer costs are more transparent, and do not 
exclude smaller transfer operators.

The International Organisation for Migration <http://unitedkingdom.iom.int/> 
is working with specialist agencies such as the International Telecommunication 
Union <http://www.itu.int/en/Pages/default.aspx> and the Universal Postal Union 
<http://www.upu.int/en.html>. Through our partnership with the latter, for 
example, we hope to make existing post office networks competitive and widely 
accessible transfer agents. Other initiatives includeTawiPay’s 
<https://www.tawipay.com/> innovative remittances price comparison website, 
data drawn from which is used by theirGlobal Remittances Observatory 
<https://www.tawipay.com/en/us/global-remittances-observatory> to inform the 
public about remittance prices and trends.

Related: Somalis face stark choice after US banks shut down cash transfer 
operators 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/feb/20/somalia-remittance-money-transfer-operators-american-banking-regulations-terrorism>

It is worth bearing in mind how remittances are typically earned. Migrant 
workers often endure poorworking conditions and low wages 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/31/migrant-workers-suffer-appalling-treatment-in-qatar-world-cup-stadiums-says-amnesty>
, and the money they send home frequently represents a significant proportion 
of their earnings. That is why we should also be pressing for decent working 
conditions for migrants and less exploitation along the migration journey. 
Employers and governments can help to reduce these social costs, to ensure that 
remittances are earned under fairer conditions.

The global sands are shifting, with politics in flux in many nations, and more 
migrants on the move 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/03/rescue-operation-under-way-as-migrant-boat-capsizes-in-mediterranean>
 than ever before. Migrants themselves are contributing three times the amount 
donated by states, which shows traditional models are ceasing to operate.

However, we should not shift responsibility for basic services, such as 
education and healthcare, to migrants. Let us not forget that, under the SDGs, 
governments, the private sector and the international community have pledged 
not only to reduce remittance costs, but also to make better provision for 
access to universal healthcare and education.

Upholding these commitments will ensure a greater proportion of migrant 
workers’ remittances are spent on what matters most: providing a better 
standard of living for their families.

The International Day of Family Remittances 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/remittances> is therefore an 
opportunity to celebrate the positive impact of remittances, while recognising 
that making them cheaper, transparent and more accessible will allow more of 
migrants’ hard-earned money to end up where it matters.

Dipti Pardeshi is chief of mission for the International Organisation for 
Migration, UK
