
The UK food scene is increasingly dominated by social media stars, 
healthy-eating advocates and tech-savvy startups devising innovative ways of 
delivering to our doors, according to a new list of 50 influential foodies 
released last week.

The list, compiled by advertising agency Telegraph Hill and featured in the 
Grocermagazine, suggests that those seeking power and influence in today’s food 
world would greatly benefit from being fresh-faced, Instagram-literate and more 
interested in the nutritional benefits of food than as an opportunity for 
indulgence.

The No 2 spot is taken by the fitness trainer turned cookery writer Joe Wicks, 
who used the popularity of his Instagram feed – and a catchydiet plan 
<http://www.thebodycoach.co.uk/> – to catapult himself to the top of the 
bestseller lists at the start of this year. More established food 
personalities, who rose to renown the old-fashioned way through TV and print 
publishing, still feature strongly on the list –Jamie Oliver 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/oliver> comes in at No 1 and Nigella 
Lawson <http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/nigellalawson>, Gordon Ramsay  
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gordonramsay>and Paul Hollywood all 
appear in the top 20. But the digital generation is hot on their heels and 
several names here, such asMadeleine Shaw 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jun/27/new-wellness-bloggers-food-drink-hadley-freeman>
 orIzy Hossack 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/30/blogger-izy-hossack-my-inspiration-kitchen-encounters>
, only started reaching big audiences in the past couple of years.

It’s not all aspiration and digital froth: the list is counterweighted by 
figures from the business end of food who are unlikely to be tweeting selfies, 
spiralising courgettes or sipping spinach juice any time soon. Much of the top 
20 is occupied by supermarket bosses –Andy Clarke of Asda  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/18/andy-clarke-asda-determined-not-shelve-five-year-plan>
is at No 5, just ahead ofDave Lewis of Tesco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/dave-lewis> – despite the storms that 
have assailed the major retailers in recent years. Lurking not far below (at 18 
and 19) are the chief executives of Lidl and Aldi, the discounters busily 
gobbling up market share.

If you have been struck by the sudden ubiquity of Deliveroo couriers in UK 
cities in recent months, you won’t be surprised by the inclusion of the 
company’s co-founder Will Shu at No 48. Deliveroo’s success – the restaurant 
delivery firm raised £127m of development cash in 2015 – reflects the growing 
relevance of food startups that take their cues from the tech industry: the UK 
heads of online delivery companies Just Eat and HelloFresh also feature in the 
top 50.

The list is far from conclusive. Compiled by evaluating factors such as 
real-world power, online activity, traditional media presence and brand 
strength, it arrives at some rather odd assessments. Is TV farmer Jimmy Doherty 
(No 12) really more influential than activistJack Monroe  
<http://www.theguardian.com/profile/jack-monroe>(17) or Heston Blumenthal  
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/aug/23/the-fat-duck-flies-again-heston-blumenthal>
(30)?Symmetry Breakfast 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/feb/06/michael-zee-instagram-symmetry-breakfast-kitchen>
 is a charming Instagram account with a book on the way, but in terms of 
real-world power it doesn’t punch very hard.

For all its shortcomings, the list does highlight interesting developments, 
most strikingly the rise of theclean-eating movement 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/jun/11/clean-eating-diet-food-gwyneth-paltrow-jay-rayner>
, with its promise to cater for an ever-expanding catalogue of food 
intolerances. And it has forced the big food manufacturers, retailers and 
restaurants to react to a customer base that increasingly sees food in 
nutritional terms rather than as an end in itself.

RISING STARS
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tmqz%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tmqz%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc68f37aca5f059fb61d589cdb9314f96807609c%2F0_271_3080_3848%2F3080.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jamie%2C%20Nadiya%20and%20Instagram%E2%80%99s%20big%20stars%3A%20who%E2%80%99s%20who%20in%20the%20new%20list%20of%20food%E2%80%99s%20top%2050&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tmqz%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jamie%2C+Nadiya+and+Instagram%E2%80%99s+big+stars%3A+who%E2%80%99s+who+in+the+new+list+of+food%E2%80%99s+top+50&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tmqz%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc68f37aca5f059fb61d589cdb9314f96807609c%2F0_271_3080_3848%2F3080.jpg>
 Joe Wicks, creator of Lean in 15. Photograph: Rex 
JOE WICKS
The Instagram king (No 2)


When Joe Wicks <http://www.thebodycoach.co.uk/> signed a book deal at the 
start of 2015, he had a mere 75,000 followers on Instagram. Now the 30-year-old 
food-and-fitness guru from Surrey, who brands himself the Body Coach – his diet 
plan combines eating with working out – commands more than a million Instagram 
followers, a statistic that has helped him sell more than 500,000 copies of his 
bookLean in 15  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/352532/>since 
December and land his own TV series on Channel 4. It shows just how powerful 
Instagram (the social media platform of choice for gourmands) can be in 
crowning a new generation of food royalty.

ELLA WOODWARD
The doyenne of healthy eating (10)


Five years ago, Ella Woodward <http://deliciouslyella.com/>, daughter of the 
former Labour minister Shaun Woodward and Camilla Sainsbury (of the supermarket 
dynasty), was diagnosed with postural tachycardia syndrome. In response she 
embraced a healthier diet and began documenting her culinary forays – think 
sweet potato brownies and kale smoothies – on her blog Deliciously Ella. Now 
Woodward has produced two bestselling cookbooks, runs cookery classes and has 
opened a cafe in central London. Her rapid evolution from blogger to industry 
player is, in part, a matter of timing: she started posting just as “clean 
eating” was becoming a mainstream phenomenon.

WILL SHU
The food delivery disrupter (48)


Twenty-three per cent of adults in the UK order a takeaway once a week or 
more, according to a study by Mintel, and yet the range and quality of takeaway 
food tends to be very limited compared to what’s on offer if you eat out. 
Disappointed with the state of British takeaways after moving to London in 
2004, former banker Will Shu decided to do something about it. Three years ago 
he co-foundedDeliveroo <https://deliveroo.co.uk/>, a delivery service that has 
lured higher-end chain restaurants such as Gourmet Burger Kitchen into the 
takeaway market. Much thought has been put into timing, packaging and delivery 
systems, to ensure dishes don’t spoil en route. The proliferation of Deliveroo 
couriers around the country suggests that Shu is on to something.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tmqz%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tmqz%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97b8a80bb2b256e2ce95196b7975768636dc931f%2F0_398_2828_3535%2F2828.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jamie%2C%20Nadiya%20and%20Instagram%E2%80%99s%20big%20stars%3A%20who%E2%80%99s%20who%20in%20the%20new%20list%20of%20food%E2%80%99s%20top%2050&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tmqz%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jamie%2C+Nadiya+and+Instagram%E2%80%99s+big+stars%3A+who%E2%80%99s+who+in+the+new+list+of+food%E2%80%99s+top+50&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tmqz%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97b8a80bb2b256e2ce95196b7975768636dc931f%2F0_398_2828_3535%2F2828.jpg>
 Nadiya Hussain during last year’s Bake Off. Photograph: Mark Bourdillon/PA 
NADIYA HUSSAIN
The reality TV star (36)


You don’t always need an Instagram account to become a food celebrity in 2016: 
it’s still possible to make it via thequaint medium of reality TV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/oct/12/bake-off-winner-nadiya-hussain-muslims-britain>
. Last October, Nadiya Hussain, a mother-of-three living in Leeds, won the 
sixth series of theGreat British Bake Off. Hussain has since become a columnist 
for theTimes magazine, signed publishing deals and baked an orange drizzle cake 
for the Queen’s 90th birthday. Last week she announced her own travel cookery 
show,The Chronicles of Nadiya 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/26/great-british-bake-off-winner-to-front-bbc1-travel-cookery-show>
, on BBC1.

WHO’S WHO IN THE GREAT BRITISH FOOD CHAIN


1. Jamie Oliver, celebrity chef, TV presenter and author

2. Joe Wicks, blogger and nutritionist, The Body Coach

3. Julian Metcalfe, founder of Metcalfe’s Food Company, Itsu and co-founder of 
Pret a Manger

4. Paul Hollywood, celebrity baker and judge on The Great British Bake Off

5. Andy Clarke, president and CEO, Asda

6. Dave Lewis, chief executive, Tesco

7. Rob Collins, managing director, Waitrose

8. James Martin, chef and TV presenter

9. Gordon Ramsay, celebrity chef, TV presenter and author

10. Ella Woodward, blogger, Deliciously Ella
