
There’s a lovely legend of how the poinsettia came to be associated with 
Christmas. It starts in 16th-century Mexico, where the poinsettia is native, 
and concerns a young girl called Pepita, too poor to afford to buy a present 
for Jesus’ birthday. Instead, she gathers wayside weeds and places them on the 
church altar. As she does so, the weeds burst into blooms of brightest red. 
Pepita’s wild bouquet is made up ofEuphorbia pulcherrima 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/advice/profile?pid=146>, the poinsettia whose blood-red 
bracts came to symbolise Christ’s blood and the cross. Before you know it, 
Franciscan monks have gone to town painting the altar red with poinsettias, and 
in a rather brilliant leap to globalisation, poinsettias are everyone’s 
favourite Christmas floral decoration.

Related: Succulents: Sow, Grow, Repeat gardening podcast 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/audio/2015/dec/05/succulents-sow-grow-repeat-gardening-podcast>

Everyone except me. I like Pepita’s legend and the thought of Franciscan monks 
going wild with the flower arranging, but the modern breeding leaves me a 
little cold. Plus, as everyone knows, poinsettias really are just for 
Christmas; it takes far too much energy to get them to flower again the 
following year and so some end up on the compost but most, I guess, are binned. 
In future they may be seen as a daft luxury on which we spent our precious last 
barrels of oil.

Still, I like houseplants, and although I don’t think the Christmas cactus is 
the pinnacle of environmental friendliness, at least it will flower again next
Christmas <http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> – and between now 
and then, it will filter out the pollutants from the air in your house.

Christmas cactus (Schlumbergera <https://www.rhs.org.uk/advice/profile?pid=840>
) is a small genus of Brazilian cactus that grow in the jungle shade, mostly 
attached to trees. They flower from November to late January, and are very easy 
to please. Buy one in a colour you fancy: there are pinks, red, oranges and 
whites. Water infrequently; if the stems start to wither, it is usually because 
you have overwatered and the roots have rotted off. Cactuses like bathrooms and 
being near the kettle because of the added humidity, but they are hard to kill, 
other than by overwatering.

When the pot is completely dry and feels light when you pick it up, water 
again, making sure water never sits in the saucer, otherwise it’ll rot pretty 
quickly. In the average house, this will be once every two weeks. When the 
flowers are over, retire the plant to a spot near your computer for the rest of 
spring, where it will filter out some of the junk that floats around in the 
atmosphere. Water it only occasionally. It is dull-looking when not in flower, 
but still prettier than any other filter.

Related: Alys Fowler: get a head start on spring 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/14/alys-fowler-spring-colour> 

In summer, sit the plant somewhere hot (18-20C), but out of direct sunlight – 
on the balcony, in the greenhouse or porch, on a patio, somewhere it can bake 
for a while. Bring it back indoors in early autumn, continue to mostly ignore 
it, reduce the temperature to 12-15C and reduce watering for a second resting 
period. Once you see flower buds appearing, start watering more frequently and 
I promise next Christmas it’ll flower again with glee.
