
When the people of a small corner of the map have jostled and fought for 
existence down the ages, it really shows. It is there in the food and the 
buildings, in the art and certainly in the attitude. This tough sort of history 
makesSan Sebastián <http://www.theguardian.com/travel/sansebastian>, in Spain’s 
Basque region, an intriguing proposition at any time. Even a first-time visitor 
like me can see that it is not just seaside sparkle on offer.

As it happens, now is not just “any time” for San Sebastián, known as Donostia 
to the Basques. It is stepping up asEuropean Capital of Culture 
<http://dss2016.eu/en/> for 2016 and will stage a chain of bold art projects 
over the next 12 months. Already known internationally for its food and its 
glittering annual film festival, the city will feature choral groups in the 
open air and an art project, Waves of Energy, bringing to life a surge of ideas 
suggested by the public, as well as performances and exhibitions inside sleek 
venues such as Basque music’s new home, Musikene, the San Telmo museum or the 
cube-shaped Kursaal on the edge of the sea.

As the sun’s rays faded this autumn I went to see what plans were being made 
for San Sebastián’s stint in the limelight. I assumed most of the excitement 
would revolve around the city’s vast sandy beaches and its celebrated bars, all 
serving a deluxe variety of tapas known aspintxos 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/mar/14/san-sebastian-best-tapas-pintxo-bars>
. But rather than beach life, what I came across was a strident maritime 
tradition, a part of the city’s identity that has seeped into every crack.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f7zg%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f7zg%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F817bb7bae8b6558febb7b43eb12823a5a48fbb83%2F0_43_5119_3072%2F5119.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=San%20Sebastian%3A%20in%20the%20limelight&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f7zg%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=San+Sebastian%3A+in+the+limelight&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f7zg%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F817bb7bae8b6558febb7b43eb12823a5a48fbb83%2F0_43_5119_3072%2F5119.jpg>
 Beach life: a view of the city from the edge of the sea. Photograph: Javier 
Larrea/Getty Images/age fotostock RM 
A former Spanish naval port 12 miles from France, it sits on the edge of a 
natural double harbour at the bottom of the Bay of Biscay and is divided by the 
mouth of a pulsating tidal river. In the autumn and winter this river, the 
Urumea, becomes so convinced that it is really part of the sea that surfers can 
ride up into town on its waves. Sometimes the powerful swell damages the 
bridges that link the two halves of the city. So it is only a fool, like me, 
who would walk nonchalantly around the headland during a high wind.

I understood I had made a mistake when I saw the police closing off the road, 
heard a roaring noise, and then looked down at the salt water swirling round my 
feet. When the waves really get going car windows are smashed. It makes a gusty 
walk along the prom at a British resort seem a bit tame. “We don’t go around 
that way when there are big tides,” I was told with unblinking frankness as I 
squelched up to my hotel reception desk.

San Sebastián’s wilder side is hard to ignore. It is so stylish and ordered, 
with its recreation of the Haussmann avenues of Paris, yet the passionate 
political eruptions of the past mark those streets. I learned from Pablo 
Berástegui, the man in charge of Donostia/San Sebastián 2016, that this is the 
Spanish city that suffered most during the sporadic murderous campaigns of the
separatist terrorists of ETA <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eta>. In 
response Berástegui has taken “peace treaties” as a key artistic theme for the 
year. He also visited Derry/Londonderry, holder of the culture title in 2013, 
to find out what another city with a split name and split history did with this 
opportunity.

“We are posing the question: how do you overcome conflicts?” he said. “It may 
be a memory, but it is pretty recent. So how do we organise a symbolic act that 
will pay homage to all the victims? We don’t know yet, but we are having 
conversations to find out what people feel.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f7zg%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f7zg%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c78b557ee77e75d4737e87a3ef9ee6728f78b51%2F0_116_5600_3360%2F5600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=San%20Sebastian%3A%20in%20the%20limelight&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f7zg%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=San+Sebastian%3A+in+the+limelight&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4f7zg%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c78b557ee77e75d4737e87a3ef9ee6728f78b51%2F0_116_5600_3360%2F5600.jpg>
 All that glitters: Constitution Square at night. Photograph: Matteo 
Colombo/Getty Images/AWL Images RM 
Berástegui does know he will be staging an interactive drama in which the 
audience will have to judge a dispute and resolve it. Much of what else is 
planned is home-grown, with few big names flying in. During the summer solstice 
visitors can watch an English-language performance ofA Midsummer Night’s Dream 
in the park and the Basque writer Anjel Lertxundi will lead Carte Blanche, a 
programme of events curated by guest artists. The streets, for Berástegui, are 
the main venue.

And what grand streets they are. Tour guide Inigo from the brilliantly 
informal Go Local <http://freewalkingtoursbylocals.com/san-sebastian/> 
explained that the city is often thought snobby by inhabitants of Bilbao and 
Victoria, its two big neighbours. This dates back to the 1800s, when Queen 
Maria Cristina began holidaying here and put up regal buildings like the 
Victoria Eugenia Theatre and the Hotel Maria Cristina (and prompted the name of 
famed football team Real Sociedad).

San Sebastián officially starts its year of culture on 23 January, and more 
than 400 projects are in progress, several drawing on the city’s extraordinary 
gastronomic reputation. Berástegui tells me about one “multisensory” event 
called Time Travel Soup that will involve a tasting menu featuring “10 
paradigmatic soups” to show how food can be used to trace human history. 
Onlookers can opt instead to drink the dry local cider or the sharp fresh wine, 
txakoli, while they consider whether the soups count as art or not.

And that ancient Basque cultural gem – the mysterious language with its odd 
Xs, Ks and Ts – will be honoured at every turn in a city where it was forbidden 
by Franco. As the 100-year-old Basque linguist Koldo Mitxelena reportedly says: 
“Its greatest mystery is how it survives.”

Now the city is ready to engage with its difficult past and celebrate its 
future.

Essentials


Vanessa stayed at the Hotel Silken Amara, double rooms from €119, and 
travelled with Brittany Ferries, which sails into Bilbao or Santander from 
Portsmouth or Plymouth.
