
I found out that my wife is telling her friends about our private life, 
including details of our sex life, and even our infrequent arguments. We have 
been married for more than 10 years and have one child. I have a medical 
condition that meant I had to quit my job. Now I am the one who takes care of 
all the house chores, and of our son. She goes to the office from morning till 
night, Monday to Friday. I happened to see her mobile phone when she received a 
message from her friends: they have this chat group that they made. I read most 
of them and was shocked to see that they were talking through all their 
husbands’ problems and their sex lives. I find myself being unfairly judged by 
others, and I can’t defend or explain myself. I don’t tell anyone negative 
things about my wife, even close friends. Right now, I’m just pretending that I 
don’t know anything about it, but I need some advice.

• When leaving a message on this page, please be sensitive to the fact that 
you are responding to a real person in the grip of a real-life dilemma, who 
wrote to Private Lives asking for help, and may well view your comments here. 
Please consider especially how your words or the tone of your message could be 
perceived by someone in this situation, and be aware that comments that appear 
to be disruptive or disrespectful to the individual concerned will be removed.

• If you would like fellow readers to respond to a dilemma of yours, send us 
an outline of the situation of about 150 words. For advice from Pamela 
Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your 
concerns.

• All correspondence should reach us by Wednesday morning. Email: 
private.lives@theguardian.com <mailto://private.lives@theguardian.com> (please 
don’t send attachments).
