
Oli’s Thai

You cannot eat well and cheaply in Oxford without heading out of town down the 
studenty Cowley Road. However, as I soldiered on to this cool, minimalist 
neighbourhood Thai (a 30-minute walk from central Oxford), I did wonder if it 
was going to be worth the shoe leather. Could those who rate Oli’s Thai as 
Oxford’s best restaurant be overegging it? Is Laddawan Thurston really turning 
out, as her fans insist, pin-sharp dishes for under £10, lunch and dinner?

The short answer is: get down here, even if you have to crawl over broken 
glass. Oli’s Thai lives up to the hype, and then some. From a short daily menu, 
which included sweet chilli prawns, aubergine curry, and chicken with garlic, 
pepper and coriander, I opted for a sensational plate of belly pork with rice. 
The compressed belly had been very slowly roasted to something approaching 
perfection. Despite the delicious crust at its edges, the meat was meltingly 
tender within, while its crackling was like lacquer. That crackling had been 
further smothered in a freshly-blitzed paste which – as is the Thai way - 
seemed to contain a 101 ingredients from across the chilli/ lemongrass 
spectrum. Two rectangles of this magnificent meat had been stacked in pool of 
“Oli’s sauce”, an electrifying soy-based broth, and each mouthful was a 
rollercoaster of hot, zingy, sweet and savoury flavours – but all in perfect 
harmony. The belly was £9.50, so I had to drink tap water to bring it in under 
budget, but it is well worth that sacrifice to eat such food.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F43dd6%2Fsfb%23img-1&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F43dd6%2Fsfb%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F18%2F1416323952938%2F67916a3c-328a-4aab-a063-347d9b309cea-2060x1470.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20budget%20restaurants%20and%20cafes%20in%20Oxford&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F43dd6%2Fstw%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top+10+budget+restaurants+and+cafes+in+Oxford&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F43dd6%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F18%2F1416323952938%2F67916a3c-328a-4aab-a063-347d9b309cea-2060x1470.jpeg>
 Aubergine Curry at Oli’s Thai 
A few seats around the bar are kept free for walk-ins, but book well ahead if 
you can (particularly at weekends). I squeezed in at midday on a Wednesday, but 
otherwise it was fully booked, as is the case most days judging from the phone 
calls. Despite this, the staff maintain an unruffled, chatty demeanour.

• Mains £6.50-£11. 38 Magdalen Road, 01865 790223, olisthai.com 
<http://olisthai.com/>

St Giles Cafe


There has been a cafe on this site since 1937. Generations of students and 
dons have taken refuge here, to think or nurse a hangover behind its steamed-up 
windows (WH Auden was a fan). More recently, this tiny space was taken over by 
Mark Butcher, given a neat, retro makeover and a new foodie direction. The 
kitchen, for instance, makes its own breads and cures its own fish and is 
generally working hard to produce honest, affordable food.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F43dd6%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F43dd6%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F18%2F1416328279195%2F411a2203-b07c-4585-ad31-5950c9d284f3-1020x790.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20budget%20restaurants%20and%20cafes%20in%20Oxford&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F43dd6%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top+10+budget+restaurants+and+cafes+in+Oxford&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F43dd6%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F18%2F1416328279195%2F411a2203-b07c-4585-ad31-5950c9d284f3-1020x790.jpeg>
The menu is populist (kedgeree, butternut squash salad, steak sandwich), while 
the daily specials include a few eclectic flourishes, such as Jamaican chicken 
stew with dumplings. St Giles’ own meaty Oxford sausages, made to an historic 
recipe using sage, lemon zest and winter savoury, are a seriously fragrant, 
peppery banger. They are fantastic on a breakfast sandwich or served with mash 
and gravy. As further entertainment, the paper placemats contain food-related 
philosophical quotes, with space to add your own. Only in Oxford.
• Breakfast £4-£9, sandwiches and light lunches £4.50-£5.50, lunch mains, 
£7-£8.50. 52 St Giles, 01865 554200,stgilescafe.com <http://stgilescafe.com/>

The Covered Market
 Photograph: Alamy 
In the 2010 Oxford budget eats guide, I flagged up Pieminister and Fasta Pasta 
in the indoor market. Somehow I completely overlooked the brilliant, 
takeaway-onlyAlpha Bar <http://alpha-bar.co.uk/home> (dishes £3.95-£4.90). It 
sells a selection of fresh, scratch-cooked stews (Kashmiri dhal, veggie chilli 
and more) and headline salad components (falafel, smoked mackerel, grilled 
halloumi), which you can pair with a bewildering selection of vegetables, 
further salads, sauces and toppings. A sample pot of venison and root vegetable 
stew was unusually accomplished, its quietly fruity flavour indicative of 
skilful deployment of juniper berries and red wine. It would easily have passed 
muster in a pub or restaurant. Here, it cost just £4.90.

I wasn’t quite as impressed with the popular cafe and takeaway, Sasi Thai  
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Sasi-Thai/296207360528955>(hot dishes 
£4.50-£5.95). The pad thai could have done with a sprinkling of crispy fried 
onions, coriander or toasted peanuts and its sauce needed a bit more fish paste 
complexity. Nonetheless, it was tasty and filling (the vegetables were al dente 
and its sweet tamarind dressing packed an authentic heat) and, crucially, only 
£4.50 to take away. On reflection I might have done better with the red beef 
curry, an intriguing dish of egg and pork in cinnamon, or the spicy chicken 
with basil. Ask the friendly staff for a recommendation.
• Market Street, oxford-coveredmarket.co.uk 
<http://www.oxford-coveredmarket.co.uk/>




The Natural Bread Company

On the (concrete-clad) face of it, Little Clarendon Street, a rather ugly 
1960s cut-through from town into Jericho, is of little interest to the passing 
tourist. However, it is home to this cafe, a spin-off from one of Oxford’s best 
artisan bakeries. Displays ofpain au levain and wild yeast sourdoughs, outsized 
buns and slices offar Breton prune cake, provide plenty of eye candy in this 
otherwise plain space. Breakfast and lunch dishes tend to pair great local 
ingredients (Willowbrook organic eggs, bacon from Sandy & Black rare-breed 
pigs) with those knockout breads.

From a short lunch menu of stews, salads and sandwiches, a sample tub of 
tomatoey, mixed vegetable soup was fantastic. Rigorously seasoned and thick 
with herbs, it had the depth of flavour that suggested someone had patiently 
sweated down a mountain of onions and celery in its preparation. On a wet 
freezing day it was just the ticket, the only downer being that the hunks of 
rustic Pugliese bread that came with it arrived toasted but unbuttered.
• Breakfast £2.75-£7.95, lunch £4.95-£5.95. 29 Little Clarendon Street, 01865 
310022,naturalbreadcompany.co.uk <http://naturalbreadcompany.co.uk/>

Door 74

This simple bistro is a good place to recover over weekend brunch (eggs 
Benedict, corned beef hash, French toast) and also serves a great-value midweek 
lunch (two courses £7.95). The short menu might feature an onion and pea 
tortilla or a spicy vegetable broth, followed by warm chicken salad, 74’s 
organic burger or bubble ’n’ squeak with a poached egg. I was confused as to 
why my wild mushroom risotto arrived topped with a mound of leaves which were 
themselves sprinkled with parmesan, but the risotto itself was a creditable bit 
of cooking. A creamy plateful with a pleasantly peppery edge, the rice had 
retained the correct residual bite and, even if the mushrooms did not quite 
deliver a significantly autumnal, woodland flavour, a generous glug of white 
wine and decent stock had given the dish good depth. A sound track of 
sweet-natured US indie tunes completed the laid-back vibe.
• Two-course lunch £7.95, three £9.95. Brunch £5.95-£9.95. 74 Cowley Road, 
01865 203374,door74.co.uk <http://www.door74.co.uk/>

Atomic Burger

Do you come over all misty-eyed at The A-Team theme tune? Or collect Star Wars 
action figures? No, me neither. Those who do, however, will love Atomic Burger, 
two nostalgic, Cowley-Road burger joints where every surface is covered in 
jigsaws, stuffed toys, posters and bric-a-brac on a sci-fi, 1980s pop, TV and 
superhero theme. Luckily, the burgers (the menu is huge) are far more up to 
date, without quite rivalling the quality found at Britain’s best new-wave 
burger specialists.

There was a lot to like in my Dead Elvis: the juicy patty had a good beef 
flavour and was nicely char-grilled (these things are not a given), the Swiss 
and plasticky US cheese worked well together, the bacon was stridently tasty 
and the super-sweet, gently fried onions were ace. In essence, it was a very 
enjoyable burger that would have hit the heights had it come on a brioche or 
sourdough bun, rather than on a somewhat dry, floury old-school number. 
Likewise, rather than gleaming and glossy, the chilli-dusted fries were a 
little tired. It was a sound burger but, to put it in Atomic Burger’s terms, it 
was more The Fall Guy than a classic like Knightrider.

• Burger meals £6.75-£10.95. 96 and 247 Cowley Road, 01865 790855, 
atomicburger.co.uk <http://atomicburger.co.uk/>

Taste Tibet and other street food
 Pizza Artisan pitches up every evening opposite Christchurch College 
Street food is still in its infancy in Oxford but a semi-regular programme of 
pop-ups, markets and weekly pitches is coalescing, which is boon for the budget 
traveller.Taste Tibet <https://twitter.com/TasteTibet> (£2-£5.50) has a pitch 
on Gloucester Green market, selling, on Wednesdays, homemade curries, soups and 
flatbreads, and on Thursdays steamed meat or vegetablemomos (dumplings). A 
sample vegan cauliflower and carrot curry was light-stepping in its spicing and 
came with a thick lentil dhal that was earthy and warming, almost like 
Himalayan refried beans.

Taste Tibet is one of a number of traders – including the wood-fired Secret 
Pizza Society, fish and chip mobiler Goujon Monkey, and local baking legend 
Barefoot Kitchen – appearing at #BittenStreet, a series of street food markets 
organised by blogger-cum-events outfitBitten Oxford 
<http://bittenoxford.co.uk/bitten-street.html>. Bitten has two events coming up 
(Nov 27, North Parade Night Market, 27 November, and Oxford Castle Quarter on 
20 December). Next year it plans to hold a street food market on the first 
Saturday of every month from March to October in the Oxford Castle Quarter.

Pizza connoisseurs will also be interested in Fundi 
<http://www.fundipizza.com/>. This star of London’s Kerb street food markets 
fires up its wood-fired pizza oven in the garden at theLibrary pub 
<http://thelibrarypuboxford.com/> every Tuesday night (£5-£7). Meanwhile, 
well-regardedPizza Artisan <http://pizzaartisan.co.uk/>, which I did not get 
round to trying out – pitches up every evening opposite Christchurch College, 
to serve handmade, wood-fired pizzas from a converted Citreon H van (£6.50-£9).

Big Society

With its table tennis tables, pop-up markets and late-nights DJs, this 
sprawling, quirkily decorated hangout is bringing a bit of east London cool to 
Cowley Road. At this point, it feels rather generic, but what Big Society lacks 
in originality it more than makes up for with its food. A menu of predictable 
“dude food” staples – wings, dogs, burgers – is lifted above the mundane by 
being, on this evidence, very, very good. A pulled pork sandwich was exemplary. 
Smoky but not overbearing, the pork was sopping with juices which were ably 
soaked up by a velvety soft, ultra-fresh brioche bun. Vinegar slaw and a few 
pickles provided the necessary sharp counterpoint, while the (often unbearably 
sweet) BBQ mayo was well-balanced. Big Society has a decent selection of craft 
beers, but, if you are watching the pennies, try its house pale ale (half 
£1.50), a bristly, dry-hopped beer from local brewery Shotover.

The people behind Big Society also own the Victoria 
<http://www.victorianpub.co.uk/> in Jericho, a pub (“definitely not a 
gastropub”) whose homemade pies (£5.95-£7.95) have a good reputation. And while 
we’re on dude food, it is worth mentioningJoe Perks 
<http://joeperksandco.co.uk/>, a bar not far from Big Society, which serves 
hotdogs by London street food pioneer Big Apple (from £4.50). The dogs are 
sensational, but mine was served, bizarrely, like an open sandwich, on a 
pared-back piece of hotdog bun which meant you needed a knife and fork to eat 
it. Not a lot of use as a takeaway – and contrary to the whole spirit of the 
hotdog, you might say. I presumed they had run out of buns, but no, I was told, 
that is how Joe Perks serves its dogs. Weird.
• Meals £4.95-£9.95. 95 Cowley Road, 01865 792755, bigsocietyoxford.com 
<http://www.bigsocietyoxford.com/>

Sojo
 Belly pork at Sojo 
All flickering tea lights and calm order, this dark, wood-panelled Chinese 
restaurant is a soothing sanctuary from the outside world. Sojo prides itself 
on the authenticity of its Szechuan, Cantonese and Shanghai dishes which, on 
its sub-£10 afternoon menu (noon-5pm), include various rice or noodle bowls and 
dim sum. Even if you swerve such exotica as black bean tripe, chicken claws or 
the numbingly hot Szechuan shredded pork (“mind blowing spicy,” warns the 
menu), be prepared for food that makes little concession to prissy Western 
palates. Braised brisket, almost plummy with its five spice seasoning, arrives 
thick with wobbly nuggets of flavour-packed fat and less-digestible strips of 
connective sinew. It tastes great but requires plenty of chewing and picking 
through.

• Afternoon menu £7-£11. 6-9 Hythe Bridge Street, 01865 202888, 
sojooxford.co.uk <http://sojooxford.co.uk/>

Dosa Park
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F43dd6%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F43dd6%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F18%2F1416324526847%2F592d08f2-5555-416d-a54c-be5fcc106ad6-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20budget%20restaurants%20and%20cafes%20in%20Oxford&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F43dd6%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top+10+budget+restaurants+and+cafes+in+Oxford&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F43dd6%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F18%2F1416324526847%2F592d08f2-5555-416d-a54c-be5fcc106ad6-1020x612.jpeg>
“Never mind the décor,” reads the headline on a local newspaper cutting tacked 
up by the till, “the food’s great.” On an unlovely strip opposite Oxford 
station, Dosa Park is so basic you could easily mistake it for a fried chicken 
shop. Lucky, then, that it delivers such colour on the plate.

The broadly South Indian menu takes in dhals, curries, idlis, vada and, of 
course, the eponymous, crèpe-like dosas. Griddled to order, the dosa itself was 
soft and pliable, as delicate as lace at its edge. The first thing I bit into, 
in the lamb masala filling, was a whole cardamom pod – a sign of the elegantly 
seasoned things to come. Both the potato and lamb had been cooked precisely and 
had great flavour - as did the accompanying sambar. It looked off-puttingly 
pale, but some alchemy in the kitchen with mustard seeds, curry leaves and 
chillies had turned this lentil broth into a transcendent winter warmer. 
Likewise, the accompanying coconut chutneys looked a shade oily, but were 
ineffably light. One was a cooling balm, but the darker orange chutney packed a 
heat that grew and grew into a sinus-clearing endorphin high. South Indian food 
may be renowned for its sensitive spicing, but this was a reminder that 
chillies first spread from Portugal through Indian, via Goa.
• Meals around £5-£7. 25 Park End Street, 01865 791197, dosapark.com 
<http://dosapark.com/>

Travel between Manchester and Oxford was provided by Cross Country Trains (
crosscountrytrains.co.uk <http://www.crosscountrytrains.co.uk/>). For more on 
Oxford, seevisitoxfordandoxfordshire.com 
<http://www.visitoxfordandoxfordshire.com/default.xmas.aspx>
