
I spotted, in the Irish Times 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/life-and-style/homes-and-property/fine-art-antiques/social-media-in-19th-century-ireland-1.2085305>
, an article about the painting above being up for sale. Called “Reading the 
news”, it was painted in 1871 by Richard Staunton Cahill, an Irishman who later 
moved to London.

According to the piece, papers were often read aloud in rural houses in Ireland
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> to family groups, usually by 
priests or schoolteachers, thus enabling “the illiterate to keep abreast of 
current affairs”.

Art <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> historian Claudia Kinmonth 
points out that the boy “listening attentively in the centre wears green, a 
colour symbolic of Fenianism”.


She is quoted as saying: “The juxtaposing of the male figures, with the older 
men sitting passively, the young man standing (with his green hat band), and 
the child centrally placed representing the future, suggests an active stance 
towards a nationalist future”.

Evidently, the paper in the picture - although not definitively identified - 
was either The Nation (a weekly established in 1844) or the Freeman’s Journal 
(a daily founded in 1763).

Neither of these nationalist organs are with us any longer. The Nation died in 
1900 while the Journal ceased publication in 1924 when it was merged with the
Irish Independent <http://www.theguardian.com/media/irish-independent>.

Anyway, it goes up for auction at Whyte’s in Dublin 
<http://www.whytes.ie/index.asp> later this month with an estimate of 
€8,000-€10,000.


It reminded me that there is a long history of artists featuring newspapers in 
their work. One of my favourite coffee table books is The Newspaper in Art*, an 
expensive tome published in the United States in 1996.

If you can hunt one down, it’s well worth it. Aside from representations of 
newsprint in still life scenes, there are scores of examples of people shown 
reading papers in paintings. The artists include Bacon, Degas, Cézanne and 
Manet. Plus, less surprisingly,Norman Rockwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/norman-rockwell>.

Will contemporary artists feature iPads, I wonder? Imagine the scene of a 
young girl surrounded by adults peering over her shoulder. The title? “Teaching 
adults how to play Candy Crush”.

*By Garry Apgar, Shaun O’L Higgins and Colleen Striegel (published by New 
Media Ventures, Spokane, Washington)
