
The millennium development goals have driven “the most successful anti-poverty 
movement in history” 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jul/06/united-nations-extreme-poverty-millennium-development-goals>
, the UN said in its final report before the targets expire. While the MDGs 
have ended extreme poverty for more than a billion people since they began in 
2000, UN secretary generalBan Ki-moon 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/world/ban-ki-moon> warned that inequalities 
persist and progress has been uneven.

Minority and indigenous communities, such as Burma’s Rohingya and Iraq’s 
Yazidi, are being displaced into cities at an alarming rate 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jul/02/minority-and-indigenous-communities-turned-off-own-land-in-growing-numbers>
, said a report by Minority Rights Group. A crucial problem is that governments 
are not consulting with communities in their policymaking processes.

The EU must plan 25 years ahead in its strategy for dealing with surging 
numbers of refugees and migrants 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/30/eu-needs-25-year-plan-deal-with-migrants-says-un-envoy>
, warned François Crépeau, the UN special rapporteur on the human rights of 
migrants. Crépeau said increasing aid spending to help stabilise turbulent 
countries would not immediately help stem the flow of migrants and refugees.

Elsewhere on the site

 * Investment in child health in world’s poorest countries saves 34m lives 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jul/03/investment-child-health-worlds-poorest-countries-saves-34m-lives>
 * Paraguay deploys anti-narco top guns to combat economic need for weed 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/25/paraguay-drugs-small-farmers-marijuana-cocaine>
 * Afghanistan growing more receptive on women’s rights, says UK ambassador 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/29/afghanistan-womens-rights-british-ambassador-karen-pierce>
 * What will $32bn do to solve the world’s problems? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jul/03/saudi-prince-alwaleed-32bn-fortune-charity-world-problems>
 * ‘If I go, someone else will claim my land’: the stark reality of real 
estate in Burundi 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jul/01/burundi-land-displacement-conflict->
Opinion

The sustainable development goals may not mention democracy, but their focus 
on the accountability of political institutions will be key to improved 
governance 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jul/03/democracy-not-mystifying-western-plot-universal-value-sustainable-development-goals>
, argues Anthony Smith, chief executive of theWestminster Foundation for 
Democracy <http://www.wfd.org/>.

Multimedia

Video: Italian mafia’s cocaine trafficking leaves trail of drug devastation 
among poor of Brazil 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2015/jun/26/italian-mafia-cocaine-trafficking-drug-devastation-brazil-poor>

Video: The Dominicans of Haitian descent denied a right to nationality 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2015/jul/01/dominican-republic-haitian-descent-denied-nationality-rights>

Pictures: Living in fear amid violence and protest in Burundi’s capital 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2015/jul/06/burundi-bujumbura-living-in-fear-violence-protest-in-pictures>

Pictures: The harsh reality of life in South Sudan’s Bentiu camp – in pictures 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2015/jul/03/south-sudan-bentiu-camp-in-pictures>

Pictures: Yemen’s humanitarian crisis leaves a million people in dire straits 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2015/jul/04/yemen-humanitarian-crisis-million-people-dire-straits-in-pictures>


Pictures: Persecution and violence: life for minority and indigenous 
communities 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2015/jul/02/persecution-and-violence-life-for-minority-and-indigenous-communities-in-pictures>

Pictures: No work, no education and little food: the Iraqis forced to flee Isis
 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2015/jun/27/no-work-no-education-iraqis-persecution-isis-forced-flee-in-pictures>

What you said: top reader comment

On the piece, Democracy is not a mystifying western plot – it is a universal 
value 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jul/03/democracy-not-mystifying-western-plot-universal-value-sustainable-development-goals#comment-54936888>
,MartinMellish wrote:

I live in China. It’s not a democracy, and most people have no particularly 
strong desire that it should be one. The present system of government is 
working well for them, the economy is still growing at an extraordinary rate. 
People’s lives are better than their parents’, and far better than their 
grandparents’. That is what is important to them. Should the economy go South, 
then I imagine there might be a revived interest in democracy, but that would 
be as a means to an end (prosperity) rather than as a goal in itself.

So - no, democracy is not a ‘universal value’, and it is highly dangerous to 
treat it as such. Trying to impose democracy on people who have no desire for 
it leads to chaos, bloodshed, and racial and ethnic strife, as many recent 
examples (Iraq, Sudan, Afghanistan, Libya) unfortunately prove.

Highlight from the blogosphere

Global Voices: Can Social Media Create a Lasting Impact in Uganda? 
<http://globalvoicesonline.org/2015/06/29/can-social-media-create-a-lasting-impact-in-uganda/>


And finally …

Poverty matters will return in two weeks with another roundup of the latest 
news and comment. In the meantime, keep up to date on theGlobal Development 
website <http://www.theguardian.com/global-development>. Follow @gdndevelopment 
<https://twitter.com/gdndevelopment> and the team – @swajones 
<https://twitter.com/swajones>, @LizFordGuardian 
<https://twitter.com/lizfordguardian>, @MarkC_Anderson 
<https://twitter.com/MarkC_Anderson> and @CarlaOkai 
<https://twitter.com/CarlaOkai> – on Twitter, and join Guardian Global 
Development on Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardianglobaldevelopment>.
