
After packing away a career in fashion, Jane Kersel journeyed to rude health 
on a wave of self exploration and yoga. For 15 years she has worked as a yoga 
teacher and wellbeing guide, balancing the demands of a busy lifestyle. From 
her at-home studio in London’s Notting Hill, Kersel offers a glimpse into a 
typical day.

I wake early without an alarm, and keep my eyes closed while I imagine my day 
going really well. My morning beauty prep is simple: cleansing, then tinted 
moisturiser and a touch of mascara. I’ll opt for a nutritious smoothie rather 
than breakfast – the naturopath in me remembers to mix in a little 
skin-hydrating olive oil and sunflower lecithin. I also take fish oils to keep 
my brain functioning well.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tzbd%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tzbd%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffacecf40d19b4e1a2176f54c6853122505e3272e%2F0_347_5209_3126%2F5209.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Balancing%20business%20and%20beauty&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tzbd%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Balancing+business+and+beauty&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tzbd%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffacecf40d19b4e1a2176f54c6853122505e3272e%2F0_347_5209_3126%2F5209.jpg>
 Jane Kersel: ‘Yoga is about being present in that moment.’ Photograph: 
Victoria Adamson 
Clients start arriving at the Ishy Shala <http://janekersel.com/ishy-classes/> 
[the yoga studio Kersel has created at her home] from 9am. Classes begin with 
meditation, allowing people to take a pause from their busy lives and turn 
inwards. I’ve studied many different forms of yoga and my approach is about 
making things relevant and easy to embody. Bodies need to be fit to deal with 
life’s daily stresses, but yoga is also about being present in that moment. As 
a trained hypnotherapist, I understand the benefit of reframing, so I empower 
people to take responsibility for their wellbeing. Classes always end with a 
nourishing smoothie made fresh in my kitchen.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tzbd%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tzbd%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c12589f43078e8d83f47b5504ebfa87f4b84c76%2F0_3265_3840_2304%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Balancing%20business%20and%20beauty&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tzbd%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Balancing+business+and+beauty&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tzbd%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c12589f43078e8d83f47b5504ebfa87f4b84c76%2F0_3265_3840_2304%2F3840.jpg>
 ‘Skincare is about nourishment and bringing a bit of ritual to my day.’ 
Photograph: Victoria Adamson 
For lunch, I’ll cook myself something healthy and protein-rich, such as 
grilled fish. I never eat red meat, wheat or dairy. Unless I have a private 
client, I spend the afternoon planning my day-long yoga retreats in London, or 
week-long retreats in Spain. The rest of the day is devoted to creative tasks 
as I relish doing the artistic work around my business. At the moment, I’m 
working on a book project and my candle collection. Designed to encourage you 
to pause and turn inwards, the candles come with a meditation practice saved on 
a USB – you follow the meditation practice for the length of the candle’s life, 
by which time you’ve formed a good habit. Another passion of mine is interiors 
that help create a calm space. I favour an eclectic style and objects with soul 
– I’ve collected many things on my travels in Bali and India.


Unless I’m going out, dinner’s at 6.30pm, as I sleep better when I eat early. 
Afterwards I often make a turmeric almond milk, a great digestive aid. My 
daughter lives at home, but my son is away at university so a good evening for 
us all is Skyping to hear each other’s news. I’m a mother, above all else, so 
being part of my children’s lives is important to me.

Five-minute meditation 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/labs/2016/may/estee-lauder/kersel.html> 
My tried and tested night-time ritual is enjoying a long soak in the bath with 
Himalayan crystal salt, surrounded by candles and good music. Skin care is very 
important to me – it’s about nourishment and bringing a bit of self-time and 
ritual to my day – so I always cleanse my skin carefully, apply a good 
moisturiser, then some Estée Lauder Advanced Night Repair Serum. I sleep on a 
silk pillowcase to keep my skin cool and hydrated.


At 10.30pm I’ll read for a while, then do a simple breathing exercise, as I 
find meditation a great way to prepare for a good night’s sleep. As you get 
older your melatonin levels drop so, if I’m away, I’ll spray some melatonin 
under my tongue, which really helps with the jet lag. Lights off by 11pm.

