
Europe was at war, Ian Fleming was a stockbroker rather than a novelist and 
most of London’s children had been forced from home: this was England and Wales 
in 1939, a digitised portrait of which is now available online.

The population register, taken in late September 1939, just after after the 
outbreak of the second world war, is the only surviving record of the 
population of England and Wales between 1921 and 1951. The digital version was 
released on Monday byFindmypast <http://www.findmypast.co.uk/1939register> in 
association with the National Archives.

The register, compiled by 65,000 enumerators and sent to every household in 
England and Wales, documents the lives of 41 million people. It gives the names 
of the inhabitants at each address, their date of birth, marital status and 
occupation.

Notable entries include James Bond creator Ian Fleming, then 31, who stated 
his main job as “stockbroker”, while the grandfather of Victoria Beckham was 
working on the London Docks and living in Tottenham.


The register also includes Joseph Kennedy, father of the future US president, 
John F Kennedy, who is listed as ambassador to the United Kingdom. In Port 
Talbot, the actor Anthony Hopkins is a toddler living with his parents. His 
father, Richard, is a baker and his mother is a housewife called Muriel.
Illustrated comparison then and now - number of people in selected jobs 
<http://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/11/jobs_then_now/giv-31114SrtTqZ8BooXm>
The register was taken soon after 1.5 million children, women and disabled 
people were evacuated to escape the bombing of cities by German forces. It 
shows that just 2% of the population in London was aged 0-10, compared with the 
national average of 14%, while 8% was aged 10-19, against 16% nationally. The 
figures for London also show a gender split of 60% male to 40% female, compared 
with 47% to 53% nationally.

Across England and Wales there were only 111 people aged over 100 when the 
register was taken, compared with 12,320 centenarians recorded in 2013.


The oldest man on registration day was born in 1831 during the reign of 
William IV. In 1939 he was living with his nurse, while serving as a senior air 
raid warden.


The most popular retirement locations at the time included Tavistock, 
Glastonbury, Looe, Newquay, Woodstock, Brixham, Torpoint, Knighton, Hearne Bay 
and Dawlish.

Overall, the average age was 33 for men and 35 for women, compared with a 
median age of 38 for men and 40 for women in the 2011 census.


An average of three people lived in each household. The register provides 
unprecedented insight into those 12 million households, including the 
composition of the labour force in England and Wales at the time.

Many of the most common occupations in 1939 have disappeared today.

Here are the top 10 occupations registered for the 22 million women and the 19 
million men in 1939:
Chart of top 10 occupations in 1939 
<http://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/11/jobs_total-zip/giv-31114b3g1wbKRlh93>
Almost half of women at the time were performing domestic work, which was 
mostly unpaid.
Top 10 jobs in Sheffield in 1939 
<http://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/11/sheffield-zip/giv-31114X2S0cTYlvt3u>
Top 10 jobs in Cardiff in 1939 
<http://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/11/cardiff-zip/giv-31114CnkydOOLvYra>
Top 10 jobs in Middlesbrough in 1939 
<http://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/11/middlesbrough-zip/giv-31114UuVBq74t52RC>
Top 10 jobs in Westminster in 1939 
<http://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/11/westminster-zip/giv-311146k6Swa8JjCLl>
Westminster topped the country’s butler chart with 247 of England and Wales’ 
595 butlers registered in the borough.

In Leicester and Leeds, more women were working in the fashion industry than 
in any other, mostly as tailors, dress makers or hosiery knitters.

The most popular names in 1939 were Mary, Margaret, Elizabeth, Annie and 
Florence, while for men, the most common names were John, William, George, 
Charles, Frederick and Thomas.


Writer and broadcaster Andrew Marr 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/andrewmarr> said: “The 1939 register is one 
of the most important documents in recent British history. A comprehensive 
record of the civil population on the outbreak of war, it captures a people 
whose lives were about to change forever. It records streets that within 
months, under the assault of the Luftwaffe, were to disappear; families that 
would be separated by the events of war: evacuation, conscription and sometimes 
worse. ”

The information recorded in the 1939 register was essential to issuing 
identity cards, planning mass evacuations and rationing.

The register, spanning 1.2 million pages, would also go on to play a central 
role in the establishment of post-war services such as the NHS.

 * Methodological note: the 1939 register collected information based on 
self-definition, allowing the majority of occupations to be recorded without 
supervision or standardisation. The statistics and categorisation for each 
occupation were provided byFindmypast <http://www.findmypast.co.uk/1939register>
. They are intended to be indicative rather than definitive.

Update: a visual in this article was amended on 2 November. A previous version 
had incorrect figures for occupations in 2011.
