
The last thing you want your brand new car to do is leak water when it rains – 
especially if you live in Britain – so it’s essential for motor manufacturers 
to throw hundreds of litres of H20 at each of their cars during testing. Of 
course, this means that water consumption levels at production plants is a 
serious concern, particularly in areas that are sensitive to climate change.

For SEAT, whose Martorell factory lies in a water-stressed region of northern 
Spain just outside Barcelona, this has led to an ambitious programme to reduce 
water consumption. In 2010, SEAT set itself a challenge of cutting the water 
needed to produce a car by 25% – the company has reached 24.5%, with two years 
still to go until its deadline. It currently uses 3 cubic-metres of water in 
the production of each car.


Related: Alejandro Mesonero: ‘Barcelona puts ideas into my head’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/inside-seat/2016/may/23/alejandro-mesonero-barcelona-puts-ideas-into-my-head>

The company also puts a strong focus on reducing other environmental impacts, 
which is why reduction targets have also been set for energy consumption, CO2 
emissions, waste production and management, and the production of volatile 
organic compounds.

But the issue of water consumption is of particular concern to SEAT due to the 
company’s location outside the coastal city of Barcelona, where rainfall is low 
and evaporation high. As a result, it takes its environmental responsibilities 
seriously.


“Because we are in the Mediterranean basin, there is a lot of water stress and 
we do have extended drought periods,” says Francesc Vila, environmental officer 
at SEAT. “Because the city of Barcelona also gets most of its water from the 
Llobregat, some years are quite critical. All the climate change statistics 
point to the fact that this particular region is at a big risk of the water 
running out. Reducing water consumption is going to be critical and companies 
have to be more responsible because of the vulnerability of the whole area.”

Sea water isn’t suitable

In 2008 Catalonia suffered its worst drought in 60 years, with drinking water 
being delivered by tanker from Marseille, France, and other areas of Spain. The 
crisis meant that a desalination plant was built to make sea water drinkable, 
but this is a solution for extreme situations only. “The thing about treating 
sea water is it’s really, really expensive, so we’d only use it in extreme 
cases,” says Joan Galles, planning engineer for infrastructure at SEAT.

“It uses a huge amount of electricity and produces a huge amount of CO2. We 
are over 40km from the sea here. It’s really used to provide drinking water or 
usable water for coastal cities in periods of extreme need. If it was easy and 
cheap to process sea water then there would not be any problems in countries 
such as Saudi Arabia.”


In 2015, SEAT used 1.4m cubic metres of water, which is equivalent to the 
needs of a city with a population of 35,000 people. In addition to the 
day-to-day resources the company requires for drinking, showers and toilets, 
the process of car production involves the cooling of hot metal, the cleaning 
of the car chassis before anti-rust treatment, and the watertight testing.


Then there is the painting. This accounts for the greatest amount of water – 
more than 50% of total consumption – due to water-based paints and the method 
of spraying the vehicles.


“We have robots to paint the cars 
<http://www.theguardian.com/inside-seat/2016/apr/18/the-seat-ateca-a-journey-to-design-perfection-episode-three>
,” says Vila, “and they require a particular level of humidity. So it’s not 
just about the water that goes into the paint – it’s the water we need to get 
humidity into the painting booth. We actually have to condition 1.2m cubic 
metres of air per hour for the painting.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j36v%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j36v%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F98f241b51032e5c4eab721eaffe6d3e259bee169%2F0_207_3235_1941%2F3235.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20SEAT%20is%20on%20the%20road%20to%20sustainable%20water%20use&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j36v%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+SEAT+is+on+the+road+to+sustainable+water+use&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j36v%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F98f241b51032e5c4eab721eaffe6d3e259bee169%2F0_207_3235_1941%2F3235.jpg>
 Water is used throughout the production process; for cooling hot metal, 
cleaning the chassis, and watertight testing. Photograph: SEAT 
SEAT’s water-reduction strategy

The company’s strategy for reducing water consumption includes a simple aim of 
cutting usage wherever possible. This has led to SEAT making the treatment and 
re-use of water a priority. This differs from recycling – where water is put 
back through the same circuit – as it is treated so it can be used again from 
scratch. “It is one of the most important measures we have applied,” says Vila, 
“because sometimes it requires just a slight treatment to re-use the water. 
When we do the rain testing, for example, the water can easily be used again 
after it is treated.”

Another key part of the reduction strategy has been in identifying and using 
three different qualities of water for various functions. Ordinary consumption, 
such as drinking, requires the highest grade, painting a middle grade and 
watertight testing can use the lowest grade.

The third branch of the strategy involves the education of staff, which 
includes running an annual environment day and displaying posters to train and 
motivate employees to think before they use water.

SEAT’s successful initiative has led to financial savings, although Vila says 
that due to the low cost of water, environmental responsibility remains the 
primary concern. “We are very demanding about the environment. Environmentally 
conscious production is part of the overall business model and the brand.”

There is no doubt that the initial 25% reduction target will be exceeded, 
although Vila points out that while the first 10% was relatively easy to 
achieve, it has become progressively harder and remains a big challenge. “We do 
have another batch of projects underway to optimise consumption, like recycling 
water from water treatment plants or making use of rainwater in certain 
facilities,” he says. “Although, unfortunately, we do not get much rain here.”


Vila concludes that one of the most promising factors in the goal to keep 
water consumption at a minimum is the fast-moving nature of the automotive 
sector.


“Our industry is constantly changing processes and production,” he says, “and 
a new model always brings improvements in manufacturing processes. With every 
model we try to cut back the environmental impact; that’s something that’s very 
particular to our sector. We will not stop moving forward.”
