

Angela Merkel has called on campaigners in Britain’s EU referendum debate to 
moderate their language ahead of next week’s vote, as political leaders and 
officials across Europe paid tribute tothe killed Labour MP Jo Cox.  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/17/david-cameron-and-jeremy-corbyn-to-pay-joint-tribute-to-jo-cox>

The German chancellor, who described the attack on the pro-European West 
Yorkshire MP as “terrible” but declined to link it directly to the referendum, 
called for all involved to respect the beliefs and opinions of others.

Related: Jo Cox death: 'The well of hatred killed her,' Corbyn says – latest 
updates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/live/2016/jun/17/jo-cox-death-police-labour-mp-latest-updates>

“Otherwise, the radicalisation will become unstoppable,” she said. 
“Exaggerations, and radicalisation of part of the language, do not help foster 
an atmosphere of respect. We know how important it is to draw limits: in choice 
of speech, in choice of argument, and also in choice of disparaging argument.”

In an interview with the Guardian, the Austrian chancellor, Christian Kern, 
said the killing was “only further proof of how quickly violent words can turn 
into violent deeds. On social media, you see people falling into parallel 
worlds that we can no longer get them back out of.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yj3a%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yj3a%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F901c8d3cdfa844ec4e651593e454c176f43fab95%2F0_120_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Merkel%20urges%20EU%20in%2Fout%20campaigns%20to%20moderate%20language%20after%20Jo%20Cox%20death&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yj3a%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Merkel+urges+EU+in%2Fout+campaigns+to+moderate+language+after+Jo+Cox+death&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yj3a%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F901c8d3cdfa844ec4e651593e454c176f43fab95%2F0_120_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 Floral tributes left in London to Labour MP Jo Cox. Photograph: Yui Mok/PA 
Kern said he had discussed the issue with both the French president, François 
Hollande, and Merkel, adding: “How do you get back these people who believe 
that all media and all journalists are lying to them?”

In France, Hollande expressed his “profound emotion” 
<https://twitter.com/fhollande/status/743518613034930178?lang=en-gb> at the 
killing, adding that Cox’s family and friends had his “condolences, and 
compassion”.

The French prime minister, Manuel Valls, also tweeted his “deep sadness” for 
Cox and the British people, saying that through her “our democratic ideal has 
been targeted. Never accept it!”
— Manuel Valls (@manuelvalls) June 16, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/manuelvalls/status/743489933470478336> 
Profonde tristesse pour Jo Cox et le peuple britannique. À travers elle, notre 
idéal démocratique a été visé. Ne jamais l’accepter !
 <https://twitter.com/manuelvalls/status/743489933470478336> 
The killing made the front pages of many European newspapers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/gallery/2016/jun/17/european-newspaper-front-pages-on-jo-cox-death-in-pictures>
, with Belgium’s Le Soir headlined “Brexit debate turns to tragedy”, Spain’s El 
Mundo saying the Brexit campaign was “stained with blood”, and De Telegraaf in 
the Netherlands opting for “Murder in Brexit battle”.

Speaking at a press conference in Vienna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/17/imf-chief-christine-lagarde-urges-britain-to-stay-in-europe>
, the IMF director, Christine Lagarde, said she had “always admired the United 
Kingdom for its openness to other nationalities and foreign cultures”, and that 
the killing should invite “a bit of reflection … about how a democratic debate 
should take place”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yj3a%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yj3a%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85ec1792e721f9314f73ba7d894a740006b1fdfc%2F0_227_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Merkel%20urges%20EU%20in%2Fout%20campaigns%20to%20moderate%20language%20after%20Jo%20Cox%20death&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yj3a%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Merkel+urges+EU+in%2Fout+campaigns+to+moderate+language+after+Jo+Cox+death&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yj3a%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85ec1792e721f9314f73ba7d894a740006b1fdfc%2F0_227_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
 IMF chief Christine Lagarde speaking in Vienna. Photograph: Georg 
Hochmuth/AFP/Getty Images 
The Dutch finance minister and president of the group of eurozone finance 
ministers, Jeroen Dijsselbloem, also said he hoped the people of the UK, “a 
beacon of peaceful politics, can make their democratic choices serenely and in 
safety next week”.

However, French and Austrian far-right leaders, also in Vienna for a meeting 
of populist and Eurosceptic parties, warned against speculation that Cox was 
killed because of her pro-EU, immigrant-friendly views.

Speaking at a meeting of rightwing and Eurosceptic parties under the motto 
“Patriotic spring”, Marine Le Pen, of France’s Front National, said it was “not 
very decent to use this dramatic event” for political motives while the reasons 
for the killing were unclear.

Appearing alongside her, Heinz-Christian Strache, the leader of Austria’s 
Freedom party, whose candidate, Norbert Hofer, narrowly lost May’s presidential 
election, insisted his party was “against all extremism”.

Reactions elsewhere were warmer. Ireland’s taoiseach, Enda Kenny, tweeted: 
— Enda Kenny (@EndaKennyTD) June 16, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/EndaKennyTD/status/743484838443892737> 
What an appalling tragedy. Jo Cox, a mother doing her public duty, her life 
taken away. My deepest sympathies to her family.
 <https://twitter.com/EndaKennyTD/status/743484838443892737> 
Alexis Tsipras, the Greek prime minister, said the incident was “shocking” 
<http://www.amna.gr/english/article/14217/PM-Tsipras-expresses-shock-at-murder-of-British-MP-Jo-Cox>
, adding: “Hatred and nationalism are common enemies of our people.”

Matteo Renzi, the Italian prime minister, said the killing was “a horrible act 
of hatred, which casts a shadow on the hearts of all of us”. Hate, Renzi added, 
“will never prevail, neither in Britain nor elsewhere”. His Danish counterpart, 
Lars Løkke Rasmussen, said it was “a true shock … that a British politician was 
killed during the campaign”.

Mariano Rajoy, the acting Spanish prime minister, wrote to his British 
counterpart, David Cameron, to lament a “savage and brutal” attack. “Violence 
has no place in a democracy,” Rajoy wrote. “I beg you … to pass on to her 
relatives and loved ones and to all the British people our most heartfelt and 
sincere condolences.”


Sweden’s prime minister, Stefan Löfven, said the killing was “an attack on 
democracy” and a “heinous attack … against all of us who believe in a free 
society. My thoughts are with Jo Cox’s family and colleagues.”


Some commentators, including Bernd Riegert, of Germany’s Deutsche Welle, asked 
whether the referendum vote should not now be postponed, to allow time for 
“fear and hate to be removed from the campaigns. [People] need to take a step 
back and ask themselves: how could it get this far? Do we really want to keep 
going this way?”
