
Cork

Cork's bars are so famous that there's a heritage pub trail dedicated to them 
<http://www.corkheritagepubs.com/> but locals prefer a welcoming spot called 
Sin é <http://www.corkheritagepubs.com/pubs/sin-e/> (8 Coburg Street), where 
the name translates as "That's it" in reference to the funeral parlour next 
door. There's live music every day but, if you're craving a traditional 
session, go on a Tuesday, Friday or Sunday. Sit at one of the small, rickety 
tables downstairs and drink pints of stout by candlelight, beneath high red 
walls covered in rock posters and fairy lights. Beyond the city,De Barra Folk 
Club <http://www.debarra.ie/> in the seaside town of Clonakilty, just 45 
minutes away, is another big draw, with a lively mix of rock'n'roll and folk 
acts, while Trad Monday sees a loyal, local collective serve up bodhrán beats 
and balladry until late.

Donegal
 Jam session outside The Corner House, Ardara. Photograph: Alamy 
Hire a car and drive towards the dramatic Glengesh Pass in the south-west, 
round hairpin bends, past bogland and timeworn cottages, and on to Ardara. 
Here, as dusk falls, you can hole up inThe Corner House 
<https://www.facebook.com/cornerhouse.ardara>, a cosy pub where you'll feel 
like a guest in someone's home. Locals tap along to fiddlers, accordionists and 
bodhrán drummers squeezed in among the drinkers. Alternatively, head further 
north to Bunbeg'sHiudai Beag <http://www.tradcentre.com/hiudaibeag/> in the 
heart of the Gaeltacht, where landlord and fiddler Hugh Gallagher is often on 
the other side of the bar, joining in the trad sessions.

Kilkenny
 Tynan's Bridge House Bar. Photograph: Alamy 
By day, the echo of buskers reverberates off the stone walls of this mediaeval 
city, whetting the appetite for the musical entertainment that strikes up at 
night. Authentic boozers are ten-a-penny here, so just wander along the 
cobblestone lanes and listen out for what takes your fancy. For traditional 
music, a safe bet isTynan's Bridge House Bar 
<https://www.facebook.com/tynans.bridgehousebar> (2 John's Bridge), a small 
horseshoe-shaped bar with antique-brass lanterns, which is popular with hurling 
teams. A neat alternative (and opposite) would be the modern, polished space of
Langton House Hotel <http://www.langtons.ie/> (69 John Street, +353 56 776 
5133), a real landmark for the Marble City, with several Celtic Tiger-era bars 
and restaurants. Expect a mix of blaring covers bands sandwiched between 
traditional Irish music sessions, and time your trip to coincide with one of 
Kilkenny's crowd-pulling arts or comedy festivals:Kilkenny Arts 
<http://www.kilkennyarts.ie/> (8-17 August 2014) and Cat Laughs comedy festival 
<http://thecatlaughs.com/> (30 May-3 June).

Galway
 Tigh Neachtains. Photograph: Alamy 
In Galway, the most authentic pubs have an anything-goes attitude and don't 
charge on the door.Tig Coili <https://www.facebook.com/tig.choili> (Mainguard 
Street) is one of the best for music, where a ragtag band of local musicians 
will spontaneously strike up in one corner of the bar. The walls are covered 
with black-and-white photographs of previous players, including the odd 
celebrity: bands in town for big concerts have been known to do impromptu 
warm-up gigs here. In nearbyTigh Neachtains <http://www.tighneachtain.com/> (17 
Cross Street) musicians often wander in and start playing songs with a bluesy, 
Americana tinge. Sit in one of the wooden snugs from which you can admire every 
poster from theGalway arts festival <http://www.galwayartsfestival.com/> to 
date (this year's festival runs from 14-27 July).

Limerick
 One Pery Square. Photograph: Keith Wiseman 
Limerick is being buoyed by its City of Culture 2014 
<http://limerickcityofculture.ie/> status and the arrival of boutique hotels 
such asOne Pery Square <http://www.oneperysquare.com> (1 Pery Square). Visit 
not just because Limerick is the sporting capital of Ireland – rugby is huge 
here, withMunster <http://www.munsterrugby.ie/home.php> playing at Thomond Park 
stadium (Old Cratloe Road) – but to experience an Irish city on the cusp of 
change. By night, some of the best drinking spots include the stone-walledThe 
Curragower <http://www.curragower.com/> bar (Clancys Strand) in the Medieval 
quarter, a popular matchday haunt and the city's best venue for traditional 
Irish music. If you happen to be in town on a Wednesday, though, don't miss the 
opportunity to hang out with the city's boho types at theWhite House 
<https://www.facebook.com/WhiteHouseLimerickPoetry> (52 O'Connell Street) for 
open-mic poetry sessions and readings from published writers.

Belfast
 The Duke of York pub 
In Belfast's Cathedral Quarter old and new establishments rub together 
harmoniously and this is where you'll find the weekend buzz. Swap pints for a 
measure ofBushmills <http://www.bushmills.com/> whiskey at the Duke of York 
<http://www.dukeofyorkbelfast.com/> (7-11 Commercial Court), taking in the old 
mirrors and whiskey memorabilia before you join the throng of crowds spilling 
out onto the streets. For the ultimate spit-and-sawdust pub, there's nowhere 
better thanMaddens Bar <https://www.facebook.com/maddens.belfast> (74 Berry 
Street). Unappealing from the outside – you'll only gain entry if they decide 
to buzz you in – inside it's jumping with fast-paced jigs and reels, seven 
nights a week: the sort of place where promoters go to canvass new musical 
talent.

Dublin
 Music at The Cobblestone, Dublin. Photograph: Alamy 
For the best traditional music and a pint of Guinness, hop across the Liffey 
river to theThe Cobblestone <https://www.facebook.com/thecobblestone> (77 North 
King Street), a real locals' spot, which is heaving all week thanks to non-stop 
trad, country, folk and bluegrass sessions. But with Dublin in the midst of a 
cocktail revolution, it's in the new speakeasy-style bars that you'll find the 
cool crowd hiding from the tourists.The Liquor Rooms 
<http://theliquorrooms.com/> (7 Wellington Quay), underneath the Clarence Hotel 
<http://www.theclarence.ie/>, is one of the more recent openings and has an 
out-of-hours Parisian bordello feel, thanks to the red walls, low lights and 
artfully worn-in decor.

Patricia Campbell travelled as a guest of Tourism Ireland 
<https://www.tourismireland.com/> and the Northern Irish Tourist Board 
<http://www.discovernorthernireland.com/>. For more information on breaks in 
the Irish Republic and Northern Ireland, visitireland.com 
<http://www.ireland.com/en-gb>
