
The announcement of £4.2bn in funding to move the NHS towards a digital, 
“paper-free” future 
<https://www.tsa-voice.org.uk/news/jeremy-hunt-outlines-paperless-nhs-plans-and-possible-technology-funding>
 raises challenges and rekindles memories of past attempts.

In fairness, the NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> gets less 
credit than it should for its progress with technology. GP surgeries are 
computerised, the health service has excellent technology for transferring data 
around the country, digital imaging and online referrals, and the largest 
secure email service in the world.

But, with the National Programme for IT 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/sep/18/nhs-records-system-10bn> still 
casting a long shadow, many processes are stuck in the 1950s. Letters are still 
sent between hospitals, GPs and social services. Many doctors still hand-write 
test requests; people move paper records from ward to clinic to operating 
theatre. Patients wait for doctors in beds and in clinics. Different 
organisations work in silos and, while some have improved their processes and 
IT, they don’t communicate electronically with each other. Imagining the future 
when you are stuck in the past is difficult and the NHS will need support.

Digital services can ensure the NHS continues providing world-leading 
universal care

Meanwhile, patients are becoming more digitally active and want to interact 
with health services in the same way as other areas of their lives. More than 
three-quarters of UK adults own a smartphone, with ownership among people 
over-55s increasing by 40%-50% between 2013 and 2014. Some 75% of the 
population go online for health information and there are more than 165,000 
health apps – though few are linked to NHS IT systems.

There are good examples of technology in the NHS. Mobile IT can cut 60% of 
paperwork for community nurses, giving them 29% more patient time. Airedale NHS 
trust found thatSkype consultations from care homes 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2012/jun/27/technology-can-transform-nhs>
 led to 35% fewer hospital admissions, a 53% reduction in A&E use and 59% fewer 
hospital bed days. But the NHS has struggled to repeat such successes across 
different organisations.

More digital interaction with patients and other organisations has huge scope 
for improvement and savings. But for technology to work well, lessons should be 
learned and the right people must be involved.

Clinicians must own and lead the process. Digitising care is difficult because 
medicine is complex and full of judgment and exploration. Clinicians must know 
what’s on offer and what works for their environment, help develop their 
organisation’s vision and work with colleagues and management to agree clinical 
processes. Technology can, and should, enable this vision and professionals 
need, and often want, to be at the forefront.

We mustn’t underestimate the need to invest. Every £1 spent on technology 
requires at least £1 to be spent on system transformation to ensure a safe and 
effective transition.

Nor will one size fit all. A system right for one hospital, or to link 
several, won’t be right for another. It depends on the clinical vision. A large 
teaching hospital – with academic links, specialist treatments and looking at 
collaborating or merging with other organisations – will require a 
comprehensive transformation programme assessing and improving patient pathways 
and care plans, taking two or three years. But smaller organisations, offering 
a narrower range of services, won’t need such complicated solutions.

It’s no accident that some applications, like SAP and Oracle, are world 
leaders used by thousands of organisations. They are standard, ubiquitous and 
touch everything from finance, customers and inventories to staffing, 
performance analytics and communication. New software can be complicated and 
everyone in the organisation needs to be involved before it arrives, knowing 
what to expect and how the ways they work will change.


Related: Patients must drive a digital revolution in NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/jan/13/patients-digital-revolution-nhs>

As with all IT projects, things can change or go wrong. All sectors and all 
countries know IT projects are risky and complicated, particularly in the 
medical world. IT changes the way people work, people will want to change the 
project and external factors evolve over time. So it’s vital there are people 
involved who have done it before, can keep patients safe as clinicians learn 
the new systems, will know what to expect and can fix things when they go wrong.


As our Connected Health report 
<http://www2.deloitte.com/uk/en/pages/life-sciences-and-healthcare/articles/connected-health.html>
 illustrates, done correctly, digital services can ensure the NHS continues 
providing world-leading universal care, overcoming financial challenges, 
supporting advances in research and improving patient outcomes.

There are inevitably risks, and 2020 is not far away, but the reward is a 
cost-effective, 21st century healthcare service.

Rebecca George is vice chair and public sector health lead for Deloitte UK

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
