
Newspapers, magazines and other publishers are “feeding on the scraps” of 
Facebook’s multibillion-dollar ad business despite playing a central role in 
keeping the social network’s users happy, according to the boss ofBloomberg 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/bloomberg> Media.

Justin Smith, chief executive of the financial information company’s 
publishing arm, told the Guardian that even thoughFacebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> was sending traffic to 
publisher websites, it was making far more from ads in its news feed which was 
filled with publisher content.

“They keep the $16bn to $18bn they get in the news feed, and the news feed, 
with personal sharing down, is effectively all of our content, it’s effectively 
just an aggregation of premium publishers’ content,” he said.

Related: Bloomberg to launch Middle East edition 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/20/bloomberg-business-middle-east> 

“While that’s all legal, based on fair use, there is a real question about how 
fair it is that Facebook can have $16bn to $18bn dollars, $3bn or $4bn dollars 
in ebitda on the back of our content.”

In results announced on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/27/facebook-revenue-first-quarter-2016>
, after the Guardian spoke to Smith, Facebook reported net income of $1.51bn 
for the first quarter of 2016, triple what it made in same quarter of 2015, and 
total revenues of $5.2bn.

At the same time, publishers are struggling to generate ad revenue from their 
digital audiences, especially with more and more of their readers visiting from 
mobile devices.

Smith warned that the unequal relationship many publishers were entering into 
with Facebook could end badly for both parties.

He said: “It’s a little bit like they are at the grown-up table and the 
publishers are propping it up while being fed scraps.

“It’s a problematic situation. On its current trajectory this could not end 
well for the news business, and Facebook needs to think about this too, because 
they are reliant on each other.”

He said only a few big players will be able to successfully chase scale by 
working with partners like Facebook.

“There will be some that achieve such tremendous scale, like BuzzFeed, that 
will succeed, but that’s going to be one in a million,” he said. “The rest, I 
would say, look for the segments, the niches that exist within your current 
offering, and fragment yourself.”

While many publishers were suffering, Smith said Bloomberg was able to avoid 
falling into the same traps because despite generating most of its money from 
advertising, its audience of business people was not going to Facebook for 
information. The operation is also supported by a the far bigger division which 
sells market information terminals to the finance industry.

He said: “We stand in a really unique position because we have this unique 
business model, we are integrated in our core business, we add value to our 
core business, and we are able to invest and able to expand and build something 
for the long term that’s of significant high quality. That is based around 
fundamentally counterintuitively based around building relationships with 
readers.”

Bloomberg is in the midst of expanding its media operation with localised 
versions of Bloomberg.com. Earlier this monthit launched a site aimed at the 
Middle East 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/20/bloomberg-business-middle-east>, 
adding to localised versions for Europe and Asia launched over the last year.
