
Where should you go if you want to feel happier?

Until recently, there’s been little data available to help you objectively 
answer that question. Surveys of subjective wellbeing tend to be infrequent, 
and their results often provide only a very general sense of location.

Today, however, the world of street-scale happiness data is coming into its 
own thanks to the emergence of geotagged social media. Never before have we 
been so open and geographically specific about our feelings. When our musings 
enter the Twitterverse, their emotional content can be mapped and followed in 
real time.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kvjj%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kvjj%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31826570e150a926c49d1aa7b24c50479dc1ca20%2F102_0_1010_606%2F1010.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Upset%3F%20How%20to%20find%20a%20happier%20place%20using%20Twitter&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kvjj%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Upset%3F+How+to+find+a+happier+place+using+Twitter&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kvjj%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31826570e150a926c49d1aa7b24c50479dc1ca20%2F102_0_1010_606%2F1010.jpg>
 A map of New York showing the happiest (greenest) and least happy (reddest) 
areas of the city.Check out the full map here 
<http://necsi.edu/research/social/newyork/sentimentmap/>. Photograph: Yaneer 
Bar-Yam 
Patterns in what we share can offer insights into the local geography of 
happiness. For example, when researchersYaneer Bar-Yam 
<http://necsi.edu/faculty/bar-yam.html> and Roozbeh Daneshvar – who generated 
the above map – considered hundreds of thousands of tweets at once, they found 
that public parks are fountains of happiness inNew York City 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2Lz6SF3s0h0>, and that sentiment generally 
deteriorates the further one travels from Times Square. So more greenery might 
help improve wellbeing.

Meanwhile, the entrances to tunnels and bridges – like the Midtown Tunnel and 
the Brooklyn Bridge – are unsurprisingly epicenters of bad moods, renewing 
arguments thatcongestion problems need to be addressed 
<http://www.nytimes.com/roomfordebate/2015/07/20/ubers-fight-for-unlimited-for-hire-cabs-in-new-york-city/better-mass-transit-is-the-real-solution-to-congestion>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kvjj%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kvjj%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa89d69ff6d92090c5117a9318b49637bf2aefaf8%2F43_24_898_539%2F898.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Upset%3F%20How%20to%20find%20a%20happier%20place%20using%20Twitter&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kvjj%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Upset%3F+How+to+find+a+happier+place+using+Twitter&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kvjj%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa89d69ff6d92090c5117a9318b49637bf2aefaf8%2F43_24_898_539%2F898.jpg>
 A global map of happy and sad hotspots, as determined by Twitter.Check out the 
full interactive map here <http://www.necsi.edu/research/social/livetwitter/ ]>
. Photograph: Yaneer Bar-Yam 
Rikers Island, where 85% 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/16/nyregion/what-is-happening-at-rikers-island.html?_r=1>
 of inmates are awaiting trial, emits especially unhappy tweets.

The results also contain curiosities, such as the finding that the Palisades 
park in Brooklyn and the Weehawken Cemetery in New Jersey are much sadder than 
Brooklyn’sHoly Cross 
<http://www.findagrave.com/cgi-bin/fg.cgi?page=cr&GScid=64166&GRid=6199860&CRid=64166&>
 cemetery.

And the data suggests a means of monitoring potential urban improvements, as 
in the case of Maspeth Creek, occasionally known as “shit creek” due to the
untreated sewage 
<https://users.nyalert.gov/newsitem/4566307?messageID=AghxO4T6A> that 
frequently flows into it. This waterway was once the site of an oil spill that 
left it with a 15-foot deep layer of chemicals that scientists termed “black 
mayonnaise <http://nymag.com/news/intelligencer/newtown-creek-2013-12/>”. Tweet 
maps show that people express unhappiness when they go there. The question is 
whether sentiment improves withattempts 
<http://www.wnyc.org/story/new-life-amidst-once-toxic-waterway/> to clean and 
restore the area.

Looking at a week of happiness data, the public mood in a workaholic 
metropolis is predictable. A tide of the blues spreads out from Manhattan at 
around 9am, presumably when people arrive at work. Afternoons bring a bit more 
joy than mornings, with a peak when schools close. New Yorkers are at their 
best at midnight, when they are probably a few glasses in. Then it’s downhill 
until sunrise.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F110398773&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F110398773&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F110398773>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F110398773&media=>
To harvest the data, Bar-Yam and Daneshvar trained a computer program to 
detect positive or negative sentiments by providing it with a sample of tweets 
containing emoticons.

An alternative method measures the happiness of tweets based on the individual 
words that compose them. Workers atAmazon’s Mechanical Turk 
<https://www.mturk.com/mturk/help?helpPage=overview> (a service that provides a 
large number of freelancers who can complete small, remote tasks) rated the 
positivity of the 10,000 most commonly used words in Google Books, the New York 
Times and other sources from 1 (saddest) to 9 (happiest).

Peter Sheridan Dodds and his team at the University of Vermont then programmed 
a computer to apply these scores to geotagged tweets as they are published 
across the US, offering ongoinghappiness assessments of states 
<http://hedonometer.org/maps.html> and cities 
<http://hedonometer.org/cities.html?comp=Appleton,%20WI>.

By this measure, Hawaii often scores as the happiest state 
<http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0064417>, and 
Napa, California, as one of the happiest cities.

Meanwhile Louisiana and Beaumont, Texas, typically come in last.

Related: Are gendered toys harming childhood development? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/28/toys-kids-girls-boys-childhood-development-gender-research>

The advantage of Dodd’s approach is that it offers a sense of what exactly is 
affecting people’s happiness in different places. Hawaiians, for example, 
happily tweet about beaches. Unhappy words correlate closely with obesity rates 
across the country – and “McDonalds 
<http://panometer.org/instruments/lexicocalorimeter/>” correlates more strongly 
than any other word with obesity (beating “wings” and “eat”).

It seems that rather than heading out for a burger, a more effective 
pick-me-up would be staying in and watching Sex and the City. Dodds has also 
applied the word scores to movie scripts, and can tell youwhich of any two 
well-known movies <http://hedonometer.org/movies/ranked-list.html> has the more 
upbeat dialogue: Sex and the City beats all the competition.

Perhaps all this seems like just a bit of fun. After all, it’s easy to argue 
that anonymous tweets don’t really help city planning because they 
over-represent the young, and that Twitter contains nothing more substantial 
than bubbles of temporary sentiment. But Dodds and his colleagues find that the 
happiness scores of thewords in geotagged tweets do indeed correlate 
<http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0064417> with 
more in-depth population surveys of subjective wellbeing.

So, as you go about your day, go ahead and tweet your feelings to the world. 
Someone with the power to alleviate traffic jams, plant more trees on your 
block or stock your local library with old Sex and the City DVDs just might be 
listening.

































