
We know that men and women are often judged differently by society, but it’s 
rare that an example comes along that highlights the double standard as clearly 
as this week’s parallel news stories about two teachers 
<http://mic.com/articles/139079/can-you-spot-the-difference-between-these-two-stories-about-sexy-underwear-model-teachers#.5EQtDGV2D>
 and their modelling photos.

The headline on one reads: “A teaching assistant was fired after parents found 
out she was an underwear model.” The other, a story about a male teacher, 
reads: “A maths tutor who was crowned the world’s sexiest teacher is now an 
Armani model.” According tosome reports 
<http://metro.co.uk/2016/03/28/primary-teaching-assistant-sacked-after-parent-finds-lingerie-pictures-5779907/>
, Gemma Laird, a 21-year-old teaching assistant who worked in County Durham, 
argued that her school employers were aware of her modelling work with Lexi 
Fashions when she applied for her position. The school spoke of particular 
photographs that were “not appropriate”. But after a parent found her modelling 
photographs on Facebook and complained to the school, she says she was fired 
out of fear it would “damage the school’s reputation”.

The story surfaced in the same week as the news that Pietro Boselli, the model 
and engineering lecturer who hitheadlines last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/alexs-adventures-in-numberland/2015/jun/11/worlds-hottest-maths-teacher-pietro-boselli-interview>
 when his students Googled him and found his modelling photos, has beenchosen 
to front Armani’s EA7 clothing line 
<http://www.gq-magazine.co.uk/article/maths-teacher-becomes-armani-model>. The 
stories are not identical – Boselli iscurrently taking a break from teaching 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/fashion/features/pietro-boselli-from-world-s-hottest-math-teacher-to-model-for-armani-a6946361.html>
 (although his modelling work became widely known while he was still 
lecturing), and there is a big age difference between his university-age 
students and Laird’s primary school charges. But there is an interesting 
question to be asked about just how “damaging” an external modelling job, which 
presumably had no impact on Laird’s ability to teach, should be considered to 
her career.

The fact that the school was reportedly concerned about its reputation 
suggests that perceptions may have been important in this case, and our 
perceptions of male and female bodies can be very different indeed. Not only 
does society sexualise women’s bodies to an uncompromising and extreme degree, 
but it also reacts with horror and vitriol when women choose to take sexual 
agency over their own bodies – and with delight when men do the same.

Consider, for example, the 2011 case of Benedict Garrett, also highlighted by 
the same Twitter user 
<https://twitter.com/shanalala_/status/714035782785359872/photo/1> who brought 
the double standard in Boselli and Laird’s cases 
<https://twitter.com/shanalala_/status/713794345246269441> to wide attention. 
Garrett – who had left his job as head of personal, social and health education 
(PSHE) at a school in London after parents discovered that he sometimes worked 
as a stripper and had appeared in pornographic films – was reprimanded at a 
disciplinary hearing in front of the General Teaching Council, buttold that he 
was free to resume teaching in the future 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/education/educationnews/8733059/Porn-star-teacher-can-return-to-the-classroom.html>
.

Compare this with the case of South Carolina high school teacher Leigh Anne 
Arthur, who was fired after a studentstole an intimate photograph of her from 
her phone 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/world-news/teacher-fired-after-student-steals-7491502>
 without her knowledge or consent and distributed it widely on social media. Or 
the 35-year-old Czech teacherreportedly fired from her job last year 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3067237/Czech-teacher-moonlighted-porn-star-sacked-pupils-discover-explicit-videos-parents-complained.html>
 after a pornographic video of her was found on the internet. Or the high 
school guidance counsellor wholost her job in 2012 over lingerie photographs 
taken 17 years previously 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2214109/Tiffany-Webb-High-school-guidance-counselor-fired-racy-lingerie-photos.html>
, which she says she had disclosed to the Department for Education when she was 
hired. Or the Massachusetts teacher’s aide who was put on administrative leave 
after someoneanonymously sent images to school district officials showing her 
modelling 
<http://www.bostonmagazine.com/news/blog/2014/01/22/kaitlin-pearson-fitchburg-teacher-paid-leave/>
.

Whatever you think about the ethics of the issue, our responses to men and 
women in this situation reveal a world of difference. There is certainly a 
separate debate to be had about the extent to which schools have a right to 
police teachers’ extra-curricular behaviour, as well as the violation of 
teachers’ privacy when pupils or parents track down and trawl through their 
social media accounts. But regardless of where you stand, there is an 
undeniable double standard in the way that society judges and punishes women, 
while men who behave similarly are treated far less harshly.
