
Going to university is never easy. It’s one of the greatest leaps of faith 
anyone ever makes, and it comes at a vulnerable time in an individual’s 
psychological development. It is difficult, and for some it can be 
life-threatening. A recent survey found that78% of students reported having had 
a mental health problem over the past year, and 33% had had suicidal thoughts 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/dec/14/majority-of-students-experience-mental-health-issues-says-nus-survey>
.

Those who are unable to cope may drop out. Left unrecognised and untreated, 
their problems may become more severe. They may start to self-medicate with 
drink or drugs, self-harm, or even take their own lives.

Related: University staff scared to disclose mental health problems 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/feb/13/university-staff-scared-to-disclose-mental-health-problems>

It is hard to calculate how many students die this way each year. There are 
difficulties in recording and reporting this information – many may already 
have dropped out by the time they choose to take their own lives, and in some 
cases, the coroner doesn’t record student status (which is a national anomaly 
that should be addressed).

The Office for National Statistics says that 112 full-time students took their 
lives in 2012 (the most recent data available). When this happens, the impact 
on friends, peers, family and the wider university community is devastating. 
But there are a number of sensible changes that could prevent student suicide.

As a clinical psychologist, I have a long-standing professional interest in 
improving outcomes for young people with psychosis. I have profiled their 
needs, advocated on their behalf and worked to help them lead fulfilling lives. 
I’ve led early intervention programmes for mental health in the NHS and became 
involved in an internationalZero Suicide <http://www.zerosuicide.org/> movement 
in healthcare. Two years ago, I joined the University of Worcester.

The move to a university enabled me to approach my work from a new angle, 
examining the complex and unique challenges for young people in higher 
education, as well as the opportunities that exist for prevention, early 
identification and timely intervention.

Universities can monitor their cohorts across three years. Peers, academic 
tutors and others can watch out for changes in a person’s attendance, 
appearance and performance. Staff can provide information on support services, 
and can facilitate relationships with helpful contacts.

Joining forces

Working with partners including Worcestershire County Council Public Health, 
Worcestershire Health and Care NHS Trust, and Community First, we are 
pioneering a multi-agency approach to mental health support and student suicide 
prevention.

Our Suicide Safer 
<http://www.worcester.ac.uk/discover/worcester-helps-to-lead-the-way-in-supporting-vulnerable-students.html>
 project has been running successfully for 18 months now. It brings together 
the perspectives and expertise of academic, mental health and counselling 
support staff within the university, while working with external partners from 
health, public health and the community sector.

Related: There is a culture of acceptance around mental health issues in 
academia 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2014/mar/01/mental-health-issue-phd-research-university>

We have extended the self-help and peer-support initiatives available to 
students – normal services used to end at 5pm or 6pm; now, a volunteer-run 
Nightline service is available from 6pm and 8am and at weekends.

We introduced self-help guidance for freshers, their parents, current students 
and staff on where to go for help inside and outside of the university. A local 
GP surgery is also now based on campus two days a week.

We brought all of the university counselling and support services together 
with NHS and public health organisations in Worcester – now everyone knows what 
the others are doing and what is available.

We made sure that students can access cognitive behavioural therapy and local 
courses on managing anxiety and mindfulness. Staff and students experiencing 
mild mental illness have also had access toMoodMaster 
<http://www.moodmaster.co.uk/> training. 

Reaching out

And now, along with the National Union of Students (NUS), mental health charity
Student Minds <http://www.studentminds.org.uk/> and others, we are working to 
put student suicide firmly on the national agenda for preventative action.

We are partnering with the James Wentworth-Stanley Memorial Fund 
<http://www.jwsmf.org/> to develop our understanding of student suicide through 
research. The trust has committed to match-fund two PhD studentships which will 
explore causes and prevention, as well as needs of peers, family and staff that 
arise when a suicide occurs.


We are also identifying practical steps that can be taken now. These include 
supporting NUS colleagues in developing a campaigning guide about student 
suicide, due to be launched at the NUS Disabled Students Conference later this 
month.

Related: What is it like to work as a university counsellor? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/careers/2015/oct/26/what-is-it-like-to-work-as-a-university-counsellor>

Universities can and must acknowledge the importance of student mental 
well-being. We must ensure that, wherever possible, students do not leave 
university or college because of mental health issues, or harm themselves as a 
result of them.

The theme of this year’s University Mental Health Day 
<http://www.studentminds.org.uk/uni-mental-health-day-2016.html> is 
#HeadsTogether, championing the idea of supporting others and encouraging 
conversations about transforming the state of mental health at university. We 
can work together to make this happen.


In the UK, the Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the National 
Suicide Prevention Hotline is1-800-273-8255 <>. In Australia, the crisis 
support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
