
The government’s hunt for a replacement for Sir Michael Wilshaw as Ofsted’s 
chief inspector of schools in England has entered its final phase after the 
shortlisted candidates were interviewed this week.

Amanda Spielman, the chair of exam regulator Ofqual and a senior figure at the 
Ark academy chain, is a frontrunner in a field that also includes Toby Salt, 
the chief executive of the OrmistonAcademies 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/academies> Trust (OAT), Dame Alison 
Peacock, an experienced educator and primary school head, and Russell Hobby, 
the general secretary of the National Association of Head Teachers.

Both Spielman and Salt have extensive involvement in multi-academy trusts, 
whose oversight has been a bone of contention between the Department for 
Education andOfsted <http://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> under 
Wilshaw. The trusts will grow in importance if the education white paper 
released last month, which said that all English schools should become 
academies, gets turned into legislation.

Talk of a chief inspector hired from the US failed to materialise, although 
the former New York city schools commissioner Joel Klein was a contender until 
a late stage, and Brett Wigdortz, the US-born founder of the TeachFirst 
training charity, applied for the post only to withdraw his bid.

Other mooted candidates, such as Sir Daniel Moynihan, the chief executive of 
the Harris federation of schools, and Dame Sally Coates, an executive at the 
United Learning trust, say they declined to put their names forward when 
approached by headhunters. However, the government is happy with its final 
field and expects to make an announcement shortly.

Related: Gove considered removing Wilshaw as Ofsted chief, memo reveals  
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/oct/09/gove-ofsted-inspector-wilshaw-memo>

Ministers are keen to avoid a repeat of their experience with Wilshaw, who has 
become a prominent media figure during his time as Her Majesty’s chief 
inspector of schools. Hispublic interventions 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/sep/25/headteachers-too-soft-unruly-pupils-ofsted-chief-sir-michael-wilshaw>
 on teacher shortages, school performance and discipline, as well as Ofsted’s 
willingness to criticise academy trusts, has made the DfE wary of candidates 
who enjoy the spotlight.

A major part of Ofsted’s role includes oversight of local authority children’s 
services, andWilshaw acknowledged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/mar/09/child-protection-chiefs-damned-in-ofsted-inspectors-report>
 the organisation’s failings after child abuse scandals in Rotherham and 
elsewhere.

Of the candidates, Spielman has had a varied career that saw her work in 
corporate finance and consulting on both sides of the Atlantic before becoming 
Ark’s policy director in 2005 and playing an integral part in the trust’s 
expansion to running 34 schools in London, Birmingham, Hastings and Portsmouth.

Ark is easily the most successful of England’s multi-academy trusts and boasts 
a string of outstanding schools, including King Solomon academy, which has a 
remarkable track record since opening in a deprived part of inner London in 
2007.

Salt has a distinguished career as an administrator and experienced 
headteacher in his favour, and it is thought he would be more diplomatic than 
the robust Wilshaw.
