
Name: Doncaster Power List.

Appearance: Annually, in the Doncaster Free Press 
<http://www.doncasterfreepress.co.uk/news/the-power-list-doncaster-s-50-most-influential-people-revealed-1-7913959>
.

Criterion: Being one of the town’s 50 “top decision-makers, big employers and 
high achievers”.

And who decides that? “An independent panel of local experts who really know 
the area – and all it’s major players.”

Shouldn’t that be “its” major players? Don’t quibble. All the best newspapers 
misspell things.

So, who are Doncaster’s major players in 2016? Oh, all sorts. There’s Lakeside 
Village <http://www.lakeside-village.co.uk/> shopping centre manager Cheryl 
Sadler at No 44.

Of course. And Bobbie Roberts (No 42), who is chairman of trustees at 
Doncaster Deaf Trust <http://www.deaf-trust.co.uk/>. Plus Nigel Brewster (6), 
co-founder of the recruitment groupBrewster Pratap 
<http://www.brewsterpratap.co.uk/>.

It’s good to see Brewster getting a top 10 place. He has slaved away in 
obscurity for too long.Indeed. And, of course, there’s Ed Miliband 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/edmiliband>. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ja84%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ja84%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa922df78264da2da365ce8576da5072b4d79d208%2F0_97_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ed%20Miliband%3A%20now%20Doncaster%E2%80%99s%2040th-most%20powerful%20person&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ja84%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ed+Miliband%3A+now+Doncaster%E2%80%99s+40th-most+powerful+person&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ja84%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa922df78264da2da365ce8576da5072b4d79d208%2F0_97_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Mayor Ros Jones, who has taken top spot once again. Photograph: Christopher 
Thomond for the Guardian 
Who? Ed Miliband <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/edmiliband>. He’s the MP 
for Doncaster North. Used to lead the Labour party.Wanted to be prime minister 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jun/03/undoing-of-ed-miliband-and-how-labour-lost-election>
 last year.

Sorry. Not ringing any bells. He ate a bacon sandwich 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/ed-miliband-fails-to-look-normal-while-eating-bacon-sandwich-ahead-of-whistle-stop-campaign-tour-9409301.html>
.

Ah, yes! I remember him now! He used to be really famous. Where’s he on the 
list?No 40.

Ouch. Just behind Steve Currier of Cooper Lighting (39), and some way back 
from Doncaster’s other MPs, Caroline Flint (26) and Rosie Winterton (13).

How the almost-mighty have fallen. I guess you can’t be Doncaster’s most 
powerful person every year.Oh, he wasn’t in 2015 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/politics/6353318/Miliband-trails-local-councillors-in-constituency-power-list.html?CMP=spklr-153168414-Editorial-TWITTER-TheSunNewspaper-20150303-Politics>
, either. He was fourth.

What? So three people in Doncaster were doing something more important than 
incompetently leading the opposition into a general election? That’s right. 
They were the mayor of Doncaster, Ros Jones, the council chief executive, Jo 
Miller, and Louis Tomlinson ofOne Direction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/one-direction>.

Fair enough. Still, Miliband can take comfort from the words of Phil Bramley.

The group editor of South Yorkshire Newspapers 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/newspapers>? That’s him. He takes pains to 
stress that the whole list is subjective. “There are many different ways people 
can have influence,” he points out.

Quite true. One could be rich, popular, very famous, hold high office, lead a 
large company, inspire people with your work … Indeed. There are many, many, 
many ways.

It’s just that, after assessing evidence, a panel of independent experts 
reckons Miliband doesn’t have much? Exactly.

Do say: “Choose Corbyn!”

Don’t say: “For the Islington Power List 2021!”
