
Open any Portuguese magazine these days and there is sure to be an update on 
Lisbon's riverside Cais do Sodré. Its transformation from sleazy haunt 
frequented by hard-drinking sailors to one of the city's coolest nightlife 
districts has been swift, and made the country sit up and take note. Elegant 
new bars jostle with contemporary restaurants and even the beautiful 
19th-century fish market is set to unveil a new food court later this month, 
mixing gourmet fare with traditionalpetiscos.

1. Start the day on Avenida Ribeira das Naus, where many of the Portuguese 
explorers' ships were built, and which opened last year as a new waterfront 
focus for the city. It has terracing with deckchairs where you can soak up the 
morning sun after picking up a breakfast of abica (espresso) coffee and pastel 
de nata (custard tart) from a kiosk. A water garden will be finished here later 
this year.

2. Lisbon's biggest food market, the lively Mercado da Ribeira (Avenida 24 de 
Julho, 6am-2pm, closed Sun), was built at the end of the 19th century and 
topped by a Moorish dome. Among the flowers and regional cheeses,varinas 
(fishwives), who once sold their wares from flat-bottomed baskets balanced on 
their heads, offer a selection of cuttlefish and clams, moray eels and sea 
bass. At weekends handicrafts and antiques are also on offer.

View Cais de Sodre, Lisbon 
<https://maps.google.com/maps/ms?ie=UTF8&hl=en&oe=UTF8&msa=0&msid=203887949342033605063.0004f3613042465f51f3d&t=m&ll=38.707331,-9.1435&spn=0.005861,0.009871&z=16&source=embed>
 in a larger map 
3. Wind your way to the beautiful Praça de São Paulo, a superb example of 
Pombaline <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pombaline_style> architecture (the 
Marquês de Pombal helped to plan the rebuilding of Lisbon after the 1755 
earthquake). It is dominated by the church of São Paulo, which is worth a look 
for its painted ceilings. The characteristic mosaic-style cobbles in the square 
date from 1849. The iron kiosk – another typical Lisbon sight – dates from the 
early 20th century. In summer, there are seats all around it where you can 
linger over a coffee.

4. Just across the road is Branco sobre Branco 
<http://www.brancosobrebranco.com/>, an interior design shop where Vera Moreira 
and Paula Laranjo create unique pieces of furniture from cork and oak, drawing 
on Portuguese traditions in their designs. Look out for the eye-catching, 
latticed wooden topped boxes and the striking framed beetles.
 Casa de Pasto restaurant 
5. Casa de Pasto restaurant <http://www.casadepasto.com/> recalls 19th-century 
Lisbon, with lace curtains at the windows and painted flowers on the ceilings, 
though Diogo Noronha's delectable dishes marry modern methods with Portugal's 
culinary traditions. A classic, if heavy, choice would be kale soup with 
chorizo (€3.50) followed by the duck rice (€9).

6. Walk off lunch by heading up the long Rua do Alecrim towards Bairro Alto. 
There are several places worth stopping at, from the contemporaryAllarts Gallery
 <http://allartsgallery.com/>, which holds exhibitions by renowned artists such 
as ceramicistBela Silva <http://www.belasilva.com/> (until 17 May) to d'Orey & 
Cardoso <http://doreytiles.pt/wp/>a treasure trove of azulejos (antique tiles) 
that are part of many a Lisbon facade. Its range stretches from the 15th to the 
20th century, with tiles from €5 to €900.

7. For the best chocolate cake in town, dip into the wonderfully atmospheric 
Landeau cafe <http://www.landeau.pt/> around the corner.
 O Bom, O Mau e O Vilao 
8. As evening approaches, head to the bars on Rua do Alecrim. This is where 
you can see the new side of Cais do Sodré at play.O Bom, O Mau e O Vilão 
<https://www.facebook.com/obomomaueovilao>  translates as The Good, the Bad and 
the Ugly, and sets the tone for this new cocktail bar. Its list of 21 gins 
makes it a good choice for a drink – or two – before dinner.

9. After your aperitif, move on down to the riverside, where an old salt 
warehouse on a wharf has been converted into a range of bars and restaurants.Ibo
 <http://www.ibo-restaurante.pt/> serves Mozambican food with a Portuguese 
twist, such as spicy octopus stew. Next door isVestigius 
<http://www.vestigius.pt/>, a wine bar that runs art exhibitions and musical 
events.

10. End your day at Station <http://www.station-club.com/> a restaurant, bar 
and club over two floors where you can sit by the window and watch the Lisbon 
night sky punctuated by lights from the25 de Abril Bridge 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/25_de_Abril_Bridge> – a Golden Gate lookalike, 
named after the revolution – 40 years ago last week– that ended the 
dictatorship . If it is a Thursday, Friday or Saturday, you can dance upstairs 
to DJs who play until the sun comes up over the water in front of you.

11. Local's tip
 Sol e Pesca, Lisbon 
Ana Rodrigues, , marketing director, Heritage Hotel Group Rough, ready and 
incredibly popular,Sol e Pesca <http://www.solepesca.com/S/Home.html>is a 
fishing tackle shop that now houses a bar selling and serving canned seafood, 
from sardines to octopus, accompanied by cornbread and local beer. This place 
buzzes until the early hours.

12. Where to stay
 Photograph: Stefano Pinci 
The beautifully blue LX Boutique Hotel <http://www.lxboutiquehotel.com/> has a 
welcoming feel and affordable prices. A taster dish of its not-to-be-missed 
Japanese food (and a glass of wine) is offered on the house to all guests every 
night and its distinctive decor draws on the capital's cultural history, with a 
floor inspired by fado music and one named after famous Lisbon poetFernando 
Pessoa <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fernando_Pessoa>.
