
Despite a rich history stretching back to Charlie Chaplin himself, the classic 
comedic custard pie is no laughing matter. Those thrown by Laurel, Hardy et al 
were,according to slapstick pioneer Mack Sennett 
<https://comedydissertation.wordpress.com/2013/03/14/pie-throwing-in-comedy-a-brief-history/>
, “full of a sort of paste and sticky stuff so that when they hit they didn’t 
splatter too much, but dripped nice and gooey”, while the favoured weapon of the
Tiswas Phantom Flan Flinger <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qPJ9a3JHfYE> seems 
to have, in fact, been coloured shaving foam (sorry, children of the 70s).

Instead, we’ll be looking at the custard tart, which has a far longer – and 
dare I say nobler – pedigree, dating back at least to the 14th century, when a 
doucet (possibly containing minced pork or bone marrow, but a sweet custard pie 
nonetheless), put in an appearance at the coronation banquet of Henry IV.

Not to be confused with the sweet, crisp Portuguese pastel de nata, or indeed 
the creme patissiere-filledflan nature favoured by the French, the similar 
tarts found in every high-street baker until relatively recently boasted a 
biscuity, shortcrust shell filled with a firm, distinctly eggy and only 
moderately sweet custard dusted with nutmeg. These days, like phone boxes and 
ready-salted Chipsticks, they’re harder to find – which is all the excuse I 
need to get the rolling pin out.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4czy9%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4czy9%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F29%2F1443544456811%2Fe2a41c89-14ed-446b-9332-0abfdb6daee3-2060x1545.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20custard%20tart&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4czy9%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+custard+tart&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4czy9%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F29%2F1443544456811%2Fe2a41c89-14ed-446b-9332-0abfdb6daee3-2060x1545.jpeg>
 Jane Grigson’s custard tart. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
The pastry

I reject any recipes calling for puff or flaky pastry on the grounds of their 
suspiciously foreign influence – shortcrust is the only thing good enough for 
my custard. (Also, Julian Baggini may know a lot about philosophy but I disagree
with his claim that shortcrust is “less flavoursome” than puff and fails to 
“provide as much textural contrast with the smooth custard” 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/feb/18/custard-tart-brits-portugal-pasteis-de-nata>
.)

Jane Grigson opts for a plain version 
<http://neilcooksgrigson.blogspot.co.uk/2010/11/264-coronation-doucet.html> in 
English Food; the Leiths Baking Bible, Marcus Wareingand Justin Gellatly 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/nov/11/justin-piers-gellatly-st-john>
 a rich, sweet shortcrust with sugar and eggs; and Constance Spry recommends a 
pate brisee with so much water that I have to start again, while cursing the 
entire French nation she credits the recipe to.

Wareing, who credits his recipe to his nan 
<http://www.greatbritishchefs.com/recipes/marcus-wareing-custard-tart-recipe>, 
baked custard tarts for the Queen’s 80th birthday banquet in 2006. He reckons 
that “crisp, melt-in-the-mouth pastry” is “the hallmark of this traditional 
English tart” – which seems to dictate a sweet pastry. Not only does sugar make 
pastry crisper, but it will also allow for a more subtly flavoured filling.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4czy9%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4czy9%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F29%2F1443544552975%2F455b0586-6bf1-4d72-b3cb-05e1ef98dfbe-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20custard%20tart&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4czy9%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+custard+tart&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4czy9%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F29%2F1443544552975%2F455b0586-6bf1-4d72-b3cb-05e1ef98dfbe-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Marcus Wareing’s custard tart Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
However, his very rich, buttery pastry is incredibly fragile; I find 
Gellatly’s slightly more robust stuff much easier to work with. His advice “to 
let your pastry case get a little browner than you think it should be at the 
blind-baking stage” also proves invaluable. Many a great custard tart has been 
felled by soggy pastry, and Spry, who mysteriously does not suggest blind 
baking, and Grigson – who blind bakes hers but neglects to mention putting it 
back in the oven for a couple of minutes without the baking beans – both let 
themselves down here. It’s vital, when dealing with a filling as liquid as 
this, to prepare your pastry defences with meticulous care and to invest in an 
insurance policy of beaten egg for good measure.

Wareing adds lemon zest to his pastry, which, lovely as it is, overpowers the 
flavour of the custard – Gary Rhodes’s grated nutmeg is a much more harmonious 
addition and allows for a double whammy of my favourite sweet spice.

Eggs

The base of every good custard, the superlative Bird’s 
<http://www.birdscustard.co.uk/> excepted. Rhodes, Gellatly and Wareing use 
yolks alone; Leiths whole eggs, and Grigson and Spry a mixture of the two. The 
more yolks, of course, the richer the colour and flavour of the result, but the 
proteins in egg whites will give the custard the firmer consistency I remember 
as the hallmark of the bakers’ tarts of my youth. A combination seems a wise 
compromise.

Dairy
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4czy9%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4czy9%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F29%2F1443544610262%2Ff68429c9-2a57-4f7f-8a1e-85a367f2ff60-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20custard%20tart&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4czy9%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+custard+tart&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4czy9%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F29%2F1443544610262%2Ff68429c9-2a57-4f7f-8a1e-85a367f2ff60-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Constance Spry’s custard tart. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Spry, whose custard merits a single, damning “underwhelming” in my notes, uses 
only “creamy milk” and melted butter, thickened with a little flour (which must 
be the French influence). Leiths’ recipe, with its milk and single cream, is 
better, though still rather plain – but it’s Grigson, Gellatly and Wareing who 
take the custard crowns (if anyone would like to make me a custard crown, 
please feel free).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4czy9%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4czy9%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F29%2F1443544678555%2F18e9a36c-79ef-4736-87ac-c3fc7e990317-2060x1409.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20custard%20tart&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4czy9%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+custard+tart&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4czy9%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F29%2F1443544678555%2F18e9a36c-79ef-4736-87ac-c3fc7e990317-2060x1409.jpeg>
 Justin Gellatly’s custard tart. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
The richest version of all comes from Gellatly, who claims in his book Bread, 
Cake, Doughnut, Pudding 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/may/17/justine-gellatly-baking-recipes>
, that he has received marriage proposals on the strength of it, and uses 
double cream. Rhodes and Wareing go for the slightly lighter whipping version, 
and Grigson a mixture of double and Channel Island milk (in heavy favour of the 
former, admittedly).

Now, I’m not saying I wouldn’t get down on one knee in front of Gellatly, 
married or not, in the hope he would keep me in custard for the rest of my 
natural life, but the delicate quiver of both his and Wareing’s decadently 
creamy tarts sets them far apart from the more robust traditional version. 
They’re more like a creme brulee in pastry, to be picked at with a silver fork 
rather than snaffled warm from a paper bag. That said, Spry’s spartan version 
wobbles rather too far to the eggy side: a mixture of whipping cream and 
Guernsey milk seems to offer the ideal formula for a custard that’s rich and 
smooth, but not overwhelmingly so.

Flavourings
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4czy9%2Fsfb%23img-6&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4czy9%2Fsfb%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F29%2F1443544726443%2Fd7ccfbbd-2169-409c-8320-1afce78d1038-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20custard%20tart&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4czy9%2Fstw%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+custard+tart&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4czy9%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F29%2F1443544726443%2Fd7ccfbbd-2169-409c-8320-1afce78d1038-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Leiths custard tart. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Medieval tarts would seem rather plain for modern tastes; Grigson’s version, 
based on a doucet, uses a scant tablespoon of honey, or the even pricier sugar, 
while everyone else sticks in at least five times that. The exact amount 
depends on personal taste (use honey if you prefer, though it does have a 
stronger flavour), but I like custard tarts less sweet than pouring custard or 
indeed creme brulee, particularly with this sweet, crunchy pastry.

Grigson infuses her recipe with saffron, Gellatly and Leiths vanilla, and Spry 
orange flower water – all excellent possibilities for the curious, but this is 
one place where my favourite sweet spice, nutmeg, has no equal. Nothing goes 
better with eggs and it gives the tart a pleasingly freckled top, too.

Temperature

As always with custard, low and slow is the way to go; Spry’s 200C gives a 
slightly scrambled texture, while Gellatly’s 120C is gloriously silky. This is 
not a dessert that can be rushed, either in the execution or the enjoyment. 
Prolong the delicious anticipation by allowing it to cool to room temperature 
for maximum eating pleasure.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4czy9%2Fsfb%23img-7&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4czy9%2Fsfb%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F29%2F1443544779871%2F69deb29f-c24c-4623-9134-07f3945abbc3-2060x1545.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20custard%20tart&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4czy9%2Fstw%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+custard+tart&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4czy9%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F29%2F1443544779871%2F69deb29f-c24c-4623-9134-07f3945abbc3-2060x1545.jpeg>
 Felicity Cloake’s perfect custard tart. Photograph: Felicity Cloake 
(serves 6-8)
For the pastry
225g plain flour
115g cold butter, grated
85g caster sugar
Fine salt
Nutmeg, to grate
3 egg yolks, beaten, plus 1 whole egg (for brushing)

For the custard
375g whipping cream
90g creamy milk
2 eggs, plus 2 yolks
60g caster sugar, or to taste

Rub together the flour and butter or whizz briefly in a food processor until 
you get coarse breadcrumbs. Mix in the sugar, a good pinch of salt and a 
generous grating of nutmeg then add the beaten yolks, a little at a time, until 
the pastry begins to come together; you may not need them all. Form into a 
ball, flatten then wrap and refrigerate for at least two hours, or overnight.

Get the pastry out of the fridge to soften slightly while you grease a 21-23cm 
tart tin well. Roll out the pastry on a lightly floured surface as thinly as 
possible and use to line the tin, being careful not to stretch it, and using a 
ball of excess pastry to ease it into the sides. Leave it overhanging the edges 
and prick the base with a fork. Put in the freezer for 45 minutes, or the 
fridge for 1.5 hours.

Heat the oven and a baking tray to 180C. Line the tart with foil and baking 
beans or rice, and bake for about 20-25 minutes until golden brown. Remove the 
beans and foil, patch up any holes with excess pastry and bake for another 10 
minutes, then brush with the beaten whole egg and bake for another 2 minutes. 
Set aside to cool completely and turn down the oven to 120, leaving the tray in.

Put the cream and milk in a heavy-based pan and bring slowly to a simmer. 
Meanwhile, whisk together the eggs, yolks and sugar in a heatproof bowl. Pour 
the hot cream mixture into the bowl, whisking continuously, then add more sugar 
to taste. Strain into a jug.

Put the tart shell into the oven and carefully pour the custard into it (this 
makes it less likely to spill). Grate nutmeg over the top and bake for about 
35-45 minutes until there is just the faintest wobble in the middle when 
shaken. Allow to cool completely before trimming the sides of the pastry and 
cutting.

What’s happened to the Great British custard tart – are they alive and well 
where you are? If not, are they missed or do you prefer more exotic versions?
