
Whenever someone claims there are “two kinds of people in the world 
<http://2kindsofpeople.tumblr.com/>” – extroverts and introverts, realists and 
idealists, optimists and pessimists – you can be pretty sure they’re 
oversimplifying. But here’s one that’s useful nonetheless: in your 
relationships with other people, you’re almost certainly anoverfunctioner or an 
underfunctioner <http://www.willmeekphd.com/overfunctioning-underfunctioning/>. 
Faced with a challenge, you either switch into fixing mode, taking control, 
attacking the to-do list, and offering supposedly helpful advice; or you pull 
back, pleading for assistance, hoping others will take responsibility, and zone 
out. Put that way, it sounds like OFs are the productive (if slightly 
irritating) ones, while UFs are freeloading losers. But the true situation’s 
much murkier, and more interesting, than that.

The problem – according to Murray Bowen 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Murray_Bowen>, the psychologist who developed 
the distinction – is that OFs and UFs get stuck in a mutually reinforcing trap. 
The OF takes on more than his or her fair share of responsibility for (say) 
housework, parenting, or finances, because otherwise they don’t get done. But 
that just reinforces the UF’s dependency, so now those tasksreally don’t get 
done, and the OF must do even more. The relationship curdles, each accusing the 
other of either laziness or nagging. Once you learn of the OF/UF pattern, it’s 
hard to avoid seeing it everywhere: not only in marriages, but in the sulky 
teen who gets more passive the more his parents anxiously try to instil a sense 
initiative, or in the micromanaging boss who’s surprised to find that the more 
they meddle in their underlings’ work, the more they need to, because they have 
taken on their responsibilities.

If you’re reading this, and if you’re interested in these kinds of questions 
in general, the chances are you’re prone to overfunctioning, like me. (Let’s 
face it: making suggestions in a newspaper about how others ought to live is 
basically just pathological overfunctioning.) The thorny part is that it’s hard 
to perceive overfunctioning as a problem at all. OFs and UFs alike tend to 
think of OFs as the people whose lives are in order, who get things done, while 
UFs get defined as the “problem child”, the difficult partner in 
a relationship, or the insufficiently motivated employee. Yet taking control is 
how OFs soothe their anxiety – just like accepting that control is how UFs 
soothe theirs. “For overfunctioners,”says Brené Brown 
<http://www.nottobetrustedwithknives.com/2011/11/02/on-being-vulnerable-and-connecting/>
, “it’s easier to do than to feel.”

Related: Why cabin fantasies shut out reality 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/06/cabin-fantasies-reality-oliver-burkeman>

Breaking the pattern is tough, because the OF needs to step back and do less, 
which means potentially letting bad things happen and tolerating the resulting 
anxiety. (Harriet Lerner, who popularised the OF/UF idea in her bookThe Dance 
Of Anger <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/dance-of-anger.html>, calls this 
“hanging in”: neither taking on the other’s responsibilities, nor checking out 
emotionally.) And don’t expect the UF to approve at first, either, since being 
pushed toward more responsibility is anxiety-inducing, too. Still, it’s the 
only way. To quote the psychologistCarin Rubenstein 
<http://videos.simonandschuster.co.uk/dr-carin-rubenstein-the-superior-wife-syndrome/34355265001>
, overfunctioners need a new motto: “Be less than you can be!”

oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com <>
