
The wilder, greener sister of the baking and crafting revolution, growing your 
own is in bloom.

Veg boxes, food swaps, pop-up gardens and pick your own flower farms; Britain 
is striving for a sustained connection to our kitchens, our gardens and the 
very soil beneath our feet. Thinking globally, growing and eating socially and 
seasonally, the local foodshed brims with homegrown pea tips, purple sprouting 
broccoli, raspberries and redcurrants. Allotmenteers jostle for space with 
urbanites, young families with birds that love birds. Fat blueberries, smoky 
figs, the tang of early lettuce. Fragile beans that squeak and taste of earth. 
This is as good as life gets: sustainable, aspirational DIY, and a ripe cherry 
for television to pick.

No pear is more exquisite than the one you have grown yourself and 
ceremoniously sliced. No blackberries more delicious than your own scant 
handful, the thrill made more intense by their scarcity. A knobbly beetroot, 
blemished and scuffed with nature's perfection. A courgette or an armful. What 
makes us celebrate is not only what we have, but how it came to be.

Yet, blinded perhaps by bunting and ratings, BBC Two's new offering The Big 
Allotment Challenge <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p01wjhcx> has missed this 
hidden trophy, that gardening is the hero here. Spontaneous, opportunistic, of 
light and weather, of choosing seeds and lengthening days. Instead, the process 
is an awkward add-on, squeezed to fit a cake-shaped hole. No early spring 
thinnings before late fudgy carrots, or the subtleties of June versus July. No 
fast lettuce, slow kale, no to lingering to nibble. No mowing, pinching, 
grafting work. With a format to stick to, it's military carrots, curd making, 
jellying, table art. But gardening is rhythm and time and cycles. It's the 
longest day and the last risk of frost. It's pruning roses and digging 
potatoes, and picking when the time is right.

Has The Big Allotment Challenge been made by people who have never grown 
anything? Never known the sowing, growing and picking regime? They've heard 
about thrips and fungal infections, about grandad's drainpipe, his glads and 
pot mums.

Pristine veg can be bought at Tesco, shrink wrapped, cut and ready to eat. But 
the Big Allotment Challenge shrink wraps gardening, and misses what is beyond 
the plate.

â€¢ Lucy Bellamy is a gardener and a former contestant on The Great British 
Bakeoff <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Great_British_Bake_Off_%28series_4%29>
.
