
London Live <http://www.theguardian.com/media/london-live>, the TV channel 
being launched by the Evening Standard, will start broadcasting on 31 March.

The channel, backed by London Evening Standard 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/london-evening-standard> and Independent 
owners Alexander Lebedev and his son Evgeny, was earmarked for launch during 
that month and has filed formal notification to media regulator Ofcom of the 31 
March date.

London Live will be available on Freeview channel 8, Sky channel 117 and 
Virgin Media channel 159. London Live executives had been pushing for a more 
high-profile slot on Virgin Media's cable TV service.

The channel is understood to have picked the last day of the March in order to 
make sure all the technical elements have been worked out at its studios in the 
offices of its newspaper stablemates in Derry Street, west London.

The launch has been touted in some quarters as the biggest in UK TV since 
Channel 5 was unveiled in 1997.

On Monday, the Evening Standard began the first stage of an increase in 
newspaper distributionfrom 700,000 to 900,000 copies a day 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade?page=2>, a 29% increase, to 
support the launch of the TV channel.

The increased distribution will see the Evening Standard made available in 250 
new locations, such as major supermarkets, across all of London's 32 boroughs 
to match the reach of London Live across the capital.

London Live has pledged five-and-a-half hours of news a day, as well as at 
least one hour of original current affairs programming,overseen by Vikki Cook, 
a former Sky News executive 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/oct/13/london-live-tv-station-launch>.

In December, it unveiled news presenters 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/dec/11/london-live-unveils-news-current-affairs-anchors>
 Marc Edwards, a presenter on France 24 and EuroSport who also voiced Danny 
Boyle's London 2012 opening ceremony; Louise Scodie, a broadcaster and writer 
with credits including Marie Claire, the Jewish Chronicle and shopping channel 
bid-up.tv; Claudia Liza Armah, who has presented BBC3's 60 Seconds news update 
and BBC News Interactive; and Gavin Ramjaun, who has worked on ITV's This 
Morning and Daybreak as well as CBBC Newsround and BBC Sport.

The channel has a budget of £15m a year and has signed a number of deals for 
hundreds of hours of London-themed archive programming 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/nov/07/evening-standard-london-live-peep-show-local-tv>
.

A deal with Channel 4 includes comedies Peep Show, Spaced, Smack the Pony and 
dramas such as White Teeth and Misfits.

A deal with BBC Worldwide includes shows such as Twenty Twelve and The Shadow 
Line.

The station is also commissioning its own programming, including a deal with 
Jamie Oliver's production company, Fresh One, to make a series about passionate 
foodies based in London.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.


