
By the time you read this, I’m afraid, it’ll be too late to attend the 
Christmas concert of the community choir to which I’ve belonged for a while now 
<http://brooklyncommunitychorus.org/wp/>. I know, I know, you’re gutted. But 
maybe it’s better that way: the weekly rehearsals have become such an oddly 
transporting highlight of my week that it almost feels too personal to mention 
in public. I’m not alone in this, I realise. These days,with amateur singing 
exploding in popularity 
<http://www.stylist.co.uk/life/the-rise-of-the-choir-and-ensemble-singing-groups>
, there’s no happiness advice less original than “Join a choir!” So it’s 
strange that we still don’t really understandwhy it feels so good. In 1997, 
when Steven Pinker wroteHow The Mind Works 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/how-the-mind-works-265221.html> – a book that 
explains almost everything you think or feel in terms of evolutionary 
advantages – even he couldn’t think of one for music. It was probably just 
“auditory cheesecake”, he concluded: a fun but pointless extra we get as a 
byproduct of language.

Perhaps. But there are hints to the contrary in new research from Goldsmiths 
college <http://www.gold.ac.uk/news/popchoir/>, comparing the benefits of 
singing in big and small groups. The participants belonged toPopchoir 
<http://www.popchoir.com>, a network of smaller choirs that occasionally meet 
to sing in a 232-person “mega-choir”. That meant researchers could account for 
the argument that the main benefit is just hanging out with friends: members of 
the small choirs knew each other, but the mega-choir members mainly didn’t. Yet 
the impact of a 90-minute rehearsal on singers’ sense of social bonding was 
bigger for the large group. Before and after rehearsals, singers also wore 
blood pressure-monitoring cuffs, inflated until they experienced extreme 
discomfort; singing, it turned out, also increased their pain threshold.

One possibility here, then, is that singing facilitates bonding in groups that 
would otherwise be too large to coordinate, giving them a clear survival 
advantage when clashing with enemies, among other things. It could even be that 
“our ancestors turned loud singing into a central element of their defence 
system against predators”, writes Joseph Jordania, an ethnomusicologist, inWhy 
Do People Sing? 
<http://www.amazon.com/People-Sing-Music-Human-Evolution/dp/9941401861> “They 
started using loud, rhythmic singing and shouting accompanied by vigorous, 
threatening body movements” to terrify opponents. My faltering attempt to make 
it through a Haydn fugue, in other words, might have its origins in something 
more akin toa Maori haka <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cvw2eXoyLLs>.

Related: What’s the secret of good writing? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/11/column-change-life-very-expensive-secret-good-writing-oliver-burkeman>

But anyone who has ever sung in a choir already knows it’s about more than 
hanging out with friends. Group singing is a perfect case of the whole being 
greater than the sum of its parts. For entirely non-magical reasons – such as 
the averaging out of flat and sharp voices – a choir can sound far better than 
its individual members’ talents might suggest. The result is 
self-transcendence: the thing only works on a level bigger than oneself. “As 
long as I’m singing,”writes Stacy Horn in Imperfect Harmony 
<http://www.npr.org/2013/06/03/188355968/imperfect-harmony-how-chorale-singing-changes-lives>
, her memoir of singing in a Manhattan amateur choir, “it’s as if I’m 
inhabiting another reality. I become temporarily suspended in a world where 
everything bad is bearable, and everything good feels possible.” There are 
worse ways to spend an evening.

 * oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com <mailto:oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com> 