
Choosing whether to vote in or out in the EU referendum 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> is potentially one of the 
biggest and longest-lasting decisions you will ever be asked to make. It is 
also a very good excuse for an extra run. Your polling station is likely to be 
only a warm-up from your home, and can be the beginning of a rewarding and 
purposeful run.

You can exercise your democratic right at the same time as exercising your 
body.GoodGym <http://www.goodgym.org/>, UKRunChat, 
<http://www.uksportschat.co.uk/> Marathon Talk <http://www.marathontalk.com/> 
andOurParks <http://www.ourparks.org.uk/> are backing the idea:


Joe Williams of UKRunChat said:


It’s always great to have a reason to run as it helps to keep you motivated – 
be it a distance, time, a route that you just really enjoy, or to the polling 
station. I will be running just under half a mile to my local station, so not 
quite a mile in total.

Related: Good Gym: running with a mission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/the-running-blog/2014/jan/03/good-gym-running-mission-community>

As GoodGym runners, we are always looking for excuses to do something useful 
as part of our runs – many of us run to visit isolated older people; some of 
the million who are always or often lonely. Having a destination and being 
expected brings a different dynamic to the run: it might speed you up, it might 
spur you on to run through some nasty weather, and it will will give you a 
deeper sense of connection to where you live.


The referendum is another opportunity to add another dimension to your run. 
Seize it. Have an extra run and tag your run #runtovote on Strava and social 
media.


Born Barikor, founder of OurParks says:

Turn voting day into an exercise opportunity, make it part of your warm up or 
cool down, run to your local polling station and feel doubly good about voting 
while letting out those exercise endorphins.
