
When Rubina Yeasmin was 13, her father died of a heart attack. Her mother 
scraped together the money to keep her in school but finances became 
increasingly tight. “My uncle said I must leave school and get married.”

She grew up in Topshe village in Dinajpur district, in northern Bangladesh. 
According to aUnicef report 
<http://www.unicef.org/publications/files/SOWC_2015_Summary_and_Tables.pdf> 
(pdf) published last year, 65% of girls in Bangladesh are married before the 
age of 18, and 29% before they are 15. For poor families, early marriage can 
ease financial pressure as it means one less mouth to feed. It can also negate 
the need for girls to be educated.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gtp7%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gtp7%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f650a198a9c5f291867e8fce2d0ee4a521a0c0e%2F1199_308_1704_2130%2F1704.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dresses%20to%20degrees%3A%20university%20opens%20its%20doors%20to%20Bangladesh%20garment%20workers%20%7C%20Sarah%20Lazarus&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gtp7%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dresses+to+degrees%3A+university+opens+its+doors+to+Bangladesh+garment+workers+%7C+Sarah+Lazarus&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gtp7%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f650a198a9c5f291867e8fce2d0ee4a521a0c0e%2F1199_308_1704_2130%2F1704.jpg>
 Rubina Yeasmin 
Yeasmin refused to marry and fought to be allowed to complete her education. 
Her family gave in and she stayed at school. On graduating, she moved to Dhaka, 
the capital, to work as a quality control inspector in one of the city’s many 
garment factories.

Her employer, the Ananta Group <http://www.ananta-bd.com/>, makes clothes for 
H&M, Gap and Next. Yeasmin worked overtime, boosting her earnings to about 
10,000 taka (£91) a month and sending money home so her younger brother, Murad, 
could go to school too.

She could not imagine her situation improving, until she was called to a 
meeting at the factory and learned of a scheme – the first of its kind – 
launched by theAsian University for Women <http://www.auw.edu.bd/> (AUW) to 
provide free university education to women working in Bangladesh’s garment 
factories.

“I jumped to my feet,” she says. “I was the first one to stand up and say, ‘I 
will apply’.”

The AUW opened in 2008 in Chittagong to educate the brightest young women with 
the greatest potential, and create a new generation of female leaders. The AUW 
is a regional university,attracting students from 15 countries in Asia and the 
Middle East <http://asian-university.org/impact/>.

It is funded by donors including the Ikea Foundation and the Bill and Melinda 
Gates Foundation. Its founder, Bangladeshi-American Kamal Ahmad, says that, 
unlike most Asian universities, which admit only those able to pay fees, “our 
cardinal principle is to recruit the most talented people, irrespective of 
background”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gtp7%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gtp7%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2f46453f17aa524f4c1ccd13139eb98d27f42a3%2F269_191_4250_2551%2F4250.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dresses%20to%20degrees%3A%20university%20opens%20its%20doors%20to%20Bangladesh%20garment%20workers%20%7C%20Sarah%20Lazarus&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gtp7%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dresses+to+degrees%3A+university+opens+its+doors+to+Bangladesh+garment+workers+%7C+Sarah+Lazarus&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gtp7%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2f46453f17aa524f4c1ccd13139eb98d27f42a3%2F269_191_4250_2551%2F4250.jpg>
 Sonia Akter 
Sonia Akter is in her fourth year at the AUW. She grew up in the village of 
Mushuria, Tangail district, “where no girl had ever attended university 
before”, she says.

She took advantage of an earlier initiative to recruit poorer students to the 
AUW via theGrameen Bank <http://www.grameen.com/>, Bangladesh’s Nobel 
prize-winning microfinance institution.


An exceptionally bright student, according to her teachers, she has completed 
internships in Cambodia and India. During the latter spell she worked on a 
project withKiran Bedi <http://www.kiranbedi.com/>, India’s first female police 
officer, to encourage women to start businesses. Last summer, she won a 
scholarship to attend theLucerne Academy for Human Rights Implementation 
<https://www.unilu.ch/en/study/courses-exams-regulations/faculty-of-law/courses/lucerne-academy-for-human-rights-implementation/>
 in Switzerland.


“When I left my village, members of the community criticised my mother for 
allowing me to go, but their attitudes are changing because they have seen what 
I’ve achieved,” she says. “To visit home, I have to walk from the bus station 
to the village. It used to take 30 minutes. Now it takes at least two hours 
because so many people come to talk to me. The same people who used to believe 
that educating girls was pointless are starting to want the same for their 
daughters. If I can make female education popular in my village, then I can do 
it for the whole ofBangladesh <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bangladesh>.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gtp7%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gtp7%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4dbc6e1761ae1b635df3fff1f94dbc3e06055a1e%2F359_441_3871_2323%2F3871.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dresses%20to%20degrees%3A%20university%20opens%20its%20doors%20to%20Bangladesh%20garment%20workers%20%7C%20Sarah%20Lazarus&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gtp7%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dresses+to+degrees%3A+university+opens+its+doors+to+Bangladesh+garment+workers+%7C+Sarah+Lazarus&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gtp7%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4dbc6e1761ae1b635df3fff1f94dbc3e06055a1e%2F359_441_3871_2323%2F3871.jpg>
 Mowmita Basak 
The garment factory workers’ university fees are covered by charitable 
donations, but the AUW requires factory owners to continue to pay wages while 
the women study. Their families rely on the income and would not let them 
attend otherwise. Mowmita Basak, one of the AUW’s first graduates, was given 
the task of convincing factory owners to agree to these terms and send their 
employees. She recently returned to her native Bangladesh, having completed a 
master’s degree at the UK’s University of Bradford.





“I didn’t get a very positive response at first,” says Basak. But her 
impassioned argument that this was a golden opportunity for them to support 
their workforce and improve their reputation, countering the storm of negative 
publicity triggered by thecollapse of Rana Plaza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/rana-plaza> in 2013, and the widespread 
perception of garment factories as sweatshops, won out. Five owners signed up.

“Next, I visited factories and gave presentations to the workers,” says Basak. 
“Only girls who had completed high school were eligible to apply, and the 
selection process was competitive.” Candidates took exams in mathematics, 
Bengali and English, and those who passed were interviewed.

Of 653 applicants, 22 were offered a place in the first intake this year. 
Yeasmin was one of them. In January, she started a two-year preparatory course 
before embarking on the university’s liberal arts curriculum. “I never imagined 
this could happen to someone like me,” she says. “It’s like a dream come true.”

 * Sarah Lazarus travelled to Chittagong with FleishmanHillard, which supports 
the AUW
