
At the recent World Humanitarian Summit in Istanbul, more than 9,000 
participants made a three-fold commitment to people in crisis all over the 
world. We pledged to improve our response to people caught up in natural 
disasters and conflicts; to empower them as the agents of their own recovery; 
and to summon greater political will to prevent and end the wars which are 
causing so much suffering.

The challenge we face is unprecedented. Around the world, 130 million people 
need humanitarian aid. More than 60 million people have been forcibly displaced 
from their homes. Despite their precarious conditions, there is a severe lack 
of funding to assist them – raising basic questions about global solidarity in 
a world of great wealth.

Related: 'We are demanding change': the Somali woman taking on international 
NGOs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/mar/21/degan-ali-somali-woman-taking-on-the-humanitarian-system>

The massive extent of this challenge meant this had to be a different kind of 
summit. For the first time, people affected by crises worked alongside world 
leaders, heads of NGOs, civil society and the private sector to find solutions. 
This diversity of voices was an achievement in itself.

I met many people affected by crisis, and spoke with brave aid workers. People 
on the front lines, often in the poorest countries in the world, show enormous 
commitment to helping families and communities in crisis. The international 
community as a whole must do more.

My Agenda for Humanity <http://sgreport.worldhumanitariansummit.org/>, drawn 
up in advance of the summit, outlined five areas for collective action: 
preventing and ending conflict; respect for the rules of war; leaving no one 
behind; working differently to end needs; and investing in humanity. The summit 
recorded nearly 3,000 individual and collective commitments in support of these 
five core areas, including many from countries affected by crisis.

A “Grand Bargain 
<http://blog.worldhumanitariansummit.org/entries/how-grand-is-the-grand-bargain/>
” between 30 top donors and aid agencies should reduce management costs, 
provide more flexible funding and give affected people a bigger voice in the 
decisions that will shape their lives.

Related: Nine commitments we want from the World Humanitarian Summit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/24/nine-commitments-we-want-from-the-world-humanitarian-summit>

The new Charter4Change <https://charter4change.org/> commits 27 international 
NGOs to channel one fifth of their funding to national organisations, in 
response to widespread calls for more local decision-making and funding.

The Vulnerable 20 Group of Finance Ministers 
<http://www.v-20.org/groundbreaking-new-preparedness-partnership-launch/> 
launched a Global Preparedness Partnership, which will help countries most at 
risk of crisis to prepare for future shocks.

Donors committed new funding to initiatives to protect women and girls from 
gender-based violence, and to ensure that millions of children in crisis can 
continue their education, addressing one of the most urgent priorities of 
refugees and displaced people around the world.

And the Summit won significant commitments to bridge the gap between 
humanitarian and development work; to create a new way of working together to 
reduce needs, manage risks and aim at common goals over longer timeframes.

Some 80% of humanitarian funding goes to manmade crises caused by conflict. So 
it was particularly significant that all the 173 Governments that were present 
committed to invest more in conflict prevention and peacebuilding, finding 
better solutions for refugees and internally displaced people, and pushing for 
practical measures to uphold the laws of war.

Related: The humanitarian system: 'A mammoth machinery losing track of what it 
is for' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/22/humanitarian-aid-system-power-concentrated-hands-of-few-losing-track>

Now we must turn these commitments into action. 

Later this year, I will report to the United Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> General Assembly and propose 
ways to take our commitments forward. The High-Level Meeting on large movements 
of Refugees and Migrants, to be held in New York on 19 September, will be a 
major opportunity to maintain momentum and build on the Summit’s achievements.

Civil society organisations were a dynamic presence in Istanbul, and I urge 
them to play an active role in monitoring States’ compliance with their 
commitments.

The World Humanitarian Summit was not an end point, but a turning point. The 
United Nations is committed to building on the momentum generated to work in 
partnership with world leaders, including those who could not be present, and 
with all stakeholders to support the most vulnerable people in our world.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
