
A scathing report released by a senator this week found that the American Red 
Cross spent about $125m in donor money forHaiti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/haiti> aid on fundraising, management and 
other expenses, and that officials refused to cooperate with investigators.

The Iowa Republican Chuck Grassley found “substantial and fundamental 
concerns” in the Red Cross, he concluded at the end ofa 309-page report 
<http://www.grassley.senate.gov/sites/default/files/constituents/2016-06-15%20Senator%20Grassley%20Red%20Cross%20Inquiry.pdf>
. His Senate commission investigation was prompted bya 2015 ProPublica and NPR 
report 
<https://www.propublica.org/article/how-the-red-cross-raised-half-a-billion-dollars-for-haiti-and-built-6-homes>
 in which said the Red Cross had builtonly six homes 
<https://www.propublica.org/article/how-the-red-cross-raised-half-a-billion-dollars-for-haiti-and-built-6-homes>
 in Haiti despite having received $488m from donors.

Grassley’s investigation found that an estimated $125m given to the Red Cross 
in the wake of Haiti’sdevastating earthquake in 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jul/10/haiti-earthquake-aid-survivors> 
went to management and fundraising expenses and “program costs”, a category 
that includes salaries, contract services, travel expenses and related costs. 
Most of the remaining $363m was “farmed out”, the report said, to partner 
organizations which worked on the island.

Partner organizations had their own expenses and overheads, and in one case 
documents showed the Red Cross gave$4.3m to a partner organization 
<https://www.propublica.org/documents/item/2861873-Senator-Grassley-s-report-on-the-Red-Cross-June.html#document/p93/a302552>
 with anadditional $2m 
<https://www.propublica.org/documents/item/2861873-Senator-Grassley-s-report-on-the-Red-Cross-June.html#document/p68/a302550>
 budgeted for “activities related” to management of the money.

“Despite this explanation, [the Red Cross] is unable to provide any financial 
evidence that oversight activities in fact occurred,” the report concluded.

In general, Grassley’s investigators found that the Red Cross was unable to 
calculate the cost of each project and program in Haiti, and “instead it uses a 
complex, yet inaccurate, process to track its spending”.

In a statement released in response, the Red Cross said it “strongly disagrees 
<http://www.redcross.org/news/press-release/Red-Cross-Responds-to-Grassley-Memo-Defends-Transparency-and-Spending-of-Donor-Dollars-in-Haiti>
” with the report’s conclusions, adding: “We have accounted for every penny 
spent in Haiti.”

Related: The Red Cross, Haiti and the 'black hole' of accountability for 
international aid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/05/red-cross-haiti-black-hole-accountability-international-aid>

The group provided its own 24-page breakdown 
<https://embed.widencdn.net/pdf/plus/americanredcross/ptgzfpe2ky/Red-Cross-Projects-and-Partnerships-in-Haiti.pdf?u=lr3pbf>
 of spending, which mirrored documents provided in the Grassley report.

The group noted that the report had not discovered “a single finding of fraud 
or abuse” and defended its expenses: “These are not overhead costs; they are 
legitimate expenses to implement humanitarian aid projects – and ensure they 
are properly implemented by our partners.”

The Red Cross insisted: “Our statement that 91 cents of every dollar donated 
went to our programs and services in Haiti is absolutely true.”


Grassley called for greater accountability, saying: “People who give 
generously to any charitable cause expect transparency and the careful use of 
every dollar.”

The senator also said Red Cross officials were reluctant to cooperate and even 
intransigent when investigators asked for documents.

“When the information was forthcoming, it became clear that the Red Cross does 
not know how much each project in Haiti cost,” he said ina statement 
<http://www.grassley.senate.gov/news/news-releases/grassley-releases-memo-red-cross%E2%80%99-haiti-earthquake-relief-response-finds-red>
. That information on expenses, he said, was “hard to come by”.

Grassley accused the American Red Cross president, Gail McGovern, of trying to 
terminate a review of the aid group, which is not a federal agency but is 
tax-exempt andchartered by Congress 
<http://www.redcross.org/about-us/history/federal-charter>. When the Government 
Accountability Office tried to audit the group following Hurricane Sandy, the 
report said, McGovern and the aid group’s attorney were “able to limit the 
scope of the GAO’s inquiry” after months of disputes about whether the Red 
Cross had handed over all the documents requested.

In its statement the aid group conceded that it had “raised legitimate issues 
about [the investigation’s] scope as going beyond that authorized by Congress”. 
But it added: “At no point did the Red Cross refuse to provide requested 
information.”

“We did not get satisfactory answers,” Grassley told ProPublica 
<https://www.propublica.org/article/senator-red-cross-misled-congress-refused-to-level-with-people-haiti-money>
. “It was like pulling teeth.”

The Iowan also found that the Red Cross’s internal ethics and accountability 
unit has only three people on staff, even though the organization works with 
hundreds of volunteers and thousands of employees.

International nonprofits largely operate free of oversight, and the Red Cross 
has been criticized for mismanagement after theSeptember 11, 2001 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2002/06/05/nyregion/red-cross-is-pressed-to-open-its-books.html?pagewanted=1>
 attacks and hurricanesKatrina 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2005/12/30/politics/senators-press-red-cross-for-a-full-accounting.html>
 andSandy <http://www.propublica.org/article/the-red-cross-secret-disaster>. 
The Red Cross retains good ratings from two watchdogs, CharityWatch and Charity 
Navigator, in large part because of its large and successful blood donation 
program.

The organization is also more accountable to government than most of its 
peers. Because of its relationship to Congress, the Red Cross delivers annual 
reports. The US army audits the group each year.

 “We expect that if 100% of donations aren’t going to beneficiaries, it had 
better be damn close to it,” journalist Jonathan Katz, the author of a book 
about the world’s chaotic response 
<https://www.amazon.com/Big-Truck-That-Went-Disaster/dp/1137278978> to the 
Haiti earthquake,wrote 
<https://twitter.com/KatzOnEarth/status/743822437905731585> on Twitter. 

“But that makes no damn sense. It costs money to buy stuff, ship stuff, hire 
staff, pay staff, oversee staff, move staff, etc, etc. A lot of money.”

He added: “Overhead in and of itself isn’t a bad thing. All that matters is 
whether the work that the group is doing is effective. In Haiti, for a lot of 
reasons, the answer was pretty clearly no. The [Red Cross] had no idea what to 
do with the money they raised.”

The American Red Cross is one of 185 societies around the world. Each has its 
own individual status and exercises no authority over the others.
