
Last summer, my partner Charlotte and I quit our jobs and went to work on a 
farm, leaving our flat of five years and giving our cat to an unwilling friend. 
We told everyone we didn’t know if we’d ever come back, which would have 
sounded hollow had it not been for the other people already sleeping in our 
bedroom.

Even so a French friend was sceptical of our plans. She was raised on a farm 
and my relaxed attitude to gruelling physical labour irked her. “Have you ever 
woken up at 3am to walk through shit and vaccinate 200 geese?” she asked. I 
hadn’t, and it dawned on me suddenly that I was about to become a middle-class 
cliché – idealistically labouring with my too-soft hands, willing the 
experience to end so I could write it up for the Observer.

My grandfather died just before we left, and we delayed our trip for the 
funeral: the first time in two years I’d seen many members of my family. Last 
time I’d been doing well in the traditional sense – good job, nice flat, 
long-term partner – so I was hesitant to tell my older, more conservative, 
relatives that we no longer had a fixed address and had just given all our 
money to a used-car dealer in exchange for a decrepit van. What could be more 
indulgent than ditching a responsible, stable existence to go and fanny about 
on a farm?

The term “Wwoofing” was coined in the 1970s by a London secretary, Sue Coppard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2006/mar/07/ethicalliving.lifeandhealth3>
, frustrated by her desk job. She proposedWorking Weekends On Organic Farms 
<http://www.wwoof.org.uk/> (now World Wide Opportunities on Organic Farms, or 
Wwoof) to give urbanites the opportunity to engage with the nascent organic 
movement. Volunteers offer their time to farmers and smallholders in exchange 
for bed and board. No money changes hands at any point and opportunities range 
from harvesting hops in the pissing rain in Kent to stamping grapes into Pinot 
Noir in the warmth of the Napa Valley.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hnca%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hnca%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8bf4a237dc3707c1c28e6bbbc227f1fcfa4e7417%2F0_461_968_581%2F968.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Down%20on%20the%20farm%3A%20Wwoofing%20in%20the%20Ard%C3%A8che%2C%20France&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hnca%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Down+on+the+farm%3A+Wwoofing+in+the+Ard%C3%A8che%2C+France&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hnca%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8bf4a237dc3707c1c28e6bbbc227f1fcfa4e7417%2F0_461_968_581%2F968.jpg>
 This way please: Charlotte after clearing an old terrace. Photograph: Courtesy 
of James Cartwright 
We go to Wwoof in the northern Ardèche, on an old silk farm just outside a 
small rural town. The property sprawls over a couple of acres, with sheltered 
terraces adorned with passionflowers, ruined outbuildings where we will 
sometimes eat supper, and a walled vegetable garden that’s wilting in the hot 
summer sun. There are chickens, three cats, two goats and a dog – ironically 
named Hippy. The goats are just there for show as they’re male and everyone’s 
vegetarian.

In the 35C heat the sweat on my back mingles with filth until I’m perpetually 
caked in clay

Our Dutch hosts, Jan and Inge, met 15 years ago in France, where they both 
went in search of a quieter pace of life, and their seven children (both were 
married before) drift in and out of the property during the month of our stay. 
Before Jan moved from the Netherlands he ran his own tapas restaurant, which is 
evident in the incredible meals he produces from nowhere, three times daily. 
Now he’s a full-time stonemason. He is quiet and measured but endlessly warm, 
and punctuates his only slightly broken English with abrupt, staccato laughter.

Jan’s pet project is a ruined farmhouse in a nearby pine woodland that he’s 
two years into restoring. He came across the structure quite by accident, 
hidden among overgrown vegetation in the middle of a plot purchased for reasons 
that never quite become clear. It’s the farmhouse that we are principally there 
to help with, as his intention is to move there some time in the next five 
years and live completely sustainably. The structure has to be reinforced and 
revamped, walls built, dry toilets installed, showers fitted, vegetable gardens 
planted, compost made, trees felled, logs stacked, and all manner of other 
tasks that support an off-grid lifestyle. He seems undeterred by the 
possibility that this may take the rest of his life to complete – finishing 
appears not to be the objective.

The work is hard. Apart from some fleeting stints on building sites, manual 
labour is new to me. I spend the first week digging out an old cellar with a 
pickaxe and shovel. In the 35C heat the sweat on my back mingles with filth 
until I’m perpetually caked in clay. At times my hands are so sodden that the 
pickaxe slides from my grip mid-swing. My T-shirt takes alternating roles as a 
bandana and towel.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hnca%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hnca%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd176f6bbf5c9e6b54f420fa9f88096487897db07%2F0_298_2592_1555%2F2592.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Down%20on%20the%20farm%3A%20Wwoofing%20in%20the%20Ard%C3%A8che%2C%20France&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hnca%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Down+on+the+farm%3A+Wwoofing+in+the+Ard%C3%A8che%2C+France&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hnca%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd176f6bbf5c9e6b54f420fa9f88096487897db07%2F0_298_2592_1555%2F2592.jpg>
 Tools down: lunch with Jan and Inge who are renovating the farmhouse. 
Photograph: Courtesy of James Cartwright 
Charlotte is set the intimidating task of clearing woodland down on old 
terraces earmarked for vegetables. I can’t imagine how such a small person will 
make a dent in this dense vegetation, but she has far more experience of manual 
labour than me – she’s a year into working on ecological and conservation 
projects, has her own overalls and can lay a hedge in an afternoon.

By the end of the week the land is clear and a monumental pile of felled trees 
and bushes heaped in its place, rendering my poky little cellar immediately 
less impressive. Then she shows Jan how to create dead hedges with the waste 
material. This seems to have implications for my manhood in rural France.

We sit in the sunshine gulping down mouthfuls of syrupy espresso and feeling 
smugly content

We try everything. We become builders, painters, carpenters and plumbers, 
gardeners, woodsmen, goat-herds and poultry farmers – all at the most amateur 
level. We pull apart rotten masonry from stonework and re-pack it with cement, 
watching the walls of the old house begin to look strong again. Each morning I 
worry that this will be the day when the job becomes tedious, but I slowly 
become accustomed to the work and the heat and time moves liquid fast. I get 
really, really good with the pickaxe.

Jan never leaves more than two hours between breaks, a habit he says he picked 
up from the French. There is always fresh coffee to drink, snacks to be eaten, 
and our mid-morning repose becomes one of my favourite times of the day. We sit 
in the sunshine gulping down mouthfuls of syrupy espresso, recharging and 
feeling smugly content about the jobs already done.

He tells us about the history of the area: how none of the trees around us is 
native to France, but were planted for use in the silver-mining industry, how 
the silk farms that used to exist all over were crippled overnight by the 
arrival of synthetic fabrics, how the hippies came down from Paris one summer 
in the 60s and never left. We imagine ourselves, like them, settling here 
permanently.

We’ve become comfortable living without the commute, the endless emails, 
deadlines and meetings, targets and business buzzwords. But then I’m offered a 
job in New York and we’re forced to abandon peasant life for a while. I accept 
the job with mixed feelings and we resignedly plan our departure, feeling a 
hell of a lot less confident about crossing the Atlantic than we did the 
Channel. Still, I fancy myself as a mason now. I’ve learned how to handle tools 
and I like it. I know we’ll be back.
