
Under a pink mosquito dome in a shack among the filthy alleyways of sector two 
of the Malakal protection of civilians (PoC) camp lies 11-day-old Pul.

Tiny, perfect, sleepy, and naked save for the beads around his neck and wrist, 
Pul is oblivious to the state of his homeland, a country born a little more 
than four years before him.

Outside the smoke-filled tarpaulin hut where he lives with his parents, aunt 
and six siblings, 45,000 people are sheltering under the protection of UN 
peacekeepers.

Related: South Sudan civil war inquiry details torture and forced cannibalism 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/oct/28/south-sudan-civil-war-inquiry-details-torture-and-forced-cannibalism>

Malakal, which sits a few kilometres away on the banks of the White Nile, was 
onceSouth Sudan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-sudan>’s second city, 
home to more than 150,000 people, a cross-border trading hub and an 
international airport.

Today, after almost two years of civil war during which it has passed back and 
forth between government and rebel hands like a grubby banknote, the population 
has dwindled and no one seems quite sure how many people live there besides the 
government troops, the women selling coffee and alcohol, and those still 
hanging on in the hope of peace or earning a little money.

The ruined airport, which once offered flights north to Khartoum, is patrolled 
by blue-helmetedRwandan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/rwanda> soldiers, 
who amble across the pale orange ground carrying Kalashnikovs and grenade 
launchers.

Their presence reassures those living in the nearby camp. Behind the 
razor-wire fences and huge bags of earth that make up its perimeter, the people 
in the PoC count their blessings and their rations of sorghum and lentils.
Malakal, South Sudan, location 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/maps/embed/oct/2015-10-28T17:00:41.html> 
They are hiding from a war that has killed tens of thousands of people, 
displaced 2.2 million inside and outside the country, left 4.6 million severely 
food insecure, and decimated an already weak economy.

The fighting has often slid into horror and depravity over the past 22 months. 
On Wednesday, a long-awaited report from theAfrican Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africanunion> (AU) laid out the atrocities 
that have accompanied the conflict, from rape and murder to the mutilation of 
dead bodies, forced cannibalism and the existence of mass graves 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/oct/28/south-sudan-civil-war-inquiry-details-torture-and-forced-cannibalism>
.

“The commission found cases of sexual and gender-based violence committed by 
both parties against women,” said the report. “It also documented extreme 
cruelty exercised through the mutilation of bodies, burning of bodies, draining 
human blood from people who had just been killed and forcing others from one 
ethnic community to drink the blood or eat burnt human flesh.”

It came less than a week after three UN agencies said that the fighting was 
choking humanitarian access to those most in need, warning there was a“concrete 
risk of famine” 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/oct/22/south-sudan-faces-concrete-famine-risk-and-needs-urgent-help-warn-experts>
 in some areas within weeks.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dy2j%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dy2j%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2906b0f8f2b71dff999e66d31230b06ae5e5799b%2F0_0_3092_2220%2F3092.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=South%20Sudan%3A%20'a%20level%20of%20human%20suffering%20I%20have%20never%20seen%20anywhere%20else'&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dy2j%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=South+Sudan%3A+%27a+level+of+human+suffering+I+have+never+seen+anywhere+else%27&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dy2j%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2906b0f8f2b71dff999e66d31230b06ae5e5799b%2F0_0_3092_2220%2F3092.jpg>
 Residents displaced due to fighting between government and rebel forces in 
Malakal wait at a World Food Programme outpost. Photograph: Denis Dumo/Reuters 
Deals to end the fighting in the world’s youngest country tend to have a 
mayfly-like lifespan; in early October,the regional bloc overseeing the 
mediation process <http://southsudan.igad.int/>, said the two sides had 
violated ceasefire agreements 53 time in 19 months 
<http://bigstory.ap.org/urn:publicid:ap.org:590116b31bb14eb4ad1c3c2f408fb2b7>.


Unsurprisingly, the guarded optimism that greeted the signing of August’s 
peace agreement 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/27/south-sudan-peace-deal-greeted-with-quiet-optimism-by-humanitarian-world>
 between President Salva Kiir and his former deputy, Riek Machar, has been 
short-lived.


The slaughter that began on 15 December 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/23/south-sudan-state-that-fell-apart-in-a-week>
 after Kiir, a Dinka, accused Machar, a Nuer, of plotting a coup, quickly tore 
the country apart along sectarian lines.


However, the AU report has dismissed suggestions of an attempted uprising, 
saying that the violence appears to have begun after a skirmish between Dinka 
and Nuer members of the presidential guard led to the government-organised 
killings of ethnic Nuer civilians and soldiers.


The fuels that have fed the fighting since then are as various as they are 
explosive and the conflict has been shaped and reshaped by generations-old 
grudges between and even among different groups, bycattle-raiding 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/mar/11/south-sudan-conflict-over-cows>
, by local militias, by shifting loyalties, and bythe proxy war fought by its 
neighbours, Sudan and Uganda 
<http://www.crisisgroup.org/en/publication-type/media-releases/2015/africa/sudan-and-south-sudan-s-merging-conflicts.aspx>
.

The enmity between Kiir and Machar – two heroes of the secession struggle – 
has also served to underscore the absence ofJohn Garang 
<http://www.theguardian.com/news/2005/aug/03/guardianobituaries.sudan>. A 
decade after he died in a helicopter crash, the soldier-turned politician who 
helped propel South Sudan towards independence is sorely missed and deeply 
revered, his face beaming down from the portraits that hang on walls across the 
country and staring up from its banknotes.


Most of the unity he built up during the 22-year fight for independence has 
been murdered over recent months. The carnage sank to its cruellest depths in 
May this year, when pro-government forceskilled 129 children in Unity state 
<http://www.unicef.org/media/media_82319.html> over the course of three weeks. 
Survivors said boys had been castrated and left to bleed to death so they would 
not live to seek revenge, girls as young as eight were gang-raped, and others 
were thrown alive into burning buildings.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dy2j%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dy2j%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F189706bc3a6e5376e0745d8dd544d6530ad8682d%2F0_0_4592_3448%2F4592.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=South%20Sudan%3A%20'a%20level%20of%20human%20suffering%20I%20have%20never%20seen%20anywhere%20else'&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dy2j%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=South+Sudan%3A+%27a+level+of+human+suffering+I+have+never+seen+anywhere+else%27&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dy2j%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F189706bc3a6e5376e0745d8dd544d6530ad8682d%2F0_0_4592_3448%2F4592.jpg>
 The IDP camp in Malakal, South Sudan. Photograph: Sam Jones for the Guardian 
Even the Malakal camp, with its well-armed foreign peacekeepers, is not immune 
to the violence. Sometimes sticks and knives come out as trouble between the 
Shilluk, Nuer and Dinka flares up in an almost instantaneous echo of the 
sectarian killing outside. And sometimes the guns refuse to acknowledge the 
sanctity of the PoC.


Luny, an 11-year-old boy who fled to the camp with his family last year, lost 
his elder brother to one such breach.

“There was fighting outside the camp and a bullet came in and hit him,” he 
says. “His name was Yumlat and he was 15. We used to play and talk together and 
I miss him a lot. When he died, my mother said she wanted to die, too. She felt 
it would be better.”

Even after his brother’s death, though, Luny and his family feel that the PoC 
is still safer than the home they left in a village in Upper Nile state. For 
the most part, the camp’s residents exist together in relative peace, the 
Shilluk in sector one, the Nuer and Dinka in sector two.


In the mornings, UN staff register the dozens of daily new arrivals who are 
still coming from Wau Shilluk, a town across the river that has recently opened 
up to humanitarian agencies after being cut off by months of fighting.

Some of the children go to school, others plunge into the dark green river to 
catch tiny fish, and the occasional beer can, with mosquito nets. Women 
desperate to supplement their rations or earn a little money venture beyond the 
safety of the razor wire to gather greens where they face the twin threat of 
rape and crocodiles.


And, like life, commerce goes on, even under the most pitiful circumstances. 
From early in the morning, the thoroughfares of the PoC become a bazaar for the 
near-destitute.

On wooden crates, tables and tarps spread on the ground, garlic is sold by the 
clove and salt in tiny plastic twists. There are potent green and red chillies, 
onions, okra, tiny limes, chunks of meat shimmering with flies, Kenyan 
cigarettes, squares of banana bubble gum, small dried fish and nails and bits 
of scrap metal for use in homes or whatever other ingenious and thrifty schemes 
the camp dwellers can dream up.

Mothers arriving are collapsing at the gate. That level of human suffering and 
desperation I have not seen anywhere else
Ettie Higgins, Unicef 
For those whose doors are sturdy enough to support them, there are shiny new 
padlocks; for those with shoes, there are tubs of polish.


In the afternoons, hundreds of the camp’s 25,000 children head for the Unicef 
<http://www.unicef.org.uk/landing-pages/donate-south-sudan/?gclid=Cj0KEQjw5MGxBRDiuZm2icXX2-sBEiQA619bq7RaYBP6c-sSzaV0EBNIT1TG99UKf1xsCrkqzU2A1sMaAvuN8P8HAQ>
 schoolyard that doubles up as a child-friendly space when classes are over. 
Some play football or dance and sing along to an Italian song about sardines, 
others draw pictures. The youngest sketch flowers in chalk on slates, while the 
older ones graduate to paper and sketch 4x4s, houses and churches.

One boy appears to be drawing from memory: flying over a South Sudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-sudan> flag and a house, a helicopter 
drops bombs on red stick people who twist and fall to the ground.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dy2j%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dy2j%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3d0606333f08bff8fb3e0b978dee42682ffe283%2F0_0_4355_3168%2F4355.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=South%20Sudan%3A%20'a%20level%20of%20human%20suffering%20I%20have%20never%20seen%20anywhere%20else'&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dy2j%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=South+Sudan%3A+%27a+level+of+human+suffering+I+have+never+seen+anywhere+else%27&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dy2j%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3d0606333f08bff8fb3e0b978dee42682ffe283%2F0_0_4355_3168%2F4355.jpg>
 A drawing by a child at the IDP camp in Malakal, showing his experiences. 
Photograph: Unicef 
Ettie Higgins, Unicef’s deputy representative to South Sudan, has worked in 
Darfur <https://www.theguardian.com/world/darfur>, Somalia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/somalia>, Central African Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/central-african-republic> and Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>. But she has never seen a 
humanitarian emergency as fast-moving or as unpredictable as that of South 
Sudan.

“People are extremely malnourished,” she says. “We’re seeing massively high 
rates of malnutrition among mothers who have been feeding everything to their 
children, including the tubers of waterlilies. The mothers are arriving at [the 
Bentiu protection of civilians camp in the northern Unity State] and literally 
collapsing at the gate. That is something – that level of human suffering and 
desperation – that I have never seen anywhere else.

On every level, adds Higgins, it is children who are paying the highest price 
for the conflict: about 15,000 are estimated to have been recruited as child 
soldiers; almost 1,500 have been killed in the fighting, and thousands more 
have died from malaria, cholera, diarrhoea and malnutrition. She says the 
numbers will only rise if the fighting does not stop and aid agencies cannot 
reach those areas most acutely in need of help.

But Higgins is all too aware of South Sudan’s place in the hierarchy of 
forgotten wars – somewhere belowYemen <https://www.theguardian.com/world/yemen>
, somewhere above Central African Republic.

“I know it’s coming at a time when we’re seeing horrific pictures coming out 
of the migrant or refugee crisis – and I know it’s a more difficult story to 
tell – but it is no less worth telling,” she says.

“That’s part of the tragedy of South Sudan. People don’t always want to know 
about it or take the time to understand it.”

Franz Rauchenstein, who spent 18 months in South Sudan as the head of the 
delegation of theInternational Committee of the Red Cross 
<https://www.icrc.org/>, argues that the faltering August peace deal still 
remains the country’s best chance.

“It is a very fragile situation and it requires leadership from both parties 
and also continued pressure from the international community,” he says. “That 
pressure must not be diminished and there also needs to be humanitarian 
support.”


Until the fighting stops in places such as Unity State, Rauchenstein adds, 
humanitarians will remain absent and frustrated, “tilting at windmills” as and 
when lulls in the violence allow them back in for a rushed drop of supplies.

Renewed fears of famine 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/jul/09/south-sudan-famine-conflict-independence-day>
 and the accusations made in the AU report will only increase the pressure on 
Kiir and Machar to settle their differences for the sake of their country.

They will also test the truth of the comparisons made on the president’s 
website <http://www.goss.org/index.php/presidency/the-president>: “Due to his 
[Kiir’s] close comradeship with the late Dr Garang, he is perceived as the 
embodiment and assurance of the future of the peace agreement spearheaded by 
the fallen hero. Indeed, many political analysts and opinion leaders worldwide 
describe him as the Biblical Joshua who took the mantle of leadership from 
Moses just as the Israelites were on the verge of entering Canaan and capably 
established the then fugitives in the Promised Land.”

For now, the hundreds of thousands of fugitives forced from their homes and 
scattered around the young country have little more than hope and, if they are 
lucky, some food rations.

Inside his tent, Pul stirs for a feed and his mother, Nyandong Gik, explains 
how his name was chosen.

“It means whole,” she says. “Everyone outside is fighting, but in here we are 
whole and together.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dy2j%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dy2j%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F024e018dfa4f4b5bc01197aecb68f0c76ec82f66%2F0_18_3264_2156%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=South%20Sudan%3A%20'a%20level%20of%20human%20suffering%20I%20have%20never%20seen%20anywhere%20else'&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dy2j%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=South+Sudan%3A+%27a+level+of+human+suffering+I+have+never+seen+anywhere+else%27&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4dy2j%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F024e018dfa4f4b5bc01197aecb68f0c76ec82f66%2F0_18_3264_2156%2F3264.jpg>
 Baby Pul at the IDP camp in Malakal. Photograph: Unicef 


