
The educational trust behind an independent Islamic school in Luton that has 
been criticised for segregating staff by gender and treating male and female 
pupils differently is being investigated by the Charity Commission.

The inquiry 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/new-charity-investigation-rabia-educational-trust>
 by the charities regulator into the Rabia Educational Trust comes after a 
series of adverse judgments by the school standards watchdog, Ofsted, following 
inspection of Rabia girls’ and boys’ school.

In April, inspectors complained that male and female staff were segregated 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/27/staff-often-segregated-gender-faith-schools-chief-inspector-ofsted>
 during training. Last year, the school was criticised for treating the 
education of boys and girls differently,limiting girls to sewing and knitting 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-beds-bucks-herts-31452814> in technology 
classes.

Related: Staff segregated by gender at some faith schools, says chief inspector
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/27/staff-often-segregated-gender-faith-schools-chief-inspector-ofsted>

The Charity Commission, whose remit does not include education matters, issued 
the trust with an action plan last September after an inspection identified 
regulatory concerns about its governance. Trustees were also asked to provide a 
written response to concerns raised in the media about the charity and its 
hosting of guest speakers at the school.

“The trustees did not respond to the commission within the required timeframes 
and their response did not address all the actions required of the trustees as 
set out in the action plan,” a commission statement said.

“Therefore the commission opened an inquiry into the charity and has exercised 
its legal powers to compel the trustees to provide information and documents 
regarding the charity to the commission.” The commission will publish its 
report at the end of the inquiry.

The latest Ofsted <http://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> inspection in 
April described the school once again as “inadequate”, although inspectors said 
there had been some progress in response to earlier inspections.

Following the inspection, the chief inspector of schools, Sir Michael Wilshaw 
<http://www.theguardian.com/profile/michael-wilshaw>, wrote to the education 
secretary, Nicky Morgan, raising concerns about segregation of male and female 
staff at Rabia and other independent faith schools.

A Department for Education spokesman said: “We have issued a statutory notice 
requiring Rabia Girls’ and Boys’ to provide us with an action plan to address 
the failures against the independent school standards, and we expect to receive 
this shortly. If the plan does not address the failings we will begin 
enforcement action.

“It is completely unacceptable for women to be treated less favourably than 
men, and where there is evidence this is happening in schools we will not 
hesitate to act.”
