
BBC <http://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Northern Ireland’s Spotlight has 
been garlanded with awards for a documentary despite having attracted 
considerable, and increasing, controversy.

Now I note that A woman alone with the IRA is under consideration in the 2015 
British Press Awards with its presenter, Jennifer O’Leary, having been 
shortlisted in the local heroes category 
<http://www.pressgazette.co.uk/humbling-and-inspiring-full-list-finalists-british-journalism-awards-2015-revealed>
.

The programme, which was originally broadcast on 14 October 2014, related the 
story of Maíría Cahill who told of being raped by a member of the IRA at the 
age of 16 in 1997. When she made this known years later, she said she faced 
what amounted to anIRA <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/ira> “kangaroo court”.

But, as I reported at the time 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2014/oct/28/bbc-sinn-fein>, the 
IRA challenged her account of its actions and there were also questions about 
the failure of the programme to mention that she had been a leading member of a 
dissident republican grouping.

She had joined the Republican Network for Unity 
<http://www.republicanunity.org/about-us-2/who-we-are/> (RNU), an organisation 
formed specifically to oppose Sinn Féin’s support for Northern Ireland’s police 
service (PSNI). That fact was reported by the Irish edition of the Mail on 
Sunday.


Cahill countered that she had been an RNU member for an “extremely brief” 
period and had been its national secretary for only a couple of hours.

In subsequent months, Cahill received sympathetic hearings from some of 
Ireland’s most senior politicians, including the leader of the Irish Labour 
party, Joan Burton.


This culminated in October this year in Cahill being nominated by Burton to be 
the party’s candidate for election to the Seanad 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-northern-ireland-34435105>, Ireland’s senate and 
parliamentary second chamber.

Voting for her particular type of Seanad seat is restricted to an electorate 
drawn from TDs (MPs) and senators. And it is widely anticipated that she will 
emerge as victor when the results are announced tomorrow (13 November).

However, she has refused to take part in any media debates with other 
candidates and has thus avoided answering questions about her membership of the 
RNU. This has resulted in a chorus of criticism over recent weeks.


One prominent senator, David Norris, was reported in the Irish Times as saying 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/news/politics/david-norris-criticises-ma%C3%ADria-cahill-over-ex-dissident-links-1.2424637>
: “Questions have been raised about her involvement with dissident republicans. 
There has been no explanation whatsoever.”

And other senior politicians have also called for Cahill to “clarify” her links
 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/news/politics/ma%C3%ADria-cahill-under-pressure-to-clarify-dissident-republican-links-1.2426872>
 to the RNU. They have pointed to objections to Cahill’s nomination by 
Catherine McCartney, the sister of Robert McCartney,who was murdered by the IRA 
outside a Belfast pub in 2005 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Murder_of_Robert_McCartney>.

In a letter to TDs and senators, Catherine McCartney said Cahill’s RNU 
membership “cannot be regarded as a minor issue or an irrelevance to the 
appointment to a political office.”

She wrote: “I am asking the Labour party and Ms Cahill to provide a credible 
explanation regarding emerging revelations of her involvement with RNU and to 
do so before the Seanad election... I am calling on Joan Burton and the Labour 
Party to reflect on their decision to nominate Ms Cahill to the Seanad 
position.”

But McCartney’s passionate open letter about Cahill has received very little 
media coverage inIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> in 
contrast to the huge publicity given to her previous attacks on the IRA.

Meanwhile, the Spotlight programme has been picking up several awards. The 
latest came last Thursday at the Belfast Media Festival, whereit was named as 
the best current affairs programme 
<http://www.u.tv/News/2015/11/05/UTV-Live-Tonight-wins-RTS-NI-award-48358> in 
the inaugural regional Royal Television Society (RTS) Northern Ireland awards.


Among other awards, it previously won the scoop of the year category 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediacentre/latestnews/2015/spotlight-RTSAward> at the 
RTS journalism awards and Cahill wona “special recognition” prize in Irish 
Tatler’s women of the year awards 
<http://www.irishnews.com/news/northernirelandnews/2015/11/09/news/mairia-cahill-wins-irish-tatler-accolade-319313/>
.

But this widespread acceptance within the media industry of the programme’s 
merits overlooks the ongoing controversy. The manaccused by Cahill of raping 
her was acquitted of all charges against him 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-northern-ireland-29786451> following two separate 
court cases in 2014.

That is not to say that Cahill was not raped. Nor does it negate her view that 
the IRA handled her complaint clumsily and insensitively. But inNorthern Ireland
 <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>, where almost every aspect of 
life has a political context, it did mean that vital information was denied to 
viewers.

And the issue of Cahill’s RNU membership remains a live issue across the 
island of Ireland.


NB: I have written in the past for An Phoblacht

