
I hate walking. I won’t do it. I am not going any further. Unorthodox as it 
may seem, as an introduction to a celebration of great walks, I need to put 
those words down and look at them. They are certainly the words every parent 
fears. The words I inflicted, as a nine-year-old on my dad on Snowdon, were 
later echoed by my own children. They are uttered, or just thought, at the 
crucial moment in many a great walk, usually when a corner is turned and the 
true dimensions of the landscape open up and show a narrow stony path, winding 
onwards for long miles, always upwards, to a goal that is impossibly distant 
and probably wreathed in ominous black clouds. The view up Langdale towards 
Lakeland’s Scafell massif often conforms to this pattern. Children do us a 
service in voicing such feelings; we adults often ignore them, or soldier 
onwards, never appreciating that this is all part of the drama.

You see I do believe that great walks are like great dramas. Act One is the 
optimistic practicalities: the picnic packing, the maps and checklists, the 
jokes and the laughter. You set off with fresh faces and jollity. But then, 
just as the effort starts to bite, comes that moment. I suppose the ancient 
Greeks had a word for it. Suddenly there is the threat of tragedy in the air, 
or at least the disappointment of turning back. But something keeps you going: 
it could be the promise of lunch, or a shaft of sunlight that warms your back. 
And, by the simple formula of putting one foot in front of the other, those 
long upward miles fall behind. Then the summit is in sight, the views become 
magnificent and soggy cheese sandwiches taste amazing. Triumph is felt.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4thab%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4thab%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85aebb12256bacdaa7b19b9f58631857cfcbb0d4%2F0_168_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20makes%20a%20great%20walk%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4thab%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What+makes+a+great+walk%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4thab%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85aebb12256bacdaa7b19b9f58631857cfcbb0d4%2F0_168_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 A very British climb … queueing to summit Snowdon. Photograph: 
Salapanda/GuardianWitness 
In this, walking has not changed since my dad dragged me up Snowdon, but 
almost everything else is different. Before 1969, all outdoor clothing leaked. 
Then a Delaware chemist named Bob Gore, frustrated by a recalcitrant lump of 
stuff called polytetrafluoroethylene, gave the material a big angry yank and 
miraculously discovered what would become Gore-Tex. Before this material became 
commercially available in the late 1970s, hill-walking was like a bloodless 
version of a Great War debacle: shell-shocked survivors trudging in from the 
mist at the end of the day wrapped in dowdy tarpaulins and sodden wool. Bob 
Gore delivered us into a new dry world of weightless colour and optimism.

It’s not the only change. These days you actually do arrive, courtesy of 
better maps, navigation devices and route guides. Previously you just walked 
off a cliff and, if you were lucky, got the boulder that killed you named in 
your honour. And on arrival those mountain lodgings, formerly Nissen huts 
infested with military-trained masochists, are often welcoming. The chalets or 
mountain huts of continental Europe bring warmth, conviviality and comfort to 
what was spartan and cold, making treks like the Pyrenean GR10 or Corsica’s 
GR20 a joy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4thab%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4thab%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc40dd6a63b4c19fe80801991524e21c8ec403d4d%2F0_330_5132_3079%2F5132.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20makes%20a%20great%20walk%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4thab%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What+makes+a+great+walk%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4thab%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc40dd6a63b4c19fe80801991524e21c8ec403d4d%2F0_330_5132_3079%2F5132.jpg>
 ‘The chalets or mountain huts of continental Europe bring warmth, conviviality 
and comfort’ to walking holidays. Photograph: Alamy 
Even in Britain, where the tradition of walking as a penance is deep-rooted 
(thanks John Bunyan, or was it bunion?), you can now arrive to smiles and the 
announcement that tea and homemade cake or scones will be served in front of 
the log fire. On England’s Coast to Coast path, theJolly Farmers B&B 
<https://thejollyfarmers.wordpress.com/> in Kirby Stephen manages precisely 
that, as doWoodland House <http://www.woodland-house.co.uk/> in Cowling on the 
Pennine Way <http://www.nationaltrail.co.uk/pennine-way> and many others. No 
one lit a log fire before 1969: it wasted fuel and tempted Oliver Reed into a 
homoerotic wrestling bouts (what a year: Gore-Tex and Ken Russell’s Women in 
Love!).

Not only that but your baggage, once a rucksack heavier than Captain Scott, is 
now an ergonomic design champ that has been delivered to your room while you 
were out actually enjoying the hills. TheLong Distance Walking Association 
<https://www.ldwa.org.uk/> lists more than 90 companies that provide this 
service in the UK alone.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4thab%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4thab%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7807907a15ea2915d334dd55343185655f0be512%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20makes%20a%20great%20walk%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4thab%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What+makes+a+great+walk%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4thab%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7807907a15ea2915d334dd55343185655f0be512%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
 Many UK companies now transfer your bags between lodges, freeing you to walk 
all day with just a day pack. Photograph: Alamy 
If you have got wet – and even Gore-Tex cannot hold out forever – there will 
be a drying room. Meanwhile, you can head off to a pub that serves food in the 
evenings – food that is delicious. And on your walk, those soggy cheese 
sandwiches can be traded for all manner of delicious deli treats, trail mixes 
and power foods. Kendal Mint Cake is no longer the only luxury allowed (but I 
still love it).

Yes, walking has certainly undergone a revolution, and all these innovations 
and changes I welcome with open arms. And yet, the best hikes are not chosen 
for any of those reasons. What makes a great walk remains the gift of nature: 
the subtle alchemy of landscape, elements and path that is transformed into a 
dramatic stage for your pleasure and experience by the magical spell of your 
own tramping feet.
