
David Lidington is a survivor and a record-breaker. He has now served for 
almost six years as Europe minister in the Foreign Office and is busy getting 
to know his sixth French opposite number, his fourth Pole and third German. 
Tony Blair and Gordon Brown went through 12 Europe ministers in 13 years, with 
some lasting just a few months before being thrown on the ministerial 
scrapheap. “It is an interesting pub question. Can you name them all?” he asks 
before offering to do so.

The previous record-holder was Douglas Hurd, who served four years, from 1979 
to 1983. Lidington has now visited every sizeable European country except 
Belarus, watching his foreign counterparts come and go.

Related: It’s confusing, contradictory, nonsense: Europe minister dismisses 
case for Brexit 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/27/david-lidington-campaign-eu-referendum-brexit>

His longevity has been vital in helping David Cameron to renegotiate the UK’s 
membership of the EU through behind-the-scenes diplomacy.Lidington 
<http://www.theguardian.com/profile/david-lidington> says he can pick up the 
phone to other Europe ministers and meet on friendly terms without having to go 
through “ice-breaking” formalities every time. He has built an encyclopaedic 
knowledge of European history and the reasons why other EU states want more 
integration.

“I remember talking to the Estonian foreign minister, who said: ‘We lost a 
quarter of our population between the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact in 1939 and the 
partisans being put down by Stalin in 1946, and we were fought over by the 
Nazis and the Soviets. We then had to endure Russian rule for half a century.’ 
When you have had that happen to your country you grab every little scrap of 
European integration that is going, to try to stop that ever happening again. 
If you are going to be a British minister, you need to understand the mindset 
and the history of those other countries and why they think as they do.”

But as the UK approaches its moment of truth on Europe on 23 June  
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/20/cameron-set-to-name-eu-referendum-date-after-cabinet-meeting>
 – the date of the referendum – the time for quiet diplomacy abroad is over. 
Instead Lidington, a mild-mannered man by nature, is ready to launch a 
full-frontal attack on anti-EU forces at home – in his own party and outside – 
to make the case for UK membership. The Eurosceptics, he says, lack coherent 
arguments and are simply wrong on detail. He is dismissive of justice secretary
Michael Gove’s claim last week that David Cameron’s renegotiation deal has no 
legal force 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/24/eu-deal-not-legally-binding-michael-gove-court>
. “It is nonsense,” he says. “Michael has … Michael, Michael, Michael [there is 
exasperation in his voice] … a view that we should not be in the European 
Union. I think he is wrong.” Not only do top legal minds in government and 
academia, as well as in the EU, insist it is binding, he says, but there is a 
clear historical precedent from Denmark and Ireland to show it will have 
immediate legal force.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h5dk%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h5dk%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2efea5c1502874177cfea8f41630f8cdfc294dd%2F0_102_2284_1370%2F2284.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=It%E2%80%99s%20confusing%2C%20contradictory%2C%20nonsense%3A%20%20Europe%20minister%20dismisses%20case%20for%20Brexit&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h5dk%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=It%E2%80%99s+confusing%2C+contradictory%2C+nonsense%3A++Europe+minister+dismisses+case+for+Brexit&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h5dk%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2efea5c1502874177cfea8f41630f8cdfc294dd%2F0_102_2284_1370%2F2284.jpg>
 David Gove’s view of the legality of David Cameron’s EU is ‘nonsense’, says 
Lidington. Photograph: Stefan Wermuth/Reuters 
Gove and Boris Johnson are part of an Out campaign that is promoting 
incoherent and contradictory arguments while having no clear idea what living 
outside the EU would look like, he says. “I do find it extraordinary that those 
who want Britain to leave the EU seem to hold to two utterly contradictory 
propositions at the same time. Their first belief is that inside the EU we 
cannot achieve any meaningful change and that too often the other countries are 
in some sort of nefarious conspiracy against our interests. But their second 
belief, which they hold equally firmly, is that outside the EU these very same 
countries and governments would rush to give us some new deal that has all the 
benefits of EU membership with none of the things that apply to others. Look at
Norway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/27/norway-eu-reality-uk-voters-seduced-by-norwegian-model>
 and Switzerland. They both have higher EU migration rates than we do, they 
both have to pay into the EU budget, they both have to accept EU rules and 
regulations as the price for access to a free-trade single market. There is no 
getting away from that. I think the Leave campaign is still in a state of 
confusion about what they actually mean by ‘leave’.”

Lidington is suspicious of the EU’s grands projets and says it should do more 
to “respect the grain of national loyalty and national affection”, but insists 
that its original motives were “noble ones” and remain so. The EU is a 
guarantor of peace, a means of resolving argument through conversation, not 
conflict, and, through the single market, a source of prosperity. It is 
remarkable to hear a Tory minister let off the leash to make a case for Europe, 
taking on around 150 Conservative MPs and a clutch of cabinet ministers who 
want to leave. Getting out, he says, would be a nightmare process that could 
take a decade to negotiate, leaving business in “limbo”.

“There is a big risk. It took even little Greenland three years to leave the 
EU. Trade deals between the EU and other countries and bilateral trade deals of 
any type (to replace those with the EU) normally take six, seven, eight years 
and counting. But it is worse than that.

“The treaties of the European Union say that, once a country has decided to 
leave, then they are excluded from the treaty after two years, unless there is 
unanimous agreement to extend that period.” Such an extension would be highly 
unlikely. So the UK would be cut out of EU trade and other agreements in 2018 
before havingagreed deals to put in their place 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/27/boris-johnson-rejects-idea-of-second-eu-referendum-and-says-out-is-out>
. Reality would bite. “We would be outside the treaties and subject to tariffs, 
and everything we take for granted about access to the single market, trade 
without customs checks, or paperwork at national frontiers, the right of 
British citizens to go and live in Spain or France: all those would all be up 
in the air. It is massive. It is massive what is at risk.”
