
What is it?

Four million people in the UK live 
<http://www.diabetes.co.uk/diabetes-prevalence.html> with diabetes and nearly a 
quarter of a million more are being diagnosed each year. Ninety per cent of 
those withdiabetes <http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/Diabetes/Pages/Diabetes.aspx> 
have type 2 diabetes (T2D) and you’re more prone to it if you’re overweight, it 
runs in your family or you’re of south Asian or African descent. In T2D, the 
body doesn’t respond properly to insulin, the hormone produced in the pancreas 
that dispatches glucose from the food we eat to the cells of the body to be 
used for energy or stored as fat. T2D is treated by weight loss, lifestyle 
changes and oral drugs. Type 1 diabetes (T1D), which accounts for 10% of cases, 
can appear in childhood and is treated with injectable insulin. In T1D, the 
pancreas gradually stops making insulin for reasons that are still unclear but 
may be triggered by a viral illness.

High blood-glucose levels damage blood vessels supplying many parts of the 
body, so there’s an increased risk of kidney failure, blindness, strokes, heart 
attacks and gangrene. Life expectancy is reduced by 20 years for people with 
T1D and up to 10 years for T2D. The good news is that careful control hugely 
reduces these risks and that new developments are coming on stream at a rapid 
rate.

Prevention is best

T1D can’t be prevented, but T2D can. NHS England is rolling out an ambitious 
nationalDiabetes Prevention Programme 
<https://www.england.nhs.uk/ourwork/qual-clin-lead/diabetes-prevention/> to try 
to prevent up to 100,000 people each year developing it.Professor Jonathan 
Valabhji <https://www.imperial.nhs.uk/consultant-directory/jonathan-valabhji>, 
NHS England’s national clinical director for obesity and diabetes, says: 
“Tackling obesity and diabetes is one of the biggest healthcare challenges of 
our time and the numbers with T2D are rising.” Those referred will get 
personalised help to lose weight and bespoke exercise programmes over nine 
months.

A desperate need for new drugs

Once you develop diabetes, dietary changes and exercise may not be enough. 
There’s a limited range of drugs available now andProfessor Nicholas Morton 
<https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Nicholas_Morton> of the University of 
Edinburgh says we need to find new drugs that work in novel ways. He is 
interested in lean individuals whose genes allow them to stay thin even though 
they live the same western lifestyle that is making so many of us obese.A gene 
that codes for an enzyme 
<http://www.nature.com/nm/journal/vaop/ncurrent/full/nm.4115.html> that 
protects mice from obesity and its damaging effects holds promise. A drug 
called sodium thiosulfate <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sodium_thiosulfate>, 
which is used to treat severe side effects of kidney disease, also acts to 
boost this enzyme and medicines like it could offer a different way of tackling 
diabetes.

Does surgery offer a chance of cure?

Simon O’Neill of Diabetes UK <https://www.diabetes.org.uk> says there’s strong 
and growing evidence that if you are obese and have T2D, surgery works better 
than drugs and lifestyle advice. Surgery involves restricting the size of the 
stomach or bypassing the duodenum, where most absorption takes place. It also 
seems to cause changes in gut hormones, so people eat less and exercise more. 
Some people have had the surgery and not lost much weight, but their diabetes 
has still disappeared. It’s possible that people with diabetes who aren’t obese 
could benefit from the surgery, too. But, obviously, surgery has its downsides 
and risks. The holy grail would be a tablet that could mimic the gut hormone 
changes that surgery causes.

An end to needles?

Many people with diabetes, especially children, dislike the repeated 
finger-prick tests. But an alternative does exist.Continuous glucose monitoring 
(CGM) 
<https://www.medtronic-diabetes.co.uk/minimed-system/continuous-glucose-monitoring>
 involves a small wearable device that tracks glucose levels constantly and can 
be set with alarms that go off when levels are too high or too low. However, at 
the moment, NHS provision of CGM is practically nil, according to O’Neill.The 
NHS may pay <https://www.nice.org.uk/advice/mib51> for devices for people who 
get no warning of dangerous hypos (when blood glucose is so low that it can 
cause coma or even death) and in children with T1D.

But what if you don’t want continuous readings?

A device called Freestyle Libre <https://www.freestylelibre.co.uk/> monitors 
your blood glucose all the time, but only gives you a reading when you swipe 
it. It’s a patch the size of a 50p piece that is positioned on the upper arm. A 
tiny filament is inserted into the skin that reads glucose levels in the fluid 
between skin cells. Parents can swipe their diabetic kids while they’re 
sleeping rather than wake them up for a finger-prick test. There’s an initial 
outlay of about £60 for a reader that should last a few years, then running 
costs of about £100 a month if used continuously.

Insulin pumps

Most diabetics in the UK still inject themselves with insulin three to four 
times a day. Butinsulin pumps 
<http://www.diabetes.co.uk/insulin/Insulin-pumps.html> that do away with the 
need to inject are increasingly popular. They consist of a fine tube inserted 
under the skin with a wearable pump that contains insulin, which is attached 
most of the time. In Sweden, 50% of people with T1D have an insulin pump, but 
in the UK only 6% of eligible adults and 19% of children have one. CGM devices 
can interact with insulin pumps if blood glucose levels are falling dangerously 
low. The health watchdog Nice hasendorsed one of these devices 
<https://www.nice.org.uk/news/press-and-media/nice-draft-guidance-recommends-integrated-automatic-glucose-monitoring-system-for-people-with-type-1-diabetes>
 for people whose T1D is generally well-controlled, but who get uncontrollable 
hypos.

The perfect solution would be for a CGM system to communicate directly with an 
insulin pump to deliver the correct dose without any input from the human 
wearing the devices. “In its entirety, that’s still a long way off,” says 
O’Neill. The pump would need to hold two hormones; insulin to lower blood 
glucose when it’s too high and glucagon to boost glucose levels if it’s too low.

Is there an app?

There are lots of apps to encourage weight loss 
<http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/nhs-health-check/pages/tools-and-technology-that-can-help.aspx>
, lifestyle changes and management of diabetes.A new app has launched this month
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=st0qXpksFrM&feature=youtu.be> to support 
people with diabetes to count carbs, scan supermarket products, plan meals at 
home and analyse typical restaurant dishes.Nutrino 
<http://www.eurekalert.org/pub_releases/2016-06/whc-nad060916.php> shows how 
daily food intake, activity, sleep and other parameters affect glucose levels. 
If you have a compatible CGM device and insulin pump, detailed data of your 
insulin requirements and diabetes control feed into the app, which can 
customise its suggestions to your needs. The app can also connect with wearable 
devices such asFitbit <http://www.fitbit.com/uk/home> to get a picture of how 
much you exercise.
