
Hosting a global anti-corruption summit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/04/cameron-to-propose-global-anti-corruption-agency-at-summit>
 on 12 May should secure David Cameron some global headlines, but building a 
reputation as a corruption fighter requires tackling UK domestic corruption 
with more determination than hitherto.

An example to follow is Lee Kuan Yew 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2015/apr/04/uk-learn-former-colony-singapore-lee-kuan-yew>
. On becoming prime minister of Singapore in 1959, he prioritised tackling the 
rampant corruption that existed and the country became one of the least corrupt 
in the world asassessed by Transparency International 
<http://www.transparency.org/cpi2015>. 

There is some good news for Cameron. Since 2012, the UK has climbed from 17th 
to 10th place in Transparency International’s anti-corruption league, its score 
rising from 74 to 81 out of 100. This is an assessment of public sector 
corruption and – because public procurement, at at least £180bn, is the 
government’s largest amount of spending and the top corruption risk – the 
improvement will be due largely to thecreation of the Crown Commercial Service 
<http://www.curvemakers.com/new.asp?public-leaders-network/2013/aug/01/crown-procurement-service-key-questions>
.

The OECD template for declaring conflicts of interest and a common ethical 
code should be used in the public sector

Despite the low level of such corruption, the value of contracts affected and, 
therefore, the economic impact will still be significant. To be on a par with 
the best nations, the UK needs to score 90. If this can be done by 2020, 
Cameron’s reputation will be assured.

To achieve this, the prime minister must finish reforming the management of 
central government procurement, which appears to have lost pace since Francis 
Maude ceased to be the Cabinet Office minister responsible for it. All central 
civil government contracting should be done independently of budget holders, 
commissioners and policymakers – it should be done by the Crown Commercial 
Service.

Line management of Whitehall department procurement chiefs should be done by 
the chief executive of the Crown Commercial Service or the government’s chief 
commercial officer. There are no constitutional obstacles to this and it could 
be done within three months, with a coherent procurement structure achieved 
within 18 months. It could then gradually be extended to the rest of the public 
sector.

Furthermore, civil servants should be prevented from moving to positions in 
companies with which they have had dealings for at least five years after any 
commercial relationship has ceased.

The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) template for 
declaring conflicts of interest and a common ethical code should be adopted 
throughout the public sector, applying to anyone with any influence over 
commercial decision-making. Each year they should sign them and record any 
potential conflicts of interest.

Related: The UK can learn a lot from Lee Kuan Yew and Singapore 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2015/apr/04/uk-learn-former-colony-singapore-lee-kuan-yew>

There is also a lack of integrity, transparency and clarity for reporting 
suspected public sector corruption. To whom does one complain about corruption 
in the NHS or local government, for example in the granting of planning 
permission? The police investigate themselves and police commissioners have too 
few resources to have much impact.

According to the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners 
<http://www.acfe.com/rttn2016.aspx>, an effective whistleblowing policy is the 
best way to reduce corruption. The Singapore government created theCorrupt 
Practices Investigation Bureau <https://www.cpib.gov.sg/> to receive and 
investigate complaints. With one independent body to report concerns, people 
know who to approach and have confidence in it.

Fighting corruption requires specialist expertise. Cameron should replace the 
UK’s confusing and rather chaotic approach to combating domestic corruption 
with a UK version of theSingapore <https://www.theguardian.com/world/singapore> 
bureau.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
