
The exam regulator, Ofqual, has announced proposals to toughen up the 
re-marking of A-level and GCSE exams, after figures showed a further huge 
increase in the number of pupils and schools appealing against results.

The regulator said the number of individual inquiries about results rocketed 
by 22% during last summer’s exam season, with 506,000 challenges leading to 
90,000 grades being changed.

Despite the large increase, the proportion of grades changed after re-marking 
remained similar to the previous year, with almost 18% of challenges resulting 
in a new grade being issued.

The number of challenges to GCSE grades soared by more than 50,000, which 
school leaders said was theresult of increased pressure on schools and pupils 
to gain a C or above 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/apr/04/school-league-tables-measures-pupils-stress-nut-attainment-gap>
. Most challenges came in the key subjects of maths and English, which are used 
by the government in compiling its league tables.


Representatives of the exam boards that conduct A-level 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/alevels> and GCSE 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/gcses> exams in England, Wales and 
Northern Ireland said the number of appeals was a tiny fraction of more than 8m 
qualifications awarded last summer, of which slightly more than 1% had a grade 
change.

Related: Ofqual signals it could get tougher on exam re-marks 
<http://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/nov/18/ofqual-signals-tougher-exam-re-marks>

But the sharp rise in challenges follows an even larger increase in 2014 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/oct/21/fears-poor-marking-exam-appeals-a-levels-gcse-hit-new-high>
, when the number of requests was up 48% on 2013. Ofqual acknowledged that the 
soaring number of appeals was placing a strain on theexamination 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/exams> system and hurting its credibility.

Glenys Stacey, the watchdog’s chief regulator, said the increase in appeals 
“reflects teachers’ increasing lack of confidence in marking and the current 
appeals system”.

The proposals, in a consultation document published by Ofqual 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/484076/Consultation_on_marking_reviews__appeals__grade_boundaries_and_Code_of_Practice.pdf>
, include a new framework for re-marking exams, with examiners only able to 
correct obvious errors rather than change marks based on different 
interpretations.

According to research by Ofqual, looking at a single paper, as many as 
two-thirds of charges in re-marks were probably down to different 
interpretations. In that case, the new rules will lead to substantially fewer 
successful challenges in the future.

Ofqual also wants the re-marks to be carried out by specially trained staff at 
each exam board, and wants to allow teachers to see all exam scripts – 
including GCSE papers – before a school decides to submit an appeal.

“These changes will reduce the disappointment and frustration that too many 
students and teachers currently encounter when navigating exam boards’ appeal 
systems,” Stacey said.

Ian Stockford, Ofqual’s director for qualifications, said: “We want a system 
that corrects marking errors but does not give candidates who challenge their 
marks an unfair advantage over those who do not.”

The current system, in which teachers mark exams in their spare time for 
little pay, is simply not able to cope
Brian Lightman 
Michael Turner, director general of the Joint Council for Qualifications, 
which represents the exam boards, said many grade changes were owing to “very 
slight differences” in judgments rather than poor marking.

“The examination system is huge and complex. It involves over 50,000 examiners 
marking over 15m scripts,” Turner said. “In a system of this scale some genuine 
errors – for example, where there are significant mark and grade changes – are 
inevitable.

“Exam boards understand the impact these have on students, schools and 
colleges, and there is much they can and are doing to reduce them as much as 
possible.”

But Chris King, chair of the Headmasters’ and Headmistresses’ Conference group 
of independent schools, said: “The true statistics are likely to be even 
higher, as we know many state schools do not have the time and resources to put 
in lengthy, complicated and expensive appeals.”

Exam boards charge schools and individuals for re-marking, with fees ranging 
from about £40 to £90 a review, depending on the service requested.

Related: Fears over poor marking as appeals for A-level and GCSE exams hit new 
high 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/oct/21/fears-poor-marking-exam-appeals-a-levels-gcse-hit-new-high>

The Department for Education said rigorous standards were required to retain 
the confidence of parents. “Though the proportion of grades changed remains 
low, the number of appeals is rising, and we expect Ofqual and the exam boards 
to ensure swift improvements,” a DfE spokesman said.

The changes are unlikely to placate critics who argue that poorly trained 
markers are responsible for glaring errors.

“The current system, in which teachers mark exams in their spare time for 
little pay, is simply not able to cope with the sheer number of scripts that 
have to be marked each summer,” said Brian Lightman, general secretary of the 
Association of College and School Leaders, which represents many state 
secondary school headteachers.

Candidates sitting A-level papers were the most likely to have their grades 
changed as a result of challenges to their marks: last summer, 28,500 out of 
161,000 challenges led to revised grades, in almost all cases upwards.

Ofqual also announced a sharp rise in possible cheating and malpractice by 
schools and teachers in administering exams this year, although the numbers 
remain tiny: 262 penalties were given to staff and 288 to schools and colleges. 
Malpractice by pupils fell, with the number caught using a mobile phone in 
exams dropping from 850 last year to 790.
