
Brazilian poet Pedro Gabriel has always had his head in the clouds, simmering 
with ideas in a mix of words that, by a twist of fate, led him to stardom, as 
his books sold more than 200,000 copies. In a country where the habit of 
reading is not as strong and being published is something extremely difficult, 
this is praiseworthy.

“I never thought that it would become my source of income. Nowadays I can say 
that I live from my poetry and illustration, but three years ago that was 
unthinkable”, says the 32-year-old author.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m25k%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m25k%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1cc251c6359422db2f9e2ebff13a5b71fd619dd%2F0_0_1942_1942%2F1942.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20brilliance%20of%20writing%20poetry%20on%20napkins&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m25k%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+brilliance+of+writing+poetry+on+napkins&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m25k%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1cc251c6359422db2f9e2ebff13a5b71fd619dd%2F0_0_1942_1942%2F1942.jpg>
 Pedro Gabriel: I’ve added value to tiny disposables pieces of paper used to 
clean hands and mouths. I’ve cleansed my soul with them. Photograph: Pedro 
Gabriel 
Naturally, what everyone is wondering is where this idea came from. 


The first napkin came to light one day when I was coming back from work and I 
had forgotten my notebook at home. You may be stuck in traffic, but your ideas 
are not, and I wanted to write so bad. When I got off the bus, I decided to go 
to Café Lamas, a traditional bar in Rio de Janeiro which I used to visit, and 
in that moment the only platform I had was the stack of napkins in front of me. 
So, very naturally, I started to draw and I was amazed, and then I began to 
enjoy expressing myself in those tiny and fragile pieces of paper.

After that, Pedro photographed his work and created a Facebook page 
<https://www.facebook.com/eumechamoantonio> to display his idea to the public, 
calling it “My name is Antônio”. But why Antônio? Because he’s shy!

“I like to say that he is me with a bit more courage to express myself. My 
name is Pedro Antônio Gabriel, but no one calls me Antônio, so by creating this 
alter-ego I found a way of keeping my identity without signing as Pedro 
Gabriel.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m25k%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m25k%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff43146ecc81d6776475c1f839566dbeb587fefff%2F0_0_1942_1942%2F1942.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20brilliance%20of%20writing%20poetry%20on%20napkins&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m25k%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+brilliance+of+writing+poetry+on+napkins&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m25k%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff43146ecc81d6776475c1f839566dbeb587fefff%2F0_0_1942_1942%2F1942.jpg>
 Pedro Gabriel: The same napkin can have different interpretations, depending 
on the reader’s emotional state and background, but it always fits like a 
glove. Photograph: Pedro Gabriel 
Nowadays there is no doubt that the internet proves itself more and more to be 
an endless means of communication. Nothing goes unnoticed by the netizen and it 
is no different with Antônio: six months after his first napkin, the Facebook 
page started to attract huge traffic, and that drew the attention of a 
traditional publishing house, Intrínseca, which proposed that Pedro transformed 
his work offline, too, into a book. The result is two bestsellers in Brazil,My 
Name is Antônio and Second My Name is Antônio, with a third one on its way. 

“Currently, I have almost a million followers online, but I don’t count my 
success in numbers, rather than the content I present. Regardless of the number 
of followers, since the first napkin I posted I keep the Antônio’s concept in 
mind. The readers know that there is someone like themselves behind everything. 
Obviously, this success is also linked to the fact that I write about universal 
feelings – the several types of love, missing someone, freedom etc – but in a 
different way, using wordplay. It also feels like I try to portray a bit of my 
own life”, explains the author.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m25k%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m25k%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F057b1c6f7439d1ea1fa271ee12e605977c6f2a8e%2F0_0_1944_1944%2F1944.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20brilliance%20of%20writing%20poetry%20on%20napkins&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m25k%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+brilliance+of+writing+poetry+on+napkins&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m25k%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F057b1c6f7439d1ea1fa271ee12e605977c6f2a8e%2F0_0_1944_1944%2F1944.jpg>
 Pedro Gabriel: The internet is our showcase. Before, we used to store 
everything in drawers; now, these drawers have become our social media feeds. 
Photograph: Pedro Gabriel 
Besides unusual, the author’s creative process is also influenced by an 
in-born linguistic plurality. Son of a Brazilian mother with a Swiss father and 
born in the former French colony of Chad, Pedro was raised speaking French, but 
has always lived in a house where “the language we spoke was nobody’s 
language”. At 13 years old, when he came to Brazil, his inexperience with 
Portuguese encouraged him to pay attention to the sonority, the spelling, and 
the formation of the words.

I just recently realised the importance of that period I lived abroad, when I 
found the voice I wanted to communicate in through napkins. Despite the 
language itself, all the wealth amongst which I lived in these 12 years in 
Africa was crucial for me to draw my poetry; everything is a reflex of what I 
have lived in some moment of my life.

What is interesting is that, even years after his first napkin, Antônio still 
has a quirky requirement for his creations: “I have lost count of how many 
napkins I created until today, but it was more than 2000. Each one of them was 
drawn in Café Lamas. I like to say that my office is the bar, a privilege for 
few.”

Related: Why I love poetry, despite my English classes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/oct/09/why-i-love-poetry-despite-my-english-classes>

After thousands of napkins, is Antônio still surprised? 

“When we get used to something, it starts to lose a little of its brightness. 
Amazingly, I still feel a lot of pleasure in making them; I am still surprised 
with what I have to say. Obviously, I will not force myself to create new 
napkins just to feed the big audience who follows me, I will always create 
based on my emotions. Antônio and the napkin manifestations will last until I 
feel truth in it. I don’t produce the same quantity of napkins I did in the 
first months, of course, but when I sit at Café Lamas, new ideas always come to 
my mind and I get out of there with a poetry hangover.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m25k%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m25k%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F603da1c4249e2eaaa5d558eb29caf3173f13e5ff%2F0_0_1944_1944%2F1944.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20brilliance%20of%20writing%20poetry%20on%20napkins&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m25k%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+brilliance+of+writing+poetry+on+napkins&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m25k%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F603da1c4249e2eaaa5d558eb29caf3173f13e5ff%2F0_0_1944_1944%2F1944.jpg>
 Pedro Gabriel: While producing my third book, besides the blank napkin, now I 
also face the blank page. Photograph: Pedro Gabriel 
“I speak to an eclectic audience. At workshops I run, once the students find 
out that poetry can be made with a simple ‘wordplay’, they start to see it as 
something interesting.My Name is Antônio has also been a door for the younger 
ones into poetry; many of them got to know, through my social media, Drummond, 
Manuel de Barros, Paulo Leminski, Arnaldo Antunes and other fantastic master 
poets who inspire me every day.”

Related: Why is there so much poetry in YA/teen lit? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/oct/05/poetry-in-ya-teen-lit-john-green>

For every writer, the new and the challenging must always be encouraged. When 
asked if someday he intends to say farewell to Antônio, Pedro Gabriel makes it 
clear that he does intend to seek other adventures, but that he still has many 
new ideas for Antônio to present:

“The first book is all made of photographed napkins, and in that one it’s 
clear that Antônio is a bohemian; there’s bar language, some puns. The second 
already has some isolated and shy paragraphs plus some illustrations, as if 
Antônio had left the bars and entered the world of dreams. In the third, there 
will be a strong marriage between napkin and prose, with longer texts.

Antônio is a character of a novel that is being written and lived’. My idea is 
that these three books form a kind of pre-novel trilogy, keeping the visual 
side, of course, which is my brand. Maybe a mix of graphic novel with prose?”, 
continues the author.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m25k%2Fsfb%23img-6&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m25k%2Fsfb%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61d18feedb05c7e683c24a2cc4718fbcc2575c08%2F0_0_1942_1942%2F1942.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20brilliance%20of%20writing%20poetry%20on%20napkins&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m25k%2Fstw%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+brilliance+of+writing+poetry+on+napkins&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m25k%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61d18feedb05c7e683c24a2cc4718fbcc2575c08%2F0_0_1942_1942%2F1942.jpg>
 Pedro Gabriel: Second is a very short time unity, so, besides being the second 
book, it also represents the idea of rapidness and fluidity in which the 
napkins can be read. Photograph: Pedro Gabriel 
The napkins photographed for this article ae taken from the two books already 
published, and that was not an easy process: choosing any napkin and 
translating it is not enough, it is necessary to handpick them, analyse whether 
they are actually translatable, to translate them and redraw them, as well as 
reinterpret them.

“To be published abroad, I would do a roundup of the napkins from the first 
two books, like an anthology, mixing the ones I liked most from both, picking 
the ones that are good for translation plus some new content, and then I 
believe I could deliver a good work to readers from other countries.”

To end a long Skype call in which the clock seemed to have stayed still, I 
decided to do some quick-fire questions that can reveal so much about someone:

Related: Top 10 poems about light 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/oct/08/top-10-poems-about-light>

A dream? That people read more and value literature, because those who read 
know the infinity.

A fear? That I lose my inspiration, the most beautiful sensitivity we have. 

In 10 years I... want to have at least one published romance about Antônio and 
be more established in the publishing market, with books outside of Brazil too.

Find out more about Pedro Gabriel’s work and see more amazing napkin designs on
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/eumechamoantonio>, Instagram 
<https://www.instagram.com/eumechamoantonio/> and Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/_mechamoantonio>.
