
At some point, every teacher will be responsible for part of their school’s 
finances – from handling petty cash for a trip to explaining why you’ve 
overspent the departmental budget for a second term running.

But, if you aspire to join your school’s senior leadership team (SLT), you’re 
likely to be asked to take on an even greater role in monitoring school 
finances. We’ve put together a beginner’s guide to budgeting, getting value for 
money, and explaining financial accountability.

1 Make your budget work for your school improvement plan

When taking over your school’s budget, it’s easy to get bogged down by the 
numbers, but don’t just be driven by how your school has budgeted in the past. 
Think about what you would like to do if you had unlimited money, then look at 
how much you’ve actually got to spend and what you can achieve with it.

Related: 10 top tips for teachers heading into school senior leadership teams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/teacher-blog/2014/aug/26/top-tips-teachers-school-senior-leadership-team>

Your school budget should reflect your school improvement plan – set on a 
five-year basis, showing two years in retrospect, the current year, and the 
next two years’ forecast.

Before setting up any new budget, you’ll want to have handy:

 * Old budgets to look at past performance, so you can learn from under- and 
over-spends. 
 * Pupil numbers (census, local authority and feeder school lists). Be aware 
that neighbouring schools changing their admissions policies could also impact 
your numbers. 
 * Exam results, so you can identify which parts of the curriculum could 
benefit from more money, and which have previously. 
 * Staffing requirements, including updated pay scales. 
 * Other resource requirements – money needed for insurance, maintenance etc. 
2 Understand the basic principles of school budgeting

The first thing you need to understand is the different funding streams 
<https://www.nationalcollege.org.uk/transfer/open/csbm-managing-school-finances/csbm-5f-s3/csbm-5f-s3-t2.html>
 by which the school receives its resources.

 * Delegated funding (eg the dedicated schools grant) usually has no strings 
attached to it. 
 * Devolved funding comes with conditions on how the money can be spent. For 
example, you must be able to demonstrate how pupil premium money is benefiting 
target students and that devolved formula capital funding is only being spent 
on long-term assets. 
 * Capital funding can only be used to improve a long-term asset (eg upgrading 
buildings or the school’s technology network). 
 * Revenue funding should be used within a year (on salaries, heating, 
stationery and routine repairs etc). 
Look at what proportion of funding in last year’s budget came from delegated 
funding, pupil premium, devolved formula capital funding and other sources. You 
need an idea of how school funding is affecting your budgeting, particularly as 
certain funds (eg pupil premium) are vulnerable to change.
Graph showing dummy numbers 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/jun/2016-06-01T14:23:40/embed.html>
Accountability is also crucial in budgeting. You must be able to demonstrate 
how state funds have helped student attainment. Any private funding you get, 
however – such as charitable donations, renting out the school hall etc – can 
be kept in a separate account although it’s still good to be transparent with 
this.

Now you know where your funding is coming from, create a budgeting calendar 
and plan ahead for all scenarios. In most cases, you’ll have to set a budget 
from April-March in line with your local authority’s (LA) financial year, 
rather than based on the academic year. Don’t be thrown by this, but be 
prepared to change in September as pupil and staff numbers change. What would 
you do if next year the school’s roll rose or fell by 10%?

It’s good practice to monitor and review your budget monthly. Put dates in 
your diary for when to file budget reports to different bodies (eg the 
governors, the LA, Ofsted and the Department for Education (DfE)) as formats 
and dates will vary.

An example of how to draw up a budget reporting spreadsheet to show 
month-by-month spending is below. For each item budgeted, you’ll want to show 
projected and actual expenditure to date, and to make rogue figures easier to 
spot it helps to show these as percentages too.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kgxv%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kgxv%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ff49037bc3b6619e2b71a7daf2b25f49aa79996%2F0_0_1824_736%2F1824.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20beginner's%20guide%20to%20planning%20and%20managing%20school%20budgets&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kgxv%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A+beginner%27s+guide+to+planning+and+managing+school+budgets&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kgxv%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ff49037bc3b6619e2b71a7daf2b25f49aa79996%2F0_0_1824_736%2F1824.png>
 While you don’t want to end up in the red and it’s good to plan contingency 
funding. Photograph: Rachel Banning-Lover/Guardian 
Between January and March, you’ll want to start forecasting next year’s 
budget, while reviewing the current budget to identify areas where money could 
be moved to other resources in future.

The end goal? That proposed expenditure does not exceed proposed income. While 
you don’t want to end up in the red and it’s good to plan contingency funding, 
avoid having large surpluses at the end of the year as the LA can claw these 
back. Academies are allowed toretain unspent funds as operational reserves 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jan/18/academy-schools-stockpile-education-funding-england>
.

3 Get value for money when procuring resources

In the age of austerity, getting the best value for money (VfM) has never been 
so important. The DfE’sbenchmarking system 
<https://www.education.gov.uk/sfb/login.aspx> is a useful resource for school 
budgeters as you can see how much neighbouring schools spend on resources such 
as classroom assistants, catering, building maintenance and so on. It doesn’t 
show you why differences occur, however, so it’s important to read between the 
lines.

You can also benchmark costs on a smaller scale. Try carrying out your own 
comparisons on a pack of exercise books – what’s the cheapest you can get these 
on the internet, the high street, from a school supplies catalogue, or 
elsewhere?
Graph showing dummy numbers 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/jun/2016-06-01T15:44:53/embed.html>
You could also join other schools to have greater purchasing power, or see if 
there’s a local public sector buying organisation you can connect with.

Buying in bulk might sound like a good idea but calculate risk versus value; 
annual contracts mean you’re stuck with one price, whereas day-to-day 
purchasing allows you to shop around regularly. Leasing equipment is another 
option, but has risks.

It can be useful to identify whether past purchases provided VfM to guide 
future spending. Ask your colleagues about the best and worst things your 
school has purchased in the last few years and why. Was the extra classroom 
assistant a better investment than the interactive whiteboard?

For a more formal way of assessing VfM, consider economy, efficiency and 
effectiveness. Were you able to get the best quality for the lowest cost? Where 
you did spend more money, did you have improved results? The whole point of VfM 
is to free up money for other resources in your school improvement plan.

4 Be confident demonstrating VfM 

Now you’ve got to break down the school budget for the governors. Come with 
easy-to-understand, clear budget reporting sheets and be prepared to explain 
any holes with recommendations for avoiding them in future. For example, if you 
overspent on building maintenance this year, you could suggest implementing 
more regular building checks to spot problem areas or negotiating better terms 
with your insurers and maintenance providers.

It’s also important to highlight the areas where you got the best VfM. Tell 
them how you spent less money than a neighbouring school on catering as you 
phoned up colleagues at another school, and agreed to partner with them and a 
third school for greater purchasing power.

Next, make a business case for the areas where you think the school should 
direct the money it has saved. Show how increasing the number of teaching 
assistants for year 9 has boosted results, so it would make sense to spend more 
money on them for year 7 to help students progress earlier and save money 
further up the school.

Perhaps you’re not the one who has to account for the school’s expenditures to 
the governors, but you’re the head of the English department, and want to ask 
for more funding for GCSE students. The same principles apply. Show the SLT how 
increasing/decreasing your budget has affected your students’ results in the 
last few years. Also, look to other schools – what changes did that 
neighbouring school, who turned their A*–C pass rate around from 58% to 82% in 
two years, make? Make the business case for your proposed changes (and bonus 
points if you can identify where the money will come from so the school’s 
business manager doesn’t have to).

Related: Secret Teacher: I wish ministers would tell the truth about school 
funding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/apr/16/secret-teacher-i-wish-ministers-would-tell-the-truth-about-school-funding>

5 Help other teachers understand financial accountability

Finally, it’s easy for most teachers to think they don’t need to worry about 
the school’s finances unless they’re in senior leadership, but sooner or later 
they’ll be coming to you for the petty cash.

The best way to explain the importance of financial accountability to your 
colleagues is by using real life scenarios. Get your colleagues together at the 
start of the year for a short Q&A session on the school finances. This will 
make you look approachable and the school finances transparent; it will also 
give you a chance to gauge their financial knowledge. Ask them what trips they 
want to plan this year and walk them through the steps they must take:

 * Have they costed the trip properly? 
 * Included hidden costs and a small contingency fund? 
 * How much will they need to charge parents? 
 * Did they know they must bring back VAT receipts as these can be used to 
offset the school’s tax bill? 
You could also ask teachers who’ve managed departmental, trip or event budgets 
to share their experiences and lessons learned. What did they find most 
challenging? Was there anything they would have liked more information on that 
you can now provide?

Further resources

 * The National College for Teaching and Leadership’s (NCTL) module on 
managing school finances 
<https://www.nationalcollege.org.uk/transfer/open/csbm-managing-school-finances/csbm-5f-s1/csbm-5f-s1-t1.html>
.

 * DfE’s schools and colleges funding and finance 
<https://www.gov.uk/topic/schools-colleges-childrens-services/school-college-funding-finance>
.

 * Maintained Schools Financial Benchmarking website 
<https://www.education.gov.uk/sfb/login.aspx>.

 * Academies Financial Benchmarking website <http://www.education.gov.uk/afb/>.

 * DfE School Development Plan budgeting tool 
<http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20131216163513/http:/www.education.gov.uk/schools/adminandfinance/financialmanagement/b0069984/vfm/strategic-management>
.

 * 10 ways to help your school manage its budget (NCTL) 
<http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20140719134807/http://www.nationalcollege.org.uk/index/leadershiplibrary/leadingschools/leading-an-effective-organisation/managing-schools/manage-resources/manage-resources-ten-ways-to-help.htm>
.

 * DfE Pupil Premium funding and accountability for schools 
<https://www.gov.uk/guidance/pupil-premium-information-for-schools-and-alternative-provision-settings>
.

 * DfE Schools financial efficiency: top 10 planning checks for governors 
<https://www.gov.uk/guidance/schools-financial-efficiency-top-10-planning-checks-for-governors>
.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
