
Q We live in a flat in a listed Twenties building with metal-framed, 
single-glazed windows. The moisture build-up on the windows is the worst I've 
ever seen. The puddles that form overnight have warped the wall plaster and 
original wood floorboards. We wipe the windows down every morning, yet it still 
looks like we live in a fish tank. Any structural suggestions?

A Your metal-framed windows will produce more condensation than timber frames 
as they transmit heat more readily from the cool outside to the moist, warm 
inside. This causes the water-laden air in your home to condense more readily. 
Moisture is difficult to avoid as we evaporate around two litres of water per 
person per day. You can use a temporary proprietary plastic sheet glazing 
called film glaze (www.dockerills.co.uk <http://www.dockerills.co.uk>), which 
fits over the windows with double-sided tape and tensions flat with a hair 
dryer, but you may well get damp forming elsewhere if the air cannot escape. 
Ideally, you need to increase the background ventilation with trickle vents or 
perhaps uncover a previously blocked up air brick, which unfortunately may make 
your home cooler, but less damp.

Q I'm looking for a wooden table for our breakfast room. Ideally the wood 
would be from a sustainable source (pine, beech or similarly light colour), it 
needs to seat four to six, and extend to fit eight in total. Ideally, we'd like 
a round table that extends to an oval shape. We have a modest budget.

A Take a look at the Ardenne circular extending table (www.furniture123.co.uk 
<http://www.furniture123.co.uk>) made from a sustainable oak (where one tree is 
felled and a further two are replanted). Alternatively you could look at an 
extending table made of reclaimed teak (recycled from old buildings being 
pulled down in India;www.arborvetum.co.uk <http://www.arborvetum.co.uk>), but 
this will have a larger carbon footprint. Also search markets and online 
auction houses for an old or antique table that could be updated with a simple 
lick of paint or stripped and re-coated with Danish oil.

Â· If you have an interior design question for Oliver, email 
ask.oliver@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.oliver@observer.co.uk>
