
Friday began with a warning from the remain side that they weren’t listening 
to the right people. Later, the thoughts of an influential foreigner dominated. 
Here, we look at your reaction toAndy Burnham’s concerns that not enough has 
been done to persuade core Labour voters to remain, 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/10/andy-burnham-warns-remain-is-failing-to-reach-labour-heartland>
 and Germany’s finance minister’s assertion that a post-Brexit UK could not be 
part of the single market 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/10/no-single-market-access-for-uk-after-brexit-wolfgang-schauble-says>
. We also cover the conversationsSir Ian McKellen provoked when he highlighted 
the role Brussels had played in helping push through equality legislation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jun/10/ian-mckellen-rejects-brexit-eu-referendum#comments>
.

Click on the links at the end of each section to get involved, or head to our 
EU referendum live blog 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/09/eu-referendum-live-wollaston-remain-vote-leave-sturgeon-johnson>
 to follow the news and discussion as it happens.

1. EU referendum live: ‘very real prospect’ of defeat for remain, says Burnham 
<>

Related: For Hull's young EU vote is about their futures – and it's not rose 
tinted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/04/hull-young-eu-vote-futures-not-rose-tinted-remaining-in-europe>

Friday morning’s fast-moving EU referendum live blog 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/10/eu-referendum-live-remain-prospect-defeat-itv-debate-boris-johnson>
 focused on reaction to Burnham’s comments that the remain camp was failing to 
reach Labour heartlands, as senior figures in the party launched a fresh push 
to keep Britain in the EU. He said campaigning had been “too much Hampstead and 
not enough Hull 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/10/eu-referendum-morning-briefing-what-we-learned-sturgeon-johnson>
” and that a Londoncentric attitude could lead to Brexit.


When we spoke to people in Hull last week we found the disillusionment he was 
talking about, resulting in an article headlinedFor Hull’s young EU vote is 
about their futures – and it’s not rose tinted 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/04/hull-young-eu-vote-futures-not-rose-tinted-remaining-in-europe>
. Your reaction might cause him further worry.

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15480735> confabuscation  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15480735> 10 June 2016 9:48am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/76049826> 
Not sure why Burnham thinks the 'Labour Heartlands' will vote remain. Look at 
Sunderland - 70% of people say they are brexiting and it gets no mor Lab than 
that. Same with the yoof... Labour has these antiquated notions of tribal 
followers. Up until 2010 this might have been true. Times have changed.

See here for more on Sunderland 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/08/sunderland-how-labour-city-became-one-of-the-uks-most-eurosceptic>
, the “Labour city putting the wind up the remain campaign.”
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4096492> Franco87  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4096492> 10 June 2016 9:18am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/76047405> 
Andy Burnham <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/andyburnham> is so right (on 
this at least). Working away from London the past two years myself it's amazing 
how disconnected the metropolitan elites are from the people in the shires and 
small town Britain.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kq7q%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kq7q%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff802f1b4a9498bfd3b17e818e27aff585b5a8a7a%2F0_43_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Factual%20debate%20was%20abandoned%20weeks%20ago'%3A%20readers%20on%20the%20EU%20referendum&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kq7q%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Factual+debate+was+abandoned+weeks+ago%27%3A+readers+on+the+EU+referendum&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kq7q%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff802f1b4a9498bfd3b17e818e27aff585b5a8a7a%2F0_43_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Labour’s home affairs spokesman, Andy Burnham. Photograph: Gareth Fuller/PA  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16011874> NorthernPessimist  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16011874> 10 June 2016 10:00am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/76050758> 
Burnham's right. The Northern Labour heartlands aren't accepting the Labour 
remain message. They haveheard it, they just think its bollocks.....

They hate the Tories and they now also have no time for plastic Labour 
Blairites like Burnham for abandoning Labour values. The party has lost its way 
so much its going to be a very long road back.

Do the problems go further back?

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/10273500> Gary Colbert  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/10273500> 10 June 2016 9:18am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/76047382> 
Sorry Andy but the Labour heartlands have been neglected for 30 years while 
you chased middle class votes.You reap what you sow.
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13278771> koolkarmauk  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13278771> 10 June 2016 9:26am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/76048047> 
"Andy Burnham warns remain camp failing to reach Labour heartlands"

That's why you came a dismal second in the labour leadership contest Andy, is 
the penny finally starting to drop. When you and your Blairite colleagues were 
winning elections by appealing to the voting middle class, the "centrists", 
none of you gave a rats arse about traditional labour voters. Talk about being 
out of touch...

Join the debate here 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/10/vote-to-leave-eu-would-embolden-thatcherites-warns-labour>
.

2. No single market access for UK after Brexit, Wolfgang Schäuble says 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/10/no-single-market-access-for-uk-after-brexit-wolfgang-schauble-says>

In response to the remain camp’s concerns over trade deals collapsing if the 
UK leaves the EU, leave supporters have spoken often ofthe UK following a Swiss 
or Norwegian model 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/10/no-single-market-access-for-uk-after-brexit-wolfgang-schauble-says>
. They see a future where the country could enjoy the benefits of the single 
market without being an EU member. Germany’s finance minister, Wolfgang 
Schäuble, writing in Der Spiegel magazine, has said this will not be possible 
and “it would require the country to abide by the rules of a club from which it 
currently wants to withdraw 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/10/no-single-market-access-for-uk-after-brexit-wolfgang-schauble-says>
”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kq7q%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kq7q%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16ced652a4ea8233698c5653d4d646e91b4692a8%2F0_0_2583_1550%2F2583.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Factual%20debate%20was%20abandoned%20weeks%20ago'%3A%20readers%20on%20the%20EU%20referendum&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kq7q%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Factual+debate+was+abandoned+weeks+ago%27%3A+readers+on+the+EU+referendum&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kq7q%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16ced652a4ea8233698c5653d4d646e91b4692a8%2F0_0_2583_1550%2F2583.jpg>
 The special bilingual edition of Der Spiegel, to be released on Saturday, and 
Wolfgang Schauble Composite: Der Spiegel/Rex 
We have heard from many readers who want to know the mechanics of what 
potential deals might look like in the event of Brexit. So it was no surprise 
that his comments provoked much discussion.
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15577346> Belgiano  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15577346> 10 June 2016 11:37am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/76059154> 
Schauble is logically right. Norway and Switzerland are quasi EU members by 
virtue of the extent to which they have to comply with EU law in return for the 
trade benefits. A 'leave' vote by the UK could not really be interpreted as a 
desire to resign from the club only to request a kind of affiliate membership 
instead.

But the UK is a big market. We have stuff to sell the rest of the world which 
the rest of the world will buy, and the rest of the world has stuff it will 
happily sell to us. The debate has to stop being about some kind of 'Norway 
solution' in the event of Brexit and must start to deal head-on with the 
question can the UK trade alone and independently with the rest of the world?
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15005795> Garreth McDaid  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15005795> 10 June 2016 11:43am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/76059758> 
People who think that there will be a UK-Germany zero-tariff trade deal 
post-Brexit don't under stand how the EU works.

EU members states cannot legally negotiate unilateral trade deals. All trade 
deals are negotiated at European Commission level.

UK-German trade would be initially governed by WTO rules, and ultimately by an 
Eu-UK trade deal, but that could take 10 years to negotiate, and would only be 
based on zero-tariffs if the UK agreed to uphold all the rules on immigration 
that the Brexit campaign want to get rid of.

If anyone doubts this, take a look at the response of the European Commission 
to the 2014 Referendum result in Switzerland to impost immigration quotas 
(which, not surprisingly), the Swiss government haven't implemented yet, 
precisely because they know the impact it will have on Swiss-EU trade.
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13880950> john1975  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13880950> 10 June 2016 11:33am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/76058668> 
Simple electioneering. Remember when Mr Juncker said Greece would have to 
leave the EU if it voted No in the referendum last year? They voted no and 
stayed in the EU. He will change his tune within hours of the referendum Brexit 
result. Furthermore he has no legal right to forbid Britain joining the EEA if 
it wishes to do so.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fboris-johnson-and-nicola-sturgeon-debate-the-eu-referendum-video-highlights&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fboris-johnson-and-nicola-sturgeon-debate-the-eu-referendum-video-highlights&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boris%20Johnson%20and%20Nicola%20Sturgeon%20debate%20the%20EU%20referendum%20-%20video%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fboris-johnson-and-nicola-sturgeon-debate-the-eu-referendum-video-highlights>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boris+Johnson+and+Nicola+Sturgeon+debate+the+EU+referendum+-+video+highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fboris-johnson-and-nicola-sturgeon-debate-the-eu-referendum-video-highlights&media=>
Boris Johnson and Nicola Sturgeon debate the EU referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jun/09/boris-johnson-and-nicola-sturgeon-debate-the-eu-referendum-video-highlights>
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14946360> PollyVilla  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14946360> 10 June 2016 12:30pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/76064805> 
Merkel and Schauble getting involved is proof that they have lost confidence 
in Cameron to win the referendum.

Never before in my lifetime have I seen so many world leaders, politicians, 
big banks, multi-national companies, economists and celebrities collectively 
crap themselves. Perhaps the Germans now regret not giving Cameron something 
more credible in his renegotiation back in February.

Schäuble also said: “If the majority in Britain opts for Brexit, that would be 
a decision against the single market. In is in. Out is out. One has to respect 
the sovereignty of the British people.”
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/70008> ieclark  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/70008> 10 June 2016 11:38am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/76059227> 
Don't confuse being in the single market with trading with the EU. Pretty well 
every country in the world trades with EU countries. My phone was made in 
China, my car in Japan (not in the EU by a Japanese company).

Seems to work for them. 

I'm a remainer but my resolve has weakened and interventions like this don't 
help.
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15280263> IndependentThought  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15280263> 10 June 2016 11:37am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/76059146> 
In fairness to him, when you read into what he has actually said, he makes a 
good point. There's hardly any point in leaving the EU because of say, 
immigration, only to then sign up to the single access market which may require 
free movement of people and be in the same situation that a lot were unhappy 
with.

I think if we do vote to leave (and I hope we don't because I haven't yet seen 
a decent plan to leave that inspires me enough!), then it has to be best to 
negotiate from scratch as opposed to trying to stick plasters over something 
that isn't going work properly. On top of that, the trade bill between the UK 
and EU will have to be agreed by all the other EU member states.

I think he's been honest and made some good points here really.

You can click on the links on any of these comments, including the analogy 
below, to get involved in the conversation.

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2561939> Roxyj  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2561939> 10 June 2016 12:16pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/76063202> 
But currently we're a member of a club and we don't want to obey all its 
rules. We have opt-outs for various things and we're not part of the Eurozone. 
So we're not really full members are we?

I'm sure most of our leading ministers are members of one or more of the 
gentleman's clubs of St James. These almost invariably insist on a jacket and 
tie dress code. Imagine the PM joining one of these clubs and trying to insist 
he could wear his famous blue polo-shirt as the jacket and tie rule didn't suit 
him. He would be politely but firmly told that maybe membership wasn't for him.

Join the debate here 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/10/no-single-market-access-for-uk-after-brexit-wolfgang-schauble-says>
.

3. Ian McKellen rejects Brexit: ‘If you’re gay, you’re an internationalist’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jun/10/ian-mckellen-rejects-brexit-eu-referendum#comments>

Away from and economy now as we look at your reaction to the veteran actor 
entering the debate 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/theatre/actors/ian-mckellen-brexit-makes-no-sense-if-youre-gay/>
 by highlighting the role Brussels has played in helping push through equality 
legislation. While some of the discussion involvedtalking down of another 
celebrity endorsement 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/76059979>, you did find 
some important points.

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1933981> munich75  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1933981> 10 June 2016 12:01pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/76061663> 
I appreciate his views and he has an absolute right to speak them. Personally 
I'm glad that the Guardian published this and I'm glad that a man who is such a 
positive role model sees beyond the trade aspects of the EU and recognises the 
positive way the EU has brought people together and will continue to do so. So, 
sorry, but I agree with him and many thanks for Guardian for sharing his words
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2555426> Opimian  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2555426> 10 June 2016 11:51am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/76060558> 
I'm gay and pro-EU but I always recoil from any attempt to link my sexuality 
to anything else, be it political views, being artistic, liking fashion or any 
other stereotype. And I've met as many bigoted, xenophobic gay people as I have 
straight people.
Having said that, Ian McKellen makes some valid points about the ability to 
work collectively through the EU to improve human rights across the continent.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kq7q%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kq7q%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd7cc8d1f441fbd7ff2d3c64d1cb3e6f41c22f77d%2F0_0_2964_1779%2F2964.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Factual%20debate%20was%20abandoned%20weeks%20ago'%3A%20readers%20on%20the%20EU%20referendum&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kq7q%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Factual+debate+was+abandoned+weeks+ago%27%3A+readers+on+the+EU+referendum&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kq7q%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd7cc8d1f441fbd7ff2d3c64d1cb3e6f41c22f77d%2F0_0_2964_1779%2F2964.jpg>
 Sir Ian McKellen with the newly elected London mayor, Sadiq Khan, before the 
politician’s signing ceremony in May. Photograph: Reuters 
This exchange broadened the debate from marriage rights to anti-discrimination 
legislation.

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12691782> PeppermintSeal  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12691782> 10 June 2016 11:58am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/76061379> 
Only 12 countries in the EU recognise gay marriage, one of those being the UK, 
so maybe he's seeking to help those [mostly] Eastern countries. The EU hasn't 
helped in that way, it's been down to the progress of individual countries to 
see it through.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Recognition_of_same-sex_unions_in_Europe 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Recognition_of_same-sex_unions_in_Europe>
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1380347> Bjerkley  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1380347> 10 June 2016 12:01pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/76061607> 
Same sex marriage is not the only criteria by which LGBT people obtain rights, 
and the EU can assist in putting pressure on countries to increase the rights 
there. Whether we want to be part of that, I suppose, is another question.
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12691782> PeppermintSeal  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12691782> 10 June 2016 12:06pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/76062102> 
Same-sex marriage is a pretty good measure to how a person is recognised, but 
sure, it's not the only measure. The EU can put pressure, but the stats on the 
Wiki page show that the eastern nations are very strongly opposed.

To me, LBGT rights are a red-herring when debating the EU.
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1380347> Bjerkley  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1380347> 10 June 2016 12:16pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/76063198> 
I disagree. For instance, all EU states cannot criminalise same sex 
relationships (okay, low bar), as well as prohibit discrimination in 
employment. That's a huge deal in some EU countries (and in fact is the direct 
reason why the UK doesn't allow employment discrimination based on sexuality), 
as well as those seeking to join. There's also the prospect of further 
protective directives as time goes on.

Given that same sex marriage is still a thorny issues in otherwise progressive 
countries both in and out of the EU, I think it's too narrow to focus on it as 
the primary market of gay rights.

Join the debate here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jun/10/ian-mckellen-rejects-brexit-eu-referendum#comments>
.

Related: EU referendum morning briefing - sign up here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/31/eu-referendum-morning-briefing-sign-up>

Finally, have you had enough of all this? Maybe not if you are still reading, 
but withpoor TV ratings for some of the live televised debates 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/10/boris-johnson-itv-eu-referendum-debate-gets-3m-viewers-nicola-sturgeon>
 (you can find morereaction to those from writers who did watch them in our 
morning briefing 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/10/eu-referendum-morning-briefing-what-we-learned-sturgeon-johnson>
) we end with some of your comments on why there might be apathy among the 
public.

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4232666> HarryRoberts  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4232666> 10 June 2016 11:38am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/76059222> 
I watched it- which was a mistake... as was watching Question Time later on- 
but the low ratings are because the Tory leadership election is tedious as a 
spectacle and no one particularly cares about aristocrats & their acolytes 
arguing over the most effective methods of enslaving the UK population.

Any hope of a measured, balanced and/or factual debate was abandoned weeks ago 
and now we're beyond peak hysteria it's increasingly obvious that both sides of 
the "mainstream" are equally pathetic and have been reduced to personal attacks 
and fearmongering to make their respective cases. Only Gisela Stuart emerged 
from three hours of bullshit with any credibility in my view and I only wish 
more airtime had been given to "outsiders" like Carswell, Corbyn, Davis and 
Lucas rather than the collection of snakeoil merchants whose interests & 
ambitions have been prioritised.

As a consequence of the shit show I'm now fully in the 'burn it down and start 
again' camp in that I honestly don't care if we Leave or Remain and sincerely 
hope both the EU and the UK establishments collapse.
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3981153> balcony39  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3981153> 10 June 2016 11:53am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/76060850> 
As others have commented, anyone who might watch this type of programme is 
likely to have had more than enough of the lies and counter lies by now. The 
old adage that politics is drama for ugly people has never seemed more true. I 
watched five minutes, then switched to watch "A Midsummer's Nights Dream" on 
catch up.

We’ll be back on Monday with another roundup of what you’re talking about in 
the comment sections on theEU referendum 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>. You can help inform what 
we report on by filling in the form below.
