
There’s no doubting the timeless appeal of wonderful old Copenhagen. It’s 
easy, and very rewarding, to hop around the well-known sites – the Round Tower, 
Christiansborg and Amalienborg palaces – or to go on a slow canal tour of the 
highlights. But to really get under the skin of this place you’ll want to make 
sure your visit takes in some of the modern landmarks and contemporary cultural 
powerhouses of the 21st-century city.

Related: Music, nightlife and hip districts: the best of cool Copenhagen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uncover-cool-copenhagen/2016/may/23/music-nightlife-and-hip-districts-the-best-of-cool-copenhagen>

A good place to get an immediate feel for its enviable lifestyle is at the 
Torvehallerne, two stylishly designed glass and steel market halls that opened 
in 2011 and boast 60 stands selling everything from fresh fish and meat to 
gourmet chocolate and exotic spices. Some stalls specialise in indigenous fare, 
such as Bornholmer Butikken, which stocks chocolate, cheese and caramel from 
the Danish island of Bornholm; others ship fine produce from carefully selected 
fine food producers in France and Spain. Some stalls are quirky and quite 
unique: Palæo, for instance, is the first restaurant in Denmark to serve what 
is known as “stone age food”. It’s great to browse, but there are dozens of 
places selling snacks, wine and tapas, so you can either eat on the hoof or 
pick something up for a gourmet picnic in one of Copenhagen’s lovely parks.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j99g%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j99g%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5eddbf63d51c902c2ca50e318fa324665e876e9%2F0_129_2700_1620%2F2700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gastronomy%2C%20art%20and%20design%3A%20the%20best%20of%20classy%20Copenhagen&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j99g%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gastronomy%2C+art+and+design%3A+the+best+of+classy+Copenhagen&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j99g%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5eddbf63d51c902c2ca50e318fa324665e876e9%2F0_129_2700_1620%2F2700.jpg>
 The market halls at the Torvehallerne are the perfect place to pick up a 
picnic or try out local delicacies. Photograph: VisitDenmark 
Once your appetite is sated, it’s time to give your eyes and imagination some 
sustenance. Copenhagen is rightly famous for its commitment to design – and it 
is on show at places like Designmuseum Danmark, the National Aquarium, the 
Black Diamond (housing an extension to the national library), 8Tallet, the 
Copenhagen Opera House, DR Koncerthuset and the Royal Danish Playhouse. Grab a 
map and visit these on foot or by bike – it’s a great way to explore and get a 
feel for the shape of the city. Nor do you have to limit yourself to looking 
and admiring – book a ticket at, say, the DR Koncerthuset and you get to 
experience French architect Jean Nouvel’s masterpiece as he intended it – 
listening to the Danish National Symphony Orchestra, with a glass of champagne 
or two imbibed at the interval.

You can even get a fix of Danish design when you go to bed by booking into the 
cool contemporary design-focused hotels. What you will probably begin to notice 
is that there is, for all the fads and fashions, a traceable line of confidence 
and quiet audaciousness line that defines the specific character of Danish 
design.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j99g%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j99g%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ee5f92cef71767e9f3978e37372c727dc98907d%2F0_0_2700_1620%2F2700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gastronomy%2C%20art%20and%20design%3A%20the%20best%20of%20classy%20Copenhagen&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j99g%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gastronomy%2C+art+and+design%3A+the+best+of+classy+Copenhagen&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j99g%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ee5f92cef71767e9f3978e37372c727dc98907d%2F0_0_2700_1620%2F2700.jpg>
 New Nordic cuisine is based on traditional, seasonal ingredients served with a 
modern twist. Photograph: Nicolai Perjesi/VisitDenmark 
And it’s the same with food, for new Nordic cuisine is, at its core, a revival 
of long-running passions. The ultra-hip restaurants like Höst, Radio and 
three-Michelin-starred Geranium all take staples (oats, cheeses, ramsons, 
seasonal shellfish) and time-honoured smoking, fermenting and curing traditions 
from the Danish kitchen and give them a twist. The dining spaces tend to be 
divinely designed too, so you can feast your eyes on the cool interiors between 
courses.

To explore something of Copenhagen’s dedication to fine art, old and new, make 
sure you pop into the Danish National Gallery in central Copenhagen to see the 
three permanent collections and also to the ARKEN Museum of Modern Art, to the 
south of the city – built by architect Søren Robert Lund to resemble a stranded 
ship and housing some 400 mainly post-1990 works by Danish, Scandinavian and 
international artists.

Can coffee be fine art? Many Danes think so, and at specialists like the Kent 
Kaffe Laboratorium in the city centre, Rist Kafeebar on Vesterbro’s 
Værnedamsvej, Democratic inside the main library, and across the branches of 
the Coffee Collective, you can taste brews from all over the bean-growing 
world. If this sounds all a bit too urban and “aspirational”, don’t worry – 
Danes specialise in the ideal ofhygge, which is a sort of homeliness and 
snugness, meaning that even the fanciest coffee comes with a comforting Danish 
pastry and a candle to calm down all that contemporary coolness.

For more information and inspiration, go to visitdenmark.co.uk 
<http://www.visitdenmark.co.uk/en-gb/denmark/modern-copenhagen-city-guide?utm_campaign=UK_Copenhagen_Modern&utm_medium=textlink&utm_source=guardian&utm_content=kampagnesite&utm_term=.>

For the lastest news and pics, visit Denmark on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/denmark> and Instagram 
<https://www.instagram.com/govisitdenmark/>
