
Q I am a vegetarian and a lover of home-made soups. All of the vegetable stock 
cubes I've tried taste rather nasty. What are your tips for flavourful stocks 
that don't involve the remains of animals? Best wishes,Jo

A Dear Jo, I'm afraid all the stock cubes I have tried are pretty rubbish. I 
tend to use vegetable powder because it is the least salty and does seem 
relatively free of anything horrid (there is also a vegan version), but of 
course all vegetable stocks are by their nature very thin and useless for 
risotto or anything that needs a bit of "body". They don't bind with the starch 
in the rice in the way a meat stock does. Making your own vegetable stock is 
simple enough. I make sure to let the onions become very soft and sweet before 
I add the rest of the veg and the water and boil it up. It takes a good 15-20 
minutes longer, but gives the stock a real depth. (I like to use tomatoes and 
mushrooms in mine, too, even though they can make the stock very cloudy.) 
Unlike meat stocks, vegetable versions are not improved by long cooking - they 
end up a bit "cabbagey", so cook them for no longer than 45 minutes. They 
freeze well, too, should you need to.

Q Dear Nigel, I have been given two tubes of rather fancy-looking French 
chestnut spread. No idea what to do with them - what would you recommend? Many 
thanks,Caroline

A The uses are almost endless, but my favourite is to use it in a dessert with 
meringues. Crumble the meringues into a bowl, fold in a little whipped cream, 
squeeze the chestnut purée from the tube over the top, then spoon over some 
melted dark chocolate.

• If you have a cooking question for Nigel, email ask.nigel@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:ask.nigel@observer.co.uk>.
