
It has been the most talked-about Archers plot in years but the long-running 
domestic abuse storyline which culminated with Helen Titchener stabbing her 
abusive husband Rob could not halt a dip in listeners to the Ambridge soap.


The “everyday story of countryfolk” attracted an average weekly reach of 4.7 
million listeners in the first three months of this year, down 3% on the final 
three months of 2015.

It reflected a similar decline in the station’s overall audience, which was 
also down 3% on the previous quarter, to 10.6 million. Its flagship breakfast 
programme Today lost 4% of its audience, down to 6.8 million.

Related: Nancy Banks-Smith on The Archers: two years of thumbscrew torture 
comes to a climax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/apr/04/nancy-banks-smith-on-murder-in-the-archers-ambridge-helen-rob>

It is the first full quarter since the BBC’s former political editor Nick 
Robinson joined the Today team 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/nov/13/poignant-moment-nick-robinson-today-programme-bbc>
, succeeding James Naughtie who left last November.

The Archers <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-archers> audience 
typically hovers just under the 5 million mark, although five years ago it 
topped 5 million during its 60th anniversary quarter in which Nigel Pargetter 
memorably fell to his death from the roof of Lower Loxley.

The Archers is proving a digital hit, however, with a record 3.6 million 
requests via the BBC’s iPlayer to listen to the programme in March 2016.

A Radio 4 <http://www.theguardian.com/media/radio4> spokesperson said: “Radio 
4 audiences remain strong and loyal with the station continuing to reach one in 
five adults in the UK every week.

“It is not unusual for live listening figures to fluctuate slightly and it is 
natural we would see this reflected in individual programmes.

“Separate to live listening, audiences have been hitting record numbers for 
programme requests with 13 million Radio 4 programmes requested in April alone. 
There were 33.3m requests from BBC iPlayer Radio forRadio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> 4 programmes during this quarter, 
that’s a 43% increase on last year.”

Earlier this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/apr/05/the-archers-abuse-storyline-helen-rob-radio-4-tony-hall>
 the BBC’s director general Tony Hall said the Archers domestic violence story 
had propelled the soap to its highest ever audience appreciation figures.

But the plotline did not go down well with everyone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/mar/25/how-the-archers-abuse-story-helen-rob-titchener-has-divided-fans>
, and one former editorwarned against the soap becoming too sensational 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/apr/04/the-archers-must-not-become-too-sensational-producer-warned>
.

Related: Archers editor Sean O’Connor: ‘Helen is the victim. But she shouldn’t 
have stabbed him’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/07/archers-editor-sean-oconnor-helen-is-the-victim-but-she-shouldnt-have-stabbed-him>

Archers editor Sean O’Connor hailed the online listening figures after the 
latest official Rajar figures were published on Thursday.

“It’s amazing that a 65-year-old programme can find itself the smash hit of 
the digital age,” he said.

“These extraordinary figures are an endorsement of the enduring pleasures of 
the programme and the unique power of radio drama to engage the audience. The 
story of Helen and Rob has gripped the nation and perhaps it’s only The Archers 
that could tell this story in this slow-burn, incremental way.

“In the 1950s, the programme’s original editor observed that the success of 
the programme lay in the fact that they’d made The Archers addictive; it’s 
gratifying to feel that we’re still achieving the same compulsive, addictive 
effect in the competitive world of new media.”


