
Six months of waiting. A year of training. Perhaps a lifetime of dreaming. The 
race is finally underway, yet you feel rundown and lacklustre. There is a
scientific term <http://bmjopensem.bmj.com/content/1/1/e000063.full> for it, 
but let’s just call it a bad race day. Everyone has experienced it, from Paula 
Radcliffe to yours faithfully (occasional amateur).


The next generation of running technology, and in particular more accessible 
blood testing, promises to help avoid such frustrating and unexplained dips in 
performance. We can monitor our heart rates and sleep, but within five years we 
could have instant access to a whole range of data linked to physical 
performance, including red blood cell count and vitamin D and iron levels.


“Strava is brilliant because you can track your performances over time, but if 
we looked at your profile we could see potential issues straight away,” says Dr 
Brian Moore, who runs the companyOrreco <http://orreco.com/> that uses the 
technology on elite runners. “Your muscle damage might be high, your immune 
system might be compromised, your haemoglobin might be low, which means there 
might be a problem in the weeks or months to come.”


It’s already known that many women could be turning up to races with low 
levels of iron. Going by astudy <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26901873> 
of runners at the London marathon last year, heavy menstrual bleeding is 
affecting more than a third of female athletes and is linked to bothiron 
deficiency 
<http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/Anaemia-iron-deficiency-/Pages/Introduction.aspx#Symptoms>
 and negative performance. Lower iron levels reduce the body’s haemoglobin 
levels and our ability to deliver oxygen to muscles, leading to fatigue.


“There are women out there effectively suffering in silence,” says Georgie 
Bruinvels, 27, a PhD student and Great Britain runner researching the topic at 
St Mary’s University, London. “They are massively at risk, but until you are 
woken up to it you probably don’t realise you could be affected by it.” Moore 
says a blood test every couple of months would help athletes adapt their 
training, sleep and nutrition before it affects performance.


There are companies <https://www.blueprintforathletes.com/faq/> in the US 
offering tests – starting at £200 each – to amateur triathletes and endurance 
runners, with samples sent off to laboratories. Moore reckons the rapid 
progress in fingerprick blood-testing means there could be handheld products on 
the market within five years.


Related: How to discover your true running potential 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/the-running-blog/2013/mar/21/discover-true-running-potential>

Regular blood testing does feels a tad excessive for a weekend runner and some 
worry it might cause unnecessary and excessive worry, or even self-medication. 
“Can you imagine saying: ‘I can’t come into the office today, my white blood 
cell count is too low’?” says amateur endurance athlete Rosemary Byde.


There are also concerns about doping. In the US, blood tests for low 
testosterone have become common, especially for men over 40, and have led to 
the wider use of illegal replacement therapies. “As amateur athletes are rarely 
drug tested, this can increase the temptation to cheat,” says Dr Andrew 
Kirkland, a coach and sports scientist at Stirling University. “There are 
certainly anecdotal reports of an increased use of human growth hormone and 
blood boosters in amateur sport, in which blood testing may be a gateway to 
such abuse.”


But Moore says the work his company is doing with elite athletes is proving 
that blood and otherbiomarker <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25719791> 
data is a way to improve performance, rather than resorting to cheating. “Our 
passion is helping athletes to achieve peak performance, using 100% of their 
natural talents. Any athlete, professional or amateur, that cheats is really 
just cheating themselves.”

