
There’s not much new under the gardening sun. A begonia with a couple more 
petals here, a busy lizzie in a brighter shade of pink there. For something 
outside the safe zone this summer, I have a truly left-field idea that I hope 
will appeal toObserver readers: quinoa flowers.

I first came across quinoa during my postgraduate research in the highlands of 
Ecuador in the early 2000s. At that time, the crop was still an obscure Andean 
peasant grain – not ubiquitous, trendy health fodder. I walked over the brow of 
a hill and was stopped in my tracks by a field of frothy flower heads in neon 
shades. The colours were so intense it felt like something straight out ofThe 
Wizard of Oz.

The pigments responsible for these psychedelic shades are called “betalains” 
and they are rarely found in nature, which means that they stand out as 
appearing almost artificially intense. The only place we might be familiar with 
these is in the lurid Technicolor stems of rainbow chard or the flowers of
Amaranthus <https://www.rhs.org.uk/plants/details?plantid=113> or Celosias 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/295078/i-Celosia-argentea-i-var-i-cristata-i-(Plumosa-Group)-Glow-Red/Details?returnurl=%2Fplants%2Fannuals%3Fcontext%3Db%25253D0%252526hf%25253D12%252526l%25253Den%252526s%25253Ddesc%25252528plant_merged%25252529%252526sl%25253Dplants%252526r%25253Df%2525252Fplant_plant_type%2525252Fannual_biennial%26s%3Ddesc(plant_merged)%26page%3D8%26aliaspath%3D%252fplants%252fannuals>
, all of which belong to the same family. Understated they are not, but for 
pure wow factor, playing with the rules of good taste can pay off.

The Incas, who domesticated quinoa, were astute agricultural engineers in the 
sense that so many of their key crops were essentially weeds. The plants were 
selectively bred to be bigger and tastier, while retaining their wild vigour. 
An incredibly close relative to the European weed “fat hen”, quinoa is 
perfectly adapted to the poor soils and chilly temperatures of the high Andes, 
making it happy to just get on with it without any intervention. In fact, in 
recent years, several quinoa farms have popped up across the UK, which shows 
how easy it is to grow.

To get growing, simply scatter a pack of quinoa seed evenly over a bare patch 
of ground and water in well. As with chard, colour varies greatly with variety. 
For full impact, hunt down “Brightest Brilliant Rainbow 
<http://www.territorialseed.com/product/Brightest_Brilliant_Rainbow_Quinoa_Organic_Seed/organic-gourmet-greens-seed>
” from online seed merchants.

Quinoa has the fastest germination rate I have ever seen, popping up in as 
little as 24 hours. It is packed full of soap-like chemicals called “saponins”, 
so pests ignore it. The plants are tolerant of drought and diseases, and have 
good fertility; the only work I do is to thin out the young seedlings to about 
20cm apart to ensure that I get the largest plants and biggest flowers.

Growing quickly to a foot or so, the plants then tend to slow down to 
accumulate sugars. Then, in the late summer – and almost without warning – they 
rocket out flower spikes up to a metre and a half tall. Maximum dazzle, minimum 
effort.

Email James at james.wong@observer.co.uk <mailto:james.wong@observer.co.uk> or 
follow him on Twitter@Botanygeek <mailto:@Botanygeek>
