
What is Activate? 

Activate <http://bit.ly/Dy0yW> is the Guardian's platform for leaders working 
across all sectors who have proven that, through the use of technology and the 
internet, we can make the world a better place.

Through senior level summits in London and New York and our online platform on 
theguardian.com Activate examines and debates the influence of technology on 
global society in areas as diverse as media, commerce and economics, the 
environment, energy and sustainability, citizenship, democracy, governance and 
accountability, the developing world, healthcare, education, science and 
humanity.

The Activate platform is the Guardian's gathering place for leaders of a new 
global network focused on harnessing and employing technological and social 
innovation for human betterment. 

Activate reflects and embodies the near limitless possibilities of modern 
technology and collective social will, bringing together some of the world's 
most influential figures to discuss and debate the critical issues and 
strategies driving a more connected and cohesive planet.

When and where are our Activate Summits? 

The Activate Summit takes place every year in June at the Guardian's purpose 
built headquarters in Kings Place, London. On 28th April 2011 we are running 
the inaugural international Activate Summit in New York City.

Who speaks at Activate? 

From ancient literature to new media; philanthropic benevolence to new wave 
capitalism; state rebuilding to social activism; environmental responsibility 
to open education and a little bit of everything else thrown in, our speakers 
are drawn from across a range of sectors and disciplines and herald from all 
four corners of the globe.

The binding element?: They have recognised, developed and employed the immense 
power of technology in all its forms to confront the greatest challenges of our 
age – and at Activate they will explain how and why they have done this.

Activate speakers are those who lead by example, not just by commentary. We 
want those individuals who have affected profound, far reaching and beneficial 
change at a global level through their endeavours.

Speakers at past Activate Summits include: 

- Eric Schmidt, CEO and chairman, Google 

- Nicholas Negroponte, founder, One Laptop Per Child

- Katie Stanton, director, international, Twitter 

- Fred Wilson, managing partner, Union Square Ventures 

- Clay Shirky, professor, Interactive Telecommunications Program, NYU 

- Joe Cerrell, European director, The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation 

- Arianna Huffington, founder & editor-in-chief, The Huffington Post

- Werner Vogels, CTO, Amazon

- Desiree Miloshevic, special advisor, United Nations Internet Governance 
Forum Advisory Group

- Ethan Zuckerman, founder, Global Voices 

- Jan Chipchase, executive creative director of global insights, Frog Design 

- Alan Rusbridger, editor-in-chief, The Guardian 

- Tom Steinberg, founder & director, MySociety 

- Esther Dyson, angel investor & chairman, EDventure Holdings 

- Tom Steinberg, founder, MySociety 

- Nigel Shadbolt, director, Web Science Trust & The Web Foundation 

- Clare Lockhart, co-founder and CEO, Institute for State Effectiveness 

- Jon Udell, evangelist, Microsoft 

- Iqbal Quadir, founder, GrameenPhone & founder and director, Legatum Centre 
for Development and Entrepreneurship, MIT

- Charlie Leadbeater, founder, Participle / author, We Think / fellow, Nesta

- Bradley Horowitz, vice president of products, Google 

- John Van Oudenaren, director, World Digital Library Initiative, The Library 
of Congress

- Nick Bostrom, director of the future of humanity institute, Oxford University

- Dr Ian Lipkin, professor of epidemiology, neurology & pathology, Columbia 
University

- Dr. R.K. Pachauri, chairman, IPCC & director general, TERI 

- Nigel Shadbolt, professor of Artificial Intelligence, University of 
Southampton

- Julie Meyer, founder & CEO, Ariadne 

- Martha Lane-Fox, UK digital champion 

- Stephen King, senior director, investments, Omidyar Network 

- Gaurav Mishra, CEO, 2020 Social

- Katrin Verclas, co-founder & editor, MobileActive.org 

- Rose Shuman, founder, OpenMind & Question Box in rural India and Uganda 

- David Cavallo, vice president & chief learning architect, One Laptop Per 
Child

- David Craig, EVP & chief strategy officer, Thomson Reuters 

- Juliana Rotich, co-founder & director of programmes, Ushahidi 

- Peter Sunde, founder, Flattr / co-founder, Pirate Bay

What audience will Activate attract? 

Director level delegates from across private, public and third sectors, from 
the biggest media and technology companies, government organisations and 
international charities to the brightest technology start ups and VC investors. 
In terms of audience, as with the speaker line up, the Activate audience is 
made up of an eclectic mix of disciplines and sectors.

What media coverage will Activate garner? 

The first two Activate Summits have been huge successes, garnering unanimous 
praise not only from participants and delegates but also across online and 
print media (Sky News, Forbes etc) and amongst theTwitterati 
<http://bit.ly/5Cd1PY>. The summit's central message strikes a powerful chord 
with an increasingly defined, organised and ever growing section of activists 
who recognise the power of technology to change the world for the better.

Media coverage for Activate 2010 will be extensive, both internally and 
externally. We made a big splash with last year's event - with eminent blogger 
James Govenor describing the event as a "watershed in UK media and culture" and 
a huge amount of activity in the Twittersphere - and interest for this year's 
event is already mounting. We will have journalists from the BBC, major news 
agencies, broadsheets and relevant trade press as well as online bloggers and 
digital news networks in the room.

"I love the theme of the summit because for me what we do is ultimately about 
impact and there can be no impact without people being activated. The theme of 
every session here is about giving people information that activates them."
Arianna Huffington, editor-in-chief, The Huffington Post 

"Activate2010 was incredible. Great mix of people, ideas and just all round 
brilliant. Couldn't believe the day ended so quickly."
Juliana Rotich, co-founder, Ushahidi 

"Activate felt like a seminal event, perhaps even a watershed in business and 
media culture. The Guardian has created a space to pull together a lot of 
really important conversations about where we go from here…Activate is 
unashamedly targeted at makers and doers, people that will build things…such as 
the future."
James Governor, analyst, Redmonk 

"The chance to speak on the Activate main stage was one of the most 
exhilarating moments in my start-up career. Exploring how to change the world 
through the internet with some of the brightest minds in tech, academia and 
politics has created amazing opportunities for Mendeley."
Victor Henning, founder, Mendeley 
