
Does England have one of the world’s best-paid leaders of schools in the form 
of Sir Daniel Moynihan, chief executive of the Harris academies chain? 
The question arises after the Harris Federation’s annual accounts revealed 
another pay rise for Moynihan in 2014‑15, with his salary climbing by 5%, or 
£20,000, to £395,000-£400,000.

Moynihan also received pensions contributions from his employer of 
£40,000-£45,000, a slight drop on the £50,000-£55,000 paid in 2013-14. His 
salary, which is now approaching three times that of the prime minister, has 
risen by 83% since 2009. Moynihan’s position is akin to a local authority 
director of education and so as far as we are aware his salary in that position 
is unmatched in the UK.

Harris’s accounts also reveal that four employees, including Moynihan, were 
paid £200,000 or more. By comparison, at Harris’s competitor chain ArkSchools 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/schools>, the highest-paid employee 
received £180,000-£190,000 in 2014-15.

Harris has said it doesn’t comment on individual salaries. If Moynihan has any 
higher-paid peers here or elsewhere in the world, please get in touch.

… Meanwhile Harris’s Croydon pupils go awol


Still on the subject of Harris academies, the government was told that the 
Harris Federation had failed to follow regulations when it omitted to inform a 
local authority about children leaving its schools early. But officials limited 
their rebuke on this to a single telephone conversation with the trust. Harris 
has denied the alleged failure.

The revelations, revealed in correspondence released under freedom of 
information rules, come amid questions over thedisappearance of thousands of 
teenagers 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jan/21/england-schools-10000-pupils-sidelined-due-to-league-table-pressures>
 from mainstream secondary rolls in the run-up to their GCSEs.

The source is an exchange of letters between Croydon council, London’s largest 
local authority by population, and the Education Funding Agency. The letters 
had been prompted by an article inEducation Guardian 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/jan/21/gcse-pupils-disappearing-from-school-rolls>
 in January 2014.

Our story had revealed that Harris had six schools in England’s top 50 ranked 
by checking how much the year group taking GCSEs in 2013 had shrunk compared 
with the size of the same cohort when it entered secondary education.

In February 2014, Sylvia McNamara, Croydon’s director for learning, wrote to 
Peter Lauener 
<https://www.dropbox.com/s/2vfsinhgoo13hnv/croydonefaletterone130214.doc?dl=0 
to Peter Lauener, EFA>, EFA chief executive, saying she was concerned.

Lauener’s reply 
<https://www.dropbox.com/s/8s9kahfvagl6o37/efacroydonletterone030314.pdf?dl=0> 
says the EFA had looked at Harris’s data and seen nothing unusual. But McNamara 
responded, saying: “I feel the need to ask you to look at this again, as our 
own research does not bear this statement out.”

McNamara’s second letter 
<https://www.dropbox.com/s/fq10e47d9oxzjiw/croydonefalettertwo210314.doc?dl=0> 
provided detailed data showing four comprehensives, all of which were sponsored 
academies with two of them run by Harris, leading its table of Croydon 
secondaries with the largest number of pupils disappearing before the age of 16 
over a 16-month period.

One, Harris Academy South Norwood, had 26 pupils registered as having left its 
rolls between January 2012 and May 2013, 24 of whose subsequent education 
destination was registered as “unknown” by the council.

McNamara wrote: “I am concerned about this for two reasons: firstly it appears 
there is substance to the figures published in the Guardian and second, there 
are potential safeguarding issues for learners whose destination is unknown.

“You point out in your letter that all schools must follow clear regulations 
when removing a pupil from their roll … our school admissions team have 
confirmed to me that the Harris Federation do not inform us of pupils who are 
deleted from their register … we are subsequently unable to track them.

“I would be grateful, therefore, if this could be followed up and investigated 
and if the academy could be instructed to conform with this requirement.”

Lauener wrote back in April 
<https://www.dropbox.com/s/lkd5v1knv26vbug/efacroydonlettertwo020414.pdf?dl=0> 
saying the EFA had contacted Harris and that “they are very keen to discuss and 
resolve any issues”.

A further FOI request, asking the DfE what action had been taken against 
Harris in response to this, saw the EFA saying: “A follow-up conversation took 
place between the EFA and Harris Federation to remind them of their 
obligations.”

Harris’s 2013 GCSE year group was 12% smaller than the same cohort in year 8. 
The 2015 Harris GCSE cohort was 8% smaller than when the same pupils were in 
year 7, DfE data shows.

Harris declined to comment on the record but said it had complied in full with 
its legal responsibilities, as it had correctly reported pupils leaving to 
Croydon’s behaviour welfare service, rather than to the local authority’s 
admissions team.

Pupils discover school closure on social media


Pupils and parents were staggered after finding out via social media that 
their 133-year-old private school was to close, with some of them part-way 
through GCSE and A-level courses, Education Guardian has learned.

Sunderland high school, founded in 1884 under the United Church Schools Trust 
charity, part of United Learning, which now also runs academies,has cited 
falling pupil numbers <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-tyne-35351213> and 
a six-figure annual deficit.

But the manner of the announcement left the community bemused, as some pupils 
read of the school’s closure on its website, then passed on the news to 
disbelieving friends on Instagram. The charity later had to tell parents that 
an email that was meant to reach them that day had not been sent.

Jon Coles, the charity’s chief executive and a former Whitehall mandarin, has 
faced the anger of parents, though there are rumours of an attempt to save the 
school. We were unable to reach United Learning for comment.

Pay progression stalls – except for CEOs


An academy chain whose joint chief executives own a company that received 
£700,000 from it over two years is enraging unions by, they say, allowing only 
small numbers of its rank-and-file teachers to progress up pay scales.

Draft figures shown by the 12-school Griffin Schools Trust to unions last 
month seem to indicate only half of teachers eligible for pay progression 
receiving it this academic year with, in 2014-15, only 65% progressing. These 
figures appear substantially lower than reportednational averages 
<http://schoolsweek.co.uk/one-in-12-teachers-denied-salary-rise-under-performance-pay-system/>
 and come despite GST’s joint chief executive Liz Lewis hailing its schools’ 
quality, saying in October that pupil progress at all 12 schools was good.

That comment had been in reaction to an Observer story 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/oct/24/academy-chain-fees-griffin-accountability-trustees>
 revealing that a company wholly owned by Lewis and her fellow CEO, Ange Tyler, 
had received £713,132 between 2012 and 2014. The two each received 
£100,000-£110,000 salaries in 2014-15. A union source said: “It’s not just, is 
it?”

GST said the pay progression figures were inaccurate and that the true figures 
were much higher, as they included staff not eligible for progression, though 
the data appeared on GST-headed paper under the heading “number of teachers 
eligible/received/denied” progression. It added: “GST is a fair and 
developmental employer, with a strong record of internal promotion and a 
demonstrable commitment to the personal and career development of all our 
staff.”

Additional reporting by Patrick Edwards
