
Magic and Kiss FM owner, Bauer, is set to face a probe from competition 
regulators over its£40m-plus takeover 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/06/bauer-buys-radio-group-orion-media>
 of local radio group Orion Media.


The UK’s second biggest commercial radio group is aiming to grow its presence 
in the Midlands snapping up Orion’s portfolio of stations that include Gem 106 
and Free Radio.

Related: Bauer merges its UK magazine publishing businesses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/11/bauer-merges-its-uk-magazine-publishing-businesses>

Paul Keenan, the chief executive of Bauer Media, has positioned the deal as 
“complementary” to its own radio holdings in the Midlands and not a takeover to 
spark fears of a significant reduction in competition. However, a previous 
ruling from the Competition and Markets Authority relating to Global Radio, the 
UK’s biggest commercial radio group taking over the third biggest player,
Smooth-owner GMG Radio 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/jun/25/gmg-radio-sold-global-50m>, 
suggests that Bauer looks likely to face a probe.

The 2013 ruling 
<http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20140402141250/http://www.competition-commission.org.uk/media-centre/latest-news/2013/May/global-gmg-final-report>
, which resulted in Global Radio having to sell off stations in a number of 
regions, states a deal will be blocked in any region competition if a local 
area is reduced to just two main rivals.

Global Radio was not ordered to sell off any of it or GMG’s stations in the 
Midlands because the competition authority said there were still two other main 
rivals: Bauer-owned Kerrang! and Orion-owned stations.

The competition regulator said at the time: “The number of radio companies 
broadcasting across the area would reduce from four to three with the 
competitors to the merged company [Global/GMG] being Orion’s network of 
stations and Bauer’s Kerrang! station.”

The regulator also made passing reference to smaller players locally, UTV and 
Quidem, but the argument that competition was healthy in the Midlands was 
almost totally based on the view of Orion as “a strong competitor”. The deal 
trying to be pushed through byBauer <http://www.theguardian.com/media/bauer>, 
which now has the Absolute brand instead of Kerrang! in the Midlands, would 
eliminate Orion as a rival appearing to leave only Global as a serious 
competitor.

Keenan argues against the regulator’s view making the point that Absolute is a 
national player and Orion is local, so there is no lessening of competition on 
a local scale in the Midlands. “This acquisition essentially brings into our 
business a local radio operation in the Midlands,” said Keenan. “We have one FM 
licence in the region that we broadcast Absolute Radio on. Absolute is 
essentially a national service; Orion is a significant local platform. From a 
competition standpoint, my view is there is no change in the competition 
landscape.”

However, given the official stance taken in the Global/GMG ruling competition 
experts say it seems likely the regulator will be prompted to scrutinise the 
Bauer deal. This is particularly likely in this case as it is understood rivals 
are likely to write to the regulator about the deal, which in the past the 
regulator has acted upon to launch at least a cursory probe.

One industry source said that Bauer’s defence of the deal flew in the face of 
the regulator’s established precedent. “The fact that Absolute is a national 
station in terms of its content is irrelevant,” said the source. “What matters 
is competition for local advertisers. The regulator clearly considered the 
Kerrang! [now Absolute] licence to be a competitor in this market at the time 
of the Global/GMG deal.”

Last year, the CMA launched what is known as a phase-one probe 
<https://www.gov.uk/cma-cases/global-radio-juice-merger-inquiry> into Global 
Radio’s £10m takeover 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jun/05/utv-media-juice-fm-global-radio> 
of UTV-owned Juice FM, but cleared the deal.
