
The pressure on state school places in England has spread from primary schools 
to secondaries, with official figures showing it is getting harder for pupils 
to get their top choice of schools.

Figures from local authorities show that applications for secondary school 
places this year 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/secondary-and-primary-school-applications-and-offers-2015>
 reached their highest since 2009, as the first cohorts of the recent baby boom 
begin to finish their primary education and move up.

The increase saw the proportion of applicants being offered their first 
preference dropping from 85% to 84% in the space of a year, to the lowest 
levels since 2010.

About 20,000 pupils, nearly 4% of applicants, failed to receive an offer from 
any of their named choices for the new school year starting in September.

While much attention has been on creating additional primary school places, 
council leaders have warned that local authorities struggle to create new 
secondary school places because of government policy restricting new schools to 
being academies or free schools.

David Simmonds, chair of the Local Government Association’s children and young 
people board, said: “Councils face a challenge creating places on time and in 
the right places when their hands are tied by red tape and they are short of 
money to do so.”

Families in London were the worst hit by oversubscription 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/434670/SFR17-2015_Apps_Offs_Tables.xls>
, as fewer than seven out of every 10 applicants gained a place at their first 
choice of secondary school.

Places were even harder to come by in some inner London 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> authorities such as Hammersmith & 
Fulham, Westminster and Wandsworth, where fewer than 60% of first preferences 
were filled.

More than one in five applicants in Hammersmith were offered places at schools 
that they had not named.

Birmingham was the local authority outside of London with the most pressure on 
places. Just 68% of first preferences ofBirmingham 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/birmingham> families were met, while 13% did not 
receive any of their named preferences – the highest proportion outside the 
capital, along with Windsor and Maidenhead.

The worsening secondary statistics contrast with primary school applications, 
which were little changed from the previous year despite a 12,000 increase in 
the number of applicants.

Nearly 88% of families received their first preference of primary school, a 
slight rise on 2014 that reflected the efforts to provide more places.

But more than 22,000 families did not get offered one of their named choices, 
which ranges from three to six depending on local authority, with 96% receiving 
a preferred offer.

London local authorities fared much better in primary allocations than for 
secondary places. But there were still big gaps between boroughs: Kensington 
and Chelsea only offered first preferences to 59% of families, compared with 
London’s 82% average. Kensington was unable to offer any named places to 16% of 
children.

Meanwhile, Northumberland, north-east Lincolnshire and Yorkshire’s East Riding 
local authorities offered first-choice places to more than 95% of applicants.

Nationally, 2,500 children were not initially offered any primary school place 
by their local authorities. For secondary schools, more than 2,000 pupils 
received no place on national offer day in March.

A Department for Education official said: “We are determined to give every 
family the choice of a good local school for their child.

“That is why we are pleased that despite rising pupil numbers, the proportion 
of parents being allocated one of their top choices remains stable, with more 
than 95% of parents receiving an offer at one of their preferred schools.”
