
It was in the late winter of January 1950 that Tom Stuttard took this 
carefully observed photograph of a Manchester street scene. 'Victoria Street' 
is an enigmatic depiction of post-war Manchester and its inhabitants and a 
remarkable image in its own right. However despite being published twice it 
remains largely unknown.

Like much of the Guardian's photographic archive this image is non-sequential. 
Instead it belongs to a larger constellation of news photographs that form a 
fragmentary narrative. TheManchester Picture Library 
<http://calm.guardian.co.uk/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=GUA%2f6%2f9%2f1%2f4&pos=1>
 (c.1920-c.1981), where this photograph is stored within the 'Fog Scenes' file, 
was the paper's first working library. It is now housed and preserved at theGNM 
Archive <http://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive>. Within its many boxes, lies a 
significant museum of photography, that centre mostly on depictions of the 
north. Viewed chronologically it would be possible to chart the many journeys 
of the paper's first staff photographers, among themWalter Doughty 
<http://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/gallery/walter-doughty-guardian-first-photographer>
, Tom Stuttard and Robert Smithies. However each catalogued file remains 
preserved in its original order; a series of alphabetical subjects (e.g, 
'Aviators', 'Ice', 'Hair', 'Slums') that were added to each week to be used 
should a relevant story arise and together forming a larger and more convoluted 
atlas of the Guardian'shistory 
<http://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/2002/jun/06/1>. 

Tom Stuttard joined the Manchester Guardian & Evening News in 1925 and worked 
for both papers until 1948 when he began working exclusively for the Guardian. 
He worked for the paper for 46 years (1925-1971) under seven editors. At the 
time this photograph was taken Stuttard had recently superseded Walter Doughty 
as the Manchester Guardian's second chief photographer. Together they had 
covered the General Strike and Manchester unemployment riots in 1931, making 
great use of 'ancient' large-format camera equipment with glass-plate 
negatives. However 'Victoria Street' showcases another side to Stuttard's eye - 
the ability to depict quiet scenes as he walked through his native Manchester 
and a relatively new found freedom heralded by his handheld camera.

In 'Victoria Street' the city is dark and tranquil, transformed by heavy fog 
and northern skies. This scene which could easily be mistaken as early evening, 
was in fact taken at midday (as Stuttard records on the reverse of one print), 
perhaps on a walk to or from the Manchester Guardian's Cross Street offices. We 
know that it is a cold day because all subjects are wearing winter coats and a 
breeze has caught the bunting of the flower seller's wooden cart. In the 
background looms the Deansgate Hotel, an architectural reminder of the scars 
left by the War. It is just possible to make out the hotels signage which marks 
the unoccupied building, dormant since December 22 1940 when it fell victim to 
air raids. The top windows reveal wooden beams and the extent of fire damage 
received as a result. To the centre of the image in the far distance it is 
possible to trace the profile of a lone figure emerging from the fog.

As viewers we are left to consider the status of the relationship, if any, 
between the scene's inhabitants. For what reason are the flowers being 
purchased? Is the man on the left of the frame simply a passer-by? Was it 
merely weather changes to familiar surroundings that persuaded Stuttard to lift 
the camera to his eye, or was it something else? Whatever the reason, we know 
that Stuttard showed great enthusiasm for this photograph. The same afternoon 
he returned to the paper's darkroom, developed his film and produced at least 
three (modestly sized) prints.
 Tom Stuttard at an exhibition of his photographs in 1971. Photograph: Guardian
Although Stuttard was known to have covered many major news events (including 
a seminal photograph ofNeville Chamberlain 
<http://www.theguardian.com/newsroom/crozier/images/0,,946737,00.html>), 
photographs such as this one, 'Sunday morning - Oldham' and his esteemed '
Grandfather clock collectors 
<http://www.culture24.org.uk/art/photography-and-film/art63537>' series 
showcase a talent, and hunger for recording Manchester's 'everyday'. In light 
of this he is a significant contributor to the development of the Guardian's 
photographic style and an important part of a lineage of Manchester-based 
photographers.

Stuttard continued to work for the paper until his retirement on 14 August 
1971. He died in 1981, the same year the Manchester Picture Library eventually 
closed its files. The change had been somewhat inevitable since the late 60s 
when the paper began printing in London thus heralding the need for a larger 
London-based library. Although Stuttard's work survives in both the major 
Guardian libraries, it is the Manchester library which contains the majority of 
his vintage prints.


Downloadable PDF resource - Victoria Street, Manchester - Tom Stuttard 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1387557150400/EducationCentreTomStuttardP.pdf>

Further reading:

A Long Exposure: 100 years of Guardian photography 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/interactive/2008/oct/21/theguardian-pressandpublishing>

Walter Doughty - the Guardian's first photographer 
<http://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/gallery/walter-doughty-guardian-first-photographer>

Past teaching resources of the month from the GNM Archive 
<http://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/series/resource-of-the-month>

More teaching resources can be found on our resources for teachers 
<http://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/resources-for-teachers> page.
