
The UK advertising watchdog has appointed Reg Bailey, who led the government’s 
review into the commercialisation and sexualisation of childhood, to the 
council that decides whether to ban advertisements.

Bailey, the former chief executive of the Mothers’ Union, will join the 
Advertising <http://www.theguardian.com/media/advertising> Standards 
Authority’s council of 13 members.

The council is the “jury” 
<https://www.asa.org.uk/About-ASA/Our-team/ASA-Council.aspx> that decides on 
whether advertisements that have received complaints have breached the UK 
advertising code.


“Having direct and indirect experience of the ASA throughout my career, both 
as a marketer and a campaigner for children’s rights, I’ve admired its 
commitment to and effectiveness in tackling misleading, harmful or 
irresponsible advertising,” said Bailey.


“It is fleet of foot in responding to social concerns about ads but, 
crucially, applies a common sense proportionate approach in making its 
judgments. I’m looking forward to contributing to the diverse and important 
work it carries out.”

Given Bailey’s background, his 2011 government report 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/jun/07/media-industry-bailey-report-sexualisation-of-children>
 proved highly influential in pushing the UK ad industry to toughen 
self-regulatory marketing practices, he is likely to come with a tough view on 
the code relating to harm and offence and social responsibility.

“One of our priorities is to protect children from inappropriate content, 
ensuring that the ads they see and hear are responsible,” said the ASA 
chairman, Chris Smith. “Reg’s background in marketing allied with his expertise 
on children’s wellbeing and issues that impact on young people will further 
enhance Council’s discussions in this area.”
