
During these cold winter days, Anumita Choudhury dare not leave her small 
second-floor apartment in Delhi’s northern suburbs. Elderly now, she has 
developed asthma. The last time she ventured into the streets of the world’s 
second most populous city she began gasping for breath and had to be helped 
home by her neighbours.

The story is the same in many of the world’s great cities. From Kabul in 
Afghanistan to Hong Kong and Shijiazhuang in China, and from Lima to São Paulo 
in Latin America, people are increasingly suffering in severe toxic smogs – 
leaving hospitals and health clinics flooded with people with respiratory and 
heart problems.

Related: Shock figures to reveal deadly toll of global air pollution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/16/world-heslth-organisation-figures-deadly-pollution-levels-world-biggest-cities>

Foul air has blanketed much of urban Asia for many weeks already this winter. 
In Delhi, where there are nearly nine million vehicles, the high court has 
compared conditions to “living in a gas chamber”; Beijing and 10 other Chinese 
cities have issued red alert warnings; in Tehran, where the chairman of the 
city council, Mehdi Chamran, says air pollution kills up to 180 people a day, 
the smog has been so bad that schools have been closed and sports banned.

According to the World Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> 
Organisation, the toxic fumes of growing numbers of diesel cars are combining 
with ammonia emissions from farming, wood and coal fires, tyre burning, open 
rubbish dumps, and dust from construction sites and brick kilns. The 
consequence is a global crisis that threatens to overwhelm countries’ economies 
as people succumb to heart and respiratory diseases, blood vessel conditions, 
strokes, lung cancers and other long-term illnesses.

The toxic haze blanketing cities was observed last week from the international 
space station.

“It’s bad now, but we just don’t know what will happen in future,” says María 
Neira, WHO public health chief. “This is the first generation in human 
experience exposed to such high levels of pollution. In the 19th century 
pollution was bad, but it was concentrated in just a few places. Now there are 
huge numbers of people living with high levels of pollution. Nearly 70% of 
people in cities are exposed to pollution above recommended levels.”

The problem is most acute in Asia, but many industrialised countries have been 
hit by smog this winter. Milan, Naples, Barcelona and some other cities in 
Spain declared an emergency and banned traffic for several days over Christmas; 
Poland’s most popular mountain resort, Zakopane, was choked in fumes; and 
several London streets breached their annual limits for nitrogen dioxide just 
days into 2016.

According to a recent study in Nature, led by Johannes Lelieveld, director of 
the Max Planck Institute for chemistry in Germany, more people now die from air 
pollution than malaria and HIV combined. They include 1.4 million people a year 
in China and 650,000 in India. This compares with about 180,000 a year in 
Europe.

New WHO figures on 2,000 cities, to be released next month, will show 
pollution worsening in many countries. At the last count in 2014, 15 out of the 
20 most polluted places were in India and China. The others were in Pakistan, 
Iran and Bangladesh. Of the worst 100, nearly 70 were in Asia and only a 
handful in Europe or the US.

But the WHO figures include only those cities that measure air pollution, and 
many of the worst offenders do not. “As the world urbanises, the pollution 
grows,” says Frank Kelly, director of environmental health research at King’s 
College London. “We suspect that many African cities have terrible pollution 
problems, but there is very little data. We know that places like Tehran are 
very polluted. In Europe the pollution is relatively clear in places like 
Germany, France and Britain, except for the diesel, but in eastern Europe, 
where they still have old industries, it is still very bad.”

After years of being discounted as an unavoidable cost of economic progress, 
air pollution is rising up the political and economic agendas, as developing 
countries grasp that the crisis threatens to cripple their economies and lead 
to simmering dissent.
Most air polluted cities graph 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/01/most-airpollutedcities/giv-27167Dq1PbNFv4yCD/>
According to a recent WHO study, the cost of disease and the premature deaths 
caused in Europe every year by air pollution was more than $1.6trillion in 
2010, nearly 10% of the gross domestic product of the EU in 2013. The UK was 
estimated to have suffered $83bn (£54bn) in costs associated with air 
pollution. Elsewhere in Europe, the figures were Germany $145bn, and France 
$53bn. The highest was in Bulgaria, which spent an estimated 29.5% of its GDP 
on the costs of air pollution fatalities.

More than 90% of citizens in the European region are exposed to annual levels 
of outdoor fine particulate matter above WHO’s air quality guidelines. This 
accounted for 482,000 premature deaths in 2012, from heart and respiratory 
diseases, blood vessel conditions and strokes, and lung cancer.

As concern over pollution grows, cities have begun to take action. On Friday, 
Delhi ended a two-week trial that took a third of the city’s three million 
private cars off the road by alternating entry to an odd and even number plates 
scheme and a ban on large diesel SUVs. City authorities said the trial resulted 
in a 50% drop in air pollution “primarily caused by vehicular traffic”, but 
this is disputed.

China has recognised the problem and copied western countries by moving power 
stations out of cities. This, along with years of heavy investment in renewable 
energy and increased fines for polluting industries, has improved air quality 
in some areas. However, away from big cities such as Beijing and Shanghai 
pollution is still bad.

“It was inevitable in places like London in the 19th century, when health was 
not considered so important,” says Neira. “But today it is irresponsible to 
allow it, and the argument of economic development is not valid. We need to 
develop a different culture in our cities. We need much better public policies.

“It needs social pressure and more awareness. There is no going back. People 
will not accept pollution. But not cities are aware how serious it is.”

If emissions continue to rise at current rates, the number of smog-induced 
deaths could double to more than six million a year by 2050, says Lelieveld.

“It is a grim scenario, but I doubt people will accept a doubling of 
pollution. It is a warning.Pollution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/pollution> is still getting worse, but 
the awareness is changing and there is a willingness to deal with the problem.”

Global picture 

BEIJING

The Chinese capital has long suffered from serious air pollution from coal 
burning and industry, but embarrassment at the Olympic Games, the closure of 
many factories and the removal of power plants from the centre have drastically 
cut pollution levels. There is a new willingness to deal with it, but pollution 
remains a big public health threat and Beijing was one of 10 Chinese cities 
that declared an emergency red alert last month.

KABUL

The fast-growing Afghan capital city is one of the unhealthiest in the world, 
surrounded by hills that trap pollution for days on end and full of cars and 
buses burning low-quality fuel and millions of houses being warmed with wood 
and paraffin. According to doctors in the main hospital, air pollution is now 
the greatest cause of death, killing more than 3,000 people a year – more than 
from war, terrorism, road accidents or HIV and Aids. Air pollution is also bad 
in other Afghan cities such as Herat, Kandahar, Jalalabad and Mazar.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fqv5%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fqv5%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93a47a6dc0e16c04fe2c277a7a9b4aa0ec6db77d%2F0_173_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Air%20pollution%3A%20a%20dark%20cloud%20of%20filth%20poisons%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20cities&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fqv5%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Air+pollution%3A+a+dark+cloud+of+filth+poisons+the+world%E2%80%99s+cities&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fqv5%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93a47a6dc0e16c04fe2c277a7a9b4aa0ec6db77d%2F0_173_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 Smog in Tehran. Photograph: Ahmad Halabisaz/Corbis 
TEHRAN

Iranian cities are among the most polluted. Last month the air in Tehran was 
so bad the city shut all schools, put emergency services on full alert and 
advised people with cardiac and respiratory problems, as well as pregnant 
women, to remain indoors. Some of the pollution in the city of five million 
cars has been blamed on sanctions on imports of refined petrol. This, it is 
said, has led to the use of low-quality alternatives.

DHAKA

Bangladeshi cities such as Dhaka, Narayanganj and Gazipur are some of the most 
polluted and fastest growing in the world. Brick kilns, tyre burning, old cars 
and heavy traffic combine to make them dangerous to live in. “What good is a 
growth rate of 6% if the air is unbreathable and puts people at high risks of 
respiratory diseases and other health problems?” a recent editorial in the New 
Age newspaper asked.

LAGOS

Air pollution in the fast-growing Nigerian city, the largest in Africa, is 
reaching dangerous levels. But, as in many cities on the continent, there’s 
little monitoring of pollution and no accurate information on fuel consumption. 
Pollution is likely to be as bad as the worst of Indian and Chinese cities.

BAKERSFIELD

Los Angeles used to be notorious for its smogs but cleaner cars and better 
regulation has improved air quality. Some of the worst air in the US is now 
found in nearby Bakersfield in the San Joaquin Valley, a farming area 
surrounded by mountains that trap pollution from traffic and agricultural 
emissions. Warm weather often leads to dangerous photo-chemical smogs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fqv5%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fqv5%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e5a6fea5a1d3231a6b6c9401c8f40fe809e50be%2F0_216_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Air%20pollution%3A%20a%20dark%20cloud%20of%20filth%20poisons%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20cities&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fqv5%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Air+pollution%3A+a+dark+cloud+of+filth+poisons+the+world%E2%80%99s+cities&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fqv5%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e5a6fea5a1d3231a6b6c9401c8f40fe809e50be%2F0_216_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
 People breathe fresh air from a giant air purifier in Lima. Photograph: 
Mariana Bazo/Reuters/Corbis 
LIMA

Peru’s capital has the worst pollution in Latin America, according to a 2014 
study by the World Health Organisation. Poor fuel, old buses and cars and the 
city’s geography between the Andes to the east and the Pacific Ocean to the 
west, all make the air foul at times. Nearly 80% of the estimated 5,000 deaths 
a year from pollution may be caused by the city’s fleet of old minivans and 
buses. The many poor areas are the most polluted and are often sited close to 
open waste dumps and other sources of pollution.

CAIRO

Air quality in the Egyptian capital city of more than seven million people is 
often 100 times above World Health Organisation safe limits. The toxic fumes of 
a million mostly old cars mixes with smoke from farmers burning rice straw, 
industrial pollutants and desert and construction work dust. Heart disease, 
stroke and respiratory infections are now among the top four causes of 
premature death in the capital. In August of last year, the Egyptian 
environment ministry declared a state of emergency to deal with a thick layer 
of pollution that hung over the city for days.

DELHI

With 9 million vehicles and 25 million people, Delhi is possibly the most 
polluted mega-city in the world, often covered in a foul-smelling toxic haze. 
The pollution was so bad last month that the city authorities imposed an on- 
and off-traffic system to try to reduce the number of cars of the choked roads. 
It also banned large diesel SUVs for two weeks but the full effects have not 
been analysed.

LONDON

Once known for its smogs because of massive coal burning, it is now plagued 
with noxious NO2 gas from hundreds of thousands of diesel engines and the 
particulates emitted by taxis, central heating systems and construction sites. 
The government does not expect the city to meet legal pollution levels until 
2025. Last week London breached its own legal limit on air pollution for the 
whole of 2016 in just over seven days.

 * This article was amended on 18 January 2016. An earlier version said that 
Mehdi Chamran is Tehran’s mayor; he is chairman of the city council. 