
Five or six years ago we had four individuals in supported living – today we 
support nearly 100. This new direction came from the personalisation agenda, 
promoted by the then government in itsPutting People First 
<http://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=6&ved=0CEEQFjAF&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.thinklocalactpersonal.org.uk%2F_library%2FResources%2FPersonalisation%2FPersonalisation_advice%2FPutting_people_first_briefing1.pdf&ei=m_XRVJLxCMH4UPWug9gN&usg=AFQjCNHIoCv6RY2aLD7CVI26lp9dX9F95Q&sig2=2gZZxLmfLvfxXleXwpBqmg&bvm=bv.85076809,d.d24>
 guidance. It was a real sea change. Local authorities no longer wanted to 
place people in residential settings – they wanted them to live in the 
community with bespoke support packages. Then came the horrors ofWinterbourne 
View 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/oct/26/winterbourne-view-care-staff-jailed>
 and that message was redoubled.

Wirral Autistic Society <http://www.autistic.org/> was founded in 1968 by a 
group of parents and has grown to become a substantial regional organisation 
with over 800 staff caring for more than 300 people with autism and social 
communication difficulties. We offer specialist support services for families 
and children, extensive daytime services and respite care along with our 
residential offers.

Despite our focus on supported living, we’ve resisted following the path taken 
by many service providers of moving all our residential services into that 
model. Some of our service users don’t have the capacity to understand the 
legalities of a tenancy and have complex sensory needs that can’t be fulfilled 
living in a local community. Our answer has been to put substantial investment 
into residential care. We’re developing our original Raby Hall site in 
Bromborough, adding a modern, autism-specific residence alongside the original 
building.

Related: Winterbourne View: what do the new reports tell us? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/jan/29/winterbourne-view-two-years-on-report>

Our society uses a “step-through” model of care. Service users leaving 
institutions can begin in a larger residential unit and then gradually move 
into smaller units with the ultimate aim of moving to a supported living 
tenancy, if that is right for them. We have 85 people in individual 
accommodation in communities and 15 tenants at Weatherstone’s Court in 
Cheshire, a block of flats in a tranquil rural setting.

Historically, the review process, where life-changing decisions about 
accommodation are made, tended to revolve around statutory requirements. We 
felt strongly that what was important and meaningful for the individual should 
be at the centre of every decision and so our new “action reviews” are entirely 
person-centred. We ask the service user all about themselves – what things they 
want to stay the same or change and what they’d like to do better. Service 
users can write down their answers, or draw pictures or symbols on a colourful 
document, which then becomes the focus of the review meeting. Service users can 
invite anyone they wish to their meeting and we encourage them to attend, if 
they are able to. One person delighted us by choosing to sing at their meeting.

We’ve had significant successes with our move to community living and our 
Weatherstone’s Court service has just been shortlisted for a Laing Buisson 
independent specialist care award in the supported living category. Our 
step-through process has helped a number of people who were in crisis to 
gradually develop valuable lives in the community. We’ve also become good at 
matching support workers to service users. There’s nothing worse than seeing an 
18-year-old man being supported by a 59-year-old woman. A young adult should 
spend time with his peers.

The most significant challenge has been to maintain sufficient funding for the 
service. On one hand, social care practitioners tell us they are desperate for 
our specialist help, on the other hand, the council has been trying to reduce 
costs, making it difficult to deliver that service. Downward pressure on hourly 
rates puts pressure on the wages we can pay staff. Our support workers need to 
be highly trained in order to cope with some of the most complex people in our 
region – the induction process alone takes them through 25 autism-specific 
courses designed by our in-house autism practice department. We feel their 
skill should be rewarded.

Tips for service providers looking to move people into supported living

• Aim where possible to secure a small advance budget from social services to 
cover a bespoke transition package so that you can have support workers going 
to where the person is already placed, getting to know them before the move.

• Communicate, communicate, communicate. Upfront planning with families, 
carers and service users makes a world of difference.

• If the individual is coming to you with a difficult reputation, be prepared 
to wipe the slate clean and allow them to have a fresh start in a new setting. 
Put in careful risk management and develop a tailored programme of support 
allowing socially responsible behaviour to increase in the new environment.

• Expect that a honeymoon period will be followed by a time of tension when 
boundaries are tested. You’ve got to support the staff and service user through 
both these periods before the real work begins.

• If your services are run by small teams, be careful that your staff don’t 
become isolated and start making their own decisions, rather than following the 
autism practice you’ve put in place.

Why not join our social care community? Becoming a member of the Guardian 
Social Care Network means you get sent weekly email updates on policy and best 
practice in the sector, as well as exclusive offers.Sign up for free 
<https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/>.
