
On a beautiful barren stretch of the Scottish Highlands, just south of 
Inverness, spin 20 brand new 3,300-kilowatt wind turbines. The second these 
industrial-scale turbines came on stream last month, allMars UK’s 
<http://www.mars.com/uk/en/press-center/press-list/news-releases.aspx?SiteId=70&Id=7164>
 factories and offices became immediately zero carbon.

The US confectionary giant negotiated with the UK arm of Eneco, the Dutch 
utility behind theMoy Wind Farm 
<http://projects.eneco.com/moy-wind-farm/about-eneco/>, to buy 85% of the 
turbines’ output over the next 10 years. The move follows similar steps in the 
US, where Mars says its operations are carbon neutral thanks to a deal to buy 
power from a large-scale wind farm in Mesquite Creek, Texas.

The two deals – known generically as renewable power purchase agreements 
(PPAs) – represent a new trend in the drive by big business to go green. Adobe, 
BT Group, Goldman Sachs, Google, Microsoft, Nestlé, Novo Nordisk, Salesforce, 
and Unilever are just a handful of the large corporations now using the 
mechanism to meet their ambitions of going fully renewable.

On the face of it, such deals appear all upside. The buyer gets to boast about 
their green credentials, while the developer locks in a high-profile, reliable 
corporate customer for 10 years or more.

So are these deals as good as they look? Or should customers and the public 
take corporate claims to carbon neutrality with a pinch of salt?

Emily Farnworth of the non-profit Climate Group is quick to defend both the 
business and environmental rationale behind long-term purchase agreements. 
That’s not entirely surprising: it’s her job. She is campaign director forRE100 
<http://there100.org/>, an initiative launched 18 months ago to encourage 
multinational companies to commit to using 100% renewable energy. PPAs 
represent the “simplest route” to doing so, as one RE100 signatory concedes.

The green credentials of PPAs appear relatively robust. Unlike carbon credits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/carbon-offset-projects>, where 
companies essentially pay to offset their ongoing use of dirty energy, 
renewable PPAs genuinely result in a switch to the clean stuff. Companies still 
buy from the conventional grid, but they receive green certificates that prove 
that the electricity they take from the grid equates to the zero-carbon energy 
put in by the likes of Eneco.

Related: Facebook criticised for ‘worrying lack of transparency’ over climate 
change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/nov/04/facebook-criticised-lack-of-transparency-climate-change>

So far RE100 has 65 signatories to the 100% renewable campaign, with more to 
be announced at the end of this month. But if PPAs offer such a winning 
formula, why aren’t more companies jumping on the bandwagon? Farnworth says it 
a case of raising awareness and overcoming historical misconceptions about the 
high cost of renewables.

It’s not quite as straightforward as that, however. On the environment side, 
there are persistent question marks over double counting. How can consumers be 
sure that the clean power put into the grid isn’t being “used” by more than one 
buyer? There are nowrules 
<https://www.ofgem.gov.uk/environmental-programmes/renewable-energy-guarantees-origin-rego>
 in place “which help clarify where energy comes from and therefore make it 
easier to claim carbon neutrality,” says Myles McCarthy, director of 
implementation at the London-based Carbon Trust, a low-carbon advisory group.

A more serious issue is what happens when the sun doesn’t shine or the wind 
stops blowing? While McCarthy says that power storage is evolving 
significantly, he concedes that there remains a “slight discrepancy” in the 
event of such shortfalls.

For multinational companies, supply constraints make a global commitment to 
going 100% renewable problematic. In some regions of the world, the 
infrastructure for low-carbon power generation doesn’t yet exist at the 
required scale. Hence Mars’ carbon-neutral claims are still only on a 
country-by-country basis. That will need to change if it’s to meet its 2040 
goal of 100% renewable energy across its entire operations.

In other, more developed markets, a surge in demand for PPAs could feasibly 
saturate existing clean energy supply and potentially push up clean energy 
prices. The competitiveness of renewables could also wobble as governments 
reduce their support for the renewables sector, such as the UK’s decision to
abolish the Renewables Obligation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/01/uk-renewable-energy-industry-warns-of-legal-action-over-subsidies>
 in April next year.

Related: Can you power a business on 100% renewable energy? Ikea wants to try 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/apr/08/renewable-energy-ikea-walmart-google-mars-hp-wind-solar-power>

Arguably, the biggest issue is not around the technicalities of PPAs but the 
ambition that underpins them. Not all PPAs suppose a 100% conversion to 
renewables. Indeed, many of the early movers set themselves fairly modest 
targets, says Gordon Edge, director of policy at the trade association 
RenewablesUK. As a consequence, some corporates find that they are achieving 
their renewable targets well ahead of time.

Last month, for instance, Dow Chemicals nearly doubled its 2025 renewables 
goal to 750MW after hitting its initial 400 MW target in just one year. The 
quick success follows an agreement by the US chemicals giant with power 
producer NRGEnergy <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> to purchase 
output from two of its wind farms in Texas. Because PPAs potentially enable 
companies to become 100% renewable at the stroke of a pen, there’s a 
theoretical danger that they might slow down on energy efficiency measures too.

One sign of true ambition would be to build renewable facilities on-site, 
rather than outsourcing the responsibility. Lego, Ford andIkea 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/apr/08/renewable-energy-ikea-walmart-google-mars-hp-wind-solar-power>
 are among the few experimenting with this approach. The benefit of doing so is 
that corporations – as clean power producers themselves – can help their key 
suppliers and even consumers to begin to cut their own power-related carbon 
footprint.

So while 100% renewable is certainly a laudable objective and while PPAs can 
help companies get there, both are interim steps to what should be a wider 
corporate commitment to greening the world’s energy consumption.
