
The most revealing thing about Scottish Labour leader Kezia Dugdale’s recent 
interview in the Fabian Review 
<http://www.fabians.org.uk/the-long-road-interview-with-kezia-dugdale/> was not 
her “coming out” – a single line in a long article – but the response it 
generated. Most follow-up press coverage concentrated instead on her perceived 
gaffe in admitting she might support Scottish independence should the UK leave 
the European Union, while her “female partner” was relegated to the fifth or 
sixth paragraph. In post-referendum Scotland, the constitution trumps pretty 
much anything.

Speaking to Mary Riddell, Dugdale said of her private life: “I don’t talk 
about it very much because I don’t feel I need to. My private life is my 
private life, that’s the thing I just have that nobody else gets to touch.” 
That aside also captured something of a significant shift in Scottish attitudes 
over the past two decades or so. While once such an “admission” (to paraphrase 
the Scottish Sun’s coverage of the story) would have dominated, now it is the 
ScottishLabour <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> leader’s political 
troubles.

Dugdale’s news now means four out of Scotland’s six party leaders (the 
Conservatives’ Ruth Davidson, Ukip’s David Coburn and the Greens’ Patrick 
Harvie) are lesbian, gay or bisexual, making Holyrood, as she put it ina recent 
newspaper column 
<http://www.dailyrecord.co.uk/news/politics/kezia-dugdale-im-bowled-over-7685153#60itd0WUcl50qUC7.97>
, “the gayest parliament in the world”. Last year, theRainbow Europe Index 
<http://www.ilga-europe.org/resources/rainbow-europe/2015> identified Scotland 
as the best country in Europe when it came to legal protections for LGB people 
and, last week, the first minister of Scotland announced her intention toreform 
gender recognition law 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/01/nicola-sturgeon-gender-recognition-law-trans-people-scotland-snp-lgbti>
 for trans people and those with nonbinary identities. So what’s behind this 
extraordinary transformation, and does political life mirror the nation as a 
whole?

Dugdale was born in August 1981, just a year after homosexual relations 
between consenting men were decriminalised in Scotland. This fact often takes 
people by surprise, not least in Scotland, for the date imprinted in most 
people’s minds is that of 1967, when the Sexual Offences Act became law. 
However, it specifically excluded Scotland (and Northern Ireland), and not 
through Westminster chicanery, but because – as Roger Davidson and Gayle Davis 
argued in their 2014 bookThe Sexual State: Sexuality and Scottish Governance, 
1950-80 <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/sexual-state.html> – Scottish 
political and public opinion demanded it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t59p%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t59p%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F710e62f609f1217005865f07578eb7039bf295e3%2F0_321_4819_2892%2F4819.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20tartan%20rainbow%3A%20why%20it%E2%80%99s%20great%20to%20be%20gay%20in%20Scotland&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t59p%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+tartan+rainbow%3A+why+it%E2%80%99s+great+to+be+gay+in+Scotland&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t59p%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F710e62f609f1217005865f07578eb7039bf295e3%2F0_321_4819_2892%2F4819.jpg>
 Malcolm Brown and Joe Schofield celebrate at one of the first same-sex 
weddings in Scotland, on 31 December 2014. Photograph: Mark Runnacles/Getty 
Images 
Indeed, Scotland’s history of dealing with LGBTI issues reveals much about its 
modern identity. Although political discourse has long been dominated by the 
belief that Scotland possesses a more egalitarian, left-of-centre politics than 
England, until the 1990s survey evidence demonstrated that the same wasn’t true 
of its social attitudes: rather when it came to divorce, abortion and 
homosexuality,Scotland <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> was 
significantly to the right of “Tory England”.

Only recently have attitudes – and the law – converged north and south of the 
border, although a prolonged row over plans by the first Scottish government to 
repeal Section 28 in the early days of devolution highlighted that even at the 
turn of the century Scotland was not necessarily the liberal, enlightened place 
many campaigners for a “new Scottish politics” believed it to be.

Today, almost everyone involved in Scottish LGBTI life stresses both the 
progress made and the need to avoid complacency, as well as the challenge of 
affecting cultural – rather than purely legislative – change.

Related: Scotland is now a place where you can be glad to be gay | Val McDermid
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/05/gay-scotland-party-leaders-lgbt>

Speaking from the campaign trail, Dugdale said she had “mixed views” as to 
whether Scotland in 2016 was a good place to be gay. “It’s very easy when you 
live in the east end of Edinburgh,” she said, “a very multicultural and 
cosmopolitan part of the city, with lots of venues where you can be yourself, 
but I’m not sure this translates across the rest of Scotland, especially in 
rural communities; that’s probably why so many young Scottish people gravitate 
towards cities.” This, of course, is as true of England as it is Scotland and 
most other European countries. Measured by the crude yardstick of bars and 
clubs, Glasgow is the gay capital of Scotland, while visitors are often 
surprised by the relatively limited “scene” that exists in Edinburgh.

Dugdale adds that her interview in the Fabian Review (conducted two months 
ago) was “neither planned nor accidental”, although it did go much further than 
previous interviews in which she had generally made clear her private life was 
off limits. The same isn’t true of Scottish Conservative leaderRuth Davidson 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/ruth-davidson>, whose female partner 
recently featured in a party election broadcast.

When Davidson was born, in November 1978, homosexuality was yet to be 
decriminalised in Scotland, a point she made last Thursday at theScottish 
parliament LGBTI hustings <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-scotland-35942037> at 
Edinburgh’s Royal College of Surgeons. She didn’t, however, namecheck the late 
Labour politician Robin Cook, whose amendment to the 1980 Criminal Justice 
(Scotland) bill finally brought Scotland into line with the rest of mainland 
Britain. Although the then Scottish secretary, George Younger, urged MPs to 
think “carefully” before voting for the amendment, they did so by 203 to 80.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t59p%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t59p%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae1932de49efbea183c37d37da6a58a622fe402b%2F0_1287_3840_2304%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20tartan%20rainbow%3A%20why%20it%E2%80%99s%20great%20to%20be%20gay%20in%20Scotland&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t59p%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+tartan+rainbow%3A+why+it%E2%80%99s+great+to+be+gay+in+Scotland&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t59p%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae1932de49efbea183c37d37da6a58a622fe402b%2F0_1287_3840_2304%2F3840.jpg>
 Ruth Davidson, leader of the Scottish Conservative party. Photograph: Murdo 
Macleod for the Guardian 
It is, of course, difficult for a Conservative politician to take credit for 
this change, not least because the Thatcher government’s subsequent moves to 
ban the “promotion” of homosexuality in schools (via Section 28) casts a 
difficult shadow over even anopenly gay Scottish Tory leader such as Davidson 
<http://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2014/aug/15/ruth-davidson-interview-scotland-tories-leader>
. But even the Scottish Conservative party is now unrecognisable from those 
days: earlier this year, David Mundell, the secretary of state for Scotland and 
the only Tory MP north of the border,became the first serving Conservative 
cabinet minister to come out 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/13/conservative-david-mundell-scotland-minister-comes-out-gay>
.

Again, the response – including tweeted approval from Nicola Sturgeon  
<https://mobile.twitter.com/NicolaSturgeon/status/687258689007415297>– was 
overwhelmingly positive. Keen, as ever, to detoxify the Conservative brand, 
senior Tories are quick to point out that it was David Cameron who led the way, 
in the face of considerable grassroots opposition, when it came to legislating 
for equal marriage in the last Westminster parliament. The Scottish parliament 
then followed suit, arguing that its bill was more “progressive” and broadly 
applicable, certainly when it came to religion.

That, in itself, reflected the change in Scotland. Bob Cant, editor of a 2008 
book called Footsteps and Witnesses: Lesbian and Gay Lifestories from Scotland, 
says that when he was growing up in 1950s and 60s Scotland, the illegality of 
homosexual activity was “not a problem for me at all”. “What inhibited me much 
more was the shame of being thought to be a ‘poof’,” he says, “and the way 
organised religion seemed to reinforce that sense of shame.” So the decline of 
religious observance in Scotland hasn’t bothered him in the slightest; on the 
contrary, he believes that “must make life easier for gay people”.

But however weakened the Roman Catholic church in Scotland has been by 
declining congregations and a scandal involving the formerCardinal Keith O’Brien
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/20/pope-francis-accepts-scottish-cardinal-keith-obriens-resignation>
, it still has influence in two important respects: via Scotland’s Catholic 
state schools and also a close relationship with the governing SNP. And while 
the SNP’s record on equality issues is widely acknowledged as a good one, it 
has been seen, on occasion, to drag its feet, usually on matters that might 
provoke a backlash from pulpits in the west of Scotland. At present, this 
relates to the campaign to combat homophobic bullying in schools.

Speaking at the LGBTI hustings, Scottish Green party co-leader Patrick Harvie 
referred to this as the “unspoken issue”. Teachers at Catholic schools have to 
be vetted by a priest before they are given a job. Unless that issue could be 
addressed openly, he said, then there would at best be “patchy results” when it 
came to training.

The SNP’s relationship with the Catholic Church in Scotland is a complicated 
one. Historically, Catholic voters in Scotland supported Labour and shunned the 
nationalists; now a majority support the SNP and independence. Few doubt 
Sturgeon’s personal commitment to equality, but there is probably tension 
between her views and her party’s need to sustain a broad electoral coalition. 
Also, an instinctively cautious politician, she won’t go out of her way to 
upset sections of the electorate, particularly those that have been hard won 
from Scottish Labour over the past two decades. And she is not alone. Asked 
about the same point, Dugdale simply said that, in order to drive cultural 
change, “you have to take people with you”.

To others, however, Scotland is in danger of becoming too self-congratulatory. 
“Scotland is a paradise on paper,” says one expat Scot who has been based in 
London for the past few years. “You can be part of middle-class Scotland and 
feel great about being gay, because you probably know lots of gay people,” he 
says. “But for most folk, Scotland still doesn’t pass the 
hold-your-partner’s-hand test, certainly compared with London.” Similarly,
campaigner Jordan Daly 
<http://www.scotsman.com/news/jordan-daly-ordeal-goes-on-for-lgbt-children-1-4023142>
 says: “It’s not enough to say to LGBT kids, ‘Hey, you can get married, so 
don’t worry about being bullied at school.’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t59p%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t59p%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1cb6b585d5a25753fcf752fe9470a428802f46c%2F0_271_6016_3612%2F6016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20tartan%20rainbow%3A%20why%20it%E2%80%99s%20great%20to%20be%20gay%20in%20Scotland&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t59p%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+tartan+rainbow%3A+why+it%E2%80%99s+great+to+be+gay+in+Scotland&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t59p%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1cb6b585d5a25753fcf752fe9470a428802f46c%2F0_271_6016_3612%2F6016.jpg>
 Participants in the annual Pride Scotia parade, on Edinburgh High Street, 
2015. Photograph: Alamy 
Colin Macfarlane, director of Stonewall Scotland 
<http://www.stonewallscotland.org.uk>, speaks of the need to go further when it 
comes to education but also points to recent progress. “In the last [Scottish] 
parliament, equal marriage was passed with a thumping majority, affording LGB 
people full equality in the eyes of the law for the first time,” he says. 
“Legal equality is only part of the jigsaw though; the lived day-to-day 
experience for many LGBT people in Scotland is far from equal.” But, he adds, 
“for three party leaders to be out as LGB and to have two party leaders as 
strong allies is pretty groundbreaking”.

Susan Stewart, a founder member of the Women for Independence 
<http://www.womenforindependence.org> group, agrees, observing that it’s 
important for young people in Scotland “to have visible lesbian and gay role 
models in all areas of life – including politics – and that’s perhaps the most 
significant difference in the past couple of decades, especially for young 
lesbians”. Dugdale recently drove home this point, writing that in Scotland 
“the rainbow flag” was now “flying higher than ever”.

Back in 1956, when Compton Mackenzie published his novel Thin Ice, a 
sympathetic portrayal of a gay Scottish civil servant, the notion of gay flags 
and parliamentarians would have mystified, if not horrified, Presbyterian 
Scotland. When, for example, the groundbreakingWolfenden Report 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wolfenden_report> appeared the following year, 
Scottish MPs ignored it and the civil servant James Adair, its Scottish 
representative, warned the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland that 
supporting its recommendations was to support the right for “perverts to 
practise sinning for the sake of sinning”.

James Robertson’s widely praised novel And the Land Lay Still 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/and-the-land-lay-still.html>, by contrast, 
finds its protagonist Mike Pendreich reaching 2008 and feeling he is living in 
a more tolerant, open Scotland than was the case 50 or even 20 years earlier. 
As Robertson remarked: “In my book, the gay characters don’t die. At least, the 
main one and his lover don’t. They survive, and at the end of the book are 
stepping into what they think is a better future.”

For a nation that often delights in emphasising differences rather than 
celebrating similarities, that Scotland has gone from being, asthe political 
commentator Gerry Hassan has observed 
<http://www.gerryhassan.com/uncategorized/the-slow-transformation-of-gay-scotland/>
, “a more conservative country than the rest of the UK, to a place rather like 
the rest of the UK”, is significant: there’s now a much greater taboo around 
being homophobic rather than homosexual. When a lone protester tried to disrupt 
the LGBTI hustings in Edinburgh last week, Ruth Davidson reflected once again 
on the change within her lifetime. “He’s a person out in the cold shouting into 
the wind,” she said, “and it used to be the other way round.”
