
Today there are more than one billion people living with a disability - that’s 
almost one in seven of the world’s population.

Yet many still face discrimination, violence and huge barriers to accessing 
vital services 
<https://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/related_material/2014%20disabilities_program_low.pdf>
. They aredisproportionately represented among  
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2015/12/03/making-quality-education-accessible-to-children-with-disabilities>
children who do not receive primary education. Women with disabilities have a 
heightened risk of beingsubjected to sexual and physical violence 
<https://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/related_material/2014%20disabilities_program_low.pdf>
. They are nearlythree times more likely to report 
<http://www.add.org.uk/disability-and-healthcare> being denied access to 
healthcare, and when it comes to jobs people with a disability experiencehigher 
rates of unemployment 
<http://www.ilo.org/global/topics/disability-and-work/WCMS_475650/lang--en/index.htm>
 and vulnerability to poverty.


Related: The moment I felt excluded because of my disability – share your 
stories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jun/08/the-moment-i-felt-excluded-because-of-my-disability-share-your-stories>

Despite the raised prominence of disability issues in the Sustainable 
Development Goals 
<http://www.un.org/disabilities/documents/sdgs/disability_inclusive_sdgs.pdf> 
and therecent World Humanitarian Summit 
<https://www.handicap-international.org.uk/world-humanitarian-summit-major-step-forward-as-ban-ki-moon-supports-new-charter-on-inclusion-of>
, progress on realising disability rights has been an uphill battle, and one 
with a long way yet to go.

So what policy changes and practical steps need to be made? What can we learn 
from projects and activists helping to make development more inclusive? And are 
the voices of people with disabilities being adequately included in these 
conversations? Join an expert panel on Monday 20 June 1 - 2.30 pm BST, to 
discuss these questions and more.

The live chat will kick off our Disability Rights week running Monday 20 - 
Monday 27 June. You can follow our coveragehere 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/series/disability-rights>
 and#disabilityrights 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23disabilityrights&src=typd> on Twitter. You can 
share yourown stories here 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jun/08/the-moment-i-felt-excluded-because-of-my-disability-share-your-stories>
 on our witness project.

The live chat is not video or audio-enabled but will take place in the 
comments section (below). Get in touch via globaldevpros@theguardian.com or
@GuardianGDP <https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP>on Twitter to recommend someone 
for our expert panel. Follow the discussion using the hashtag#globaldevlive 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23globaldevlive&src=typd>.

Panel

Vladimir Cuk, executive director, International Disability Alliance 
<http://www.internationaldisabilityalliance.org>, New York, USA. @VladimirCuk2 
<https://twitter.com/VladimirCuk2>
Vladimir is responsible for IDA’s advocacy towards the UN System, including 
its members and agencies, and international organisations.

Hisayo Katsui, research and development manager, Abilis Foundation 
<http://www.abilis.fi>, Helsinki, Finland. @AbilisF 
<https://twitter.com/AbilisF>
Hisayo is currently a Disability Studies adjunct professor in Finland. 
Previously Hisayo served as researcher for Shuaib Chalklen the former UN 
Special Rapporteur on Disability, and has conducted research on disabilities in 
Central Asian countries, Uganda, Ethiopia and Nepal.

Dominic Haslam, director, policy and programme strategy, Sightsavers 
<http://www.sightsavers.org>, Brighton, UK. @domhaslam123 
<https://twitter.com/domhaslam123>
Dominic is a development activist of twenty years, currently focusing on 
disability, health and education.

Florence Ndagire, senior programme officer advocacy, ADD International 
<http://www.add.org.uk/>, Kampala Uganda. 
Florence works at ADD International, an organisation that fights for 
independence, equality and opportunity for disabled people living in poverty in 
Asia and Africa.

Jazz Shaban, policy and advocacy officer, Handicap International UK 
<http://www.handicap-international.org.uk>, London, UK. @HI_UK 
<https://twitter.com/HI_UK>

Jazz was involved in work with the UK government on the Charter on Inclusion 
of Persons with Disabilities in Humanitarian Action launched at the World 
Humanitarian Summit. She is currently Steering Group member of the BOND
Disability <https://www.theguardian.com/society/disability> and Development 
group.

David Constantine, president and co-founder, Motivation 
<http://www.motivation.org.uk>, Bristol, UK. 
David is president and co-founder of Motivation, an organisation supporting 
disabled people in low-income countries to stay healthy, get mobile and play an 
active part in their communities.

More to be announced
