
Hundreds of world leaders and politicians will descend on Istanbul on Monday 
in a nominal attempt to reform the global humanitarian system, despite 
criticism that their summit is a photo-opportunity that will achieve little.

Representatives of 175 countries, including 57 heads of states or governments, 
will attend the world humanitarian summit, as the outgoing UN secretary 
general, Ban Ki-moon, attempts to restructure the way the world responds to 
humanitarian crises.

Related: Everything you need to know about the world humanitarian summit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/19/world-humanitarian-summit-istanbul-everything-you-need-to-know>

Angela Merkel is the highest-profile western leader due to attend, while 
Britain will be represented by development secretary Justine Greening. About 
6,000 senior aid workers will also participate in debates and panels at the 
two-day event.

With more people – about 125 million 
<http://www.unocha.org/cerf/resources/top-stories/un-central-emergency-response-fund-10-years-saving-lives-together>
 – in need of humanitarian assistance than ever, aid groups increasingly 
under-resourced, andinternational law under growing threat 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/10/humanitarian-law-violations-stop-them-world-humanitarian-summit>
, Ban wants the international community to agree to new global humanitarian 
standards.

The key commitments to which he hopes leaders will agree include better 
structuring of aid; more funding for local groups; greater respect for the 
rules of war; better planning for disaster situations and climate change; and
wider sharing of refugee populations 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/13/why-is-the-cost-of-hosting-refugees-falling-on-poorest-states-kenya-dadaab-closing>
.

Hailing the prospects of the summit, Herve Verhoosel, the summit’s spokesman, 
said: “It’s the first time in 70 years of UN history that a summit has been 
organised to talk about humanitarian issues. Today we’re living in the worst 
humanitarian situation since world war two – we have 125 million people in need 
of humanitarian support in the world. Can we cope with that situation working 
the same way we do today, or do we need to change it? That’s why the secretary 
general has called this conference.”

There is nevertheless mounting criticism of the summit from aid and rights 
workers, with Médecins Sans Frontières calling it a“fig-leaf” for international 
failures 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/05/medecins-sans-frontieres-world-humanitarian-summit-istanbul-fig-leaf-pulls-out>
, and Oxfam describing it as an “expensive talking shop”. A columnist in 
Foreign Policy, an American magazine,wondered 
<https://foreignpolicy.com/2016/05/19/the-u-n-s-world-humanitarian-summit-is-a-total-mess/>
 if it “could do more harm than good”.

MSF has even pulled out of the conference 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/19/world-humanitarian-summit-istanbul-everything-you-need-to-know>
, saying it no longer believes that the assembled leaders have any genuine 
desire to make binding commitments. Speaking to the Guardian, MSF’s UK 
director, Vickie Hawkins, said it was unlikely that the same countries who are 
currently shirking their obligations to refugees would turn over a new leaf 
next week.

Related: MSF brands humanitarian summit 'a fig-leaf of good intentions' as it 
pulls out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/05/medecins-sans-frontieres-world-humanitarian-summit-istanbul-fig-leaf-pulls-out>

 “The contradiction became too much for us,” said Hawkins. “We didn’t have any 
confidence that anything different will come out of the conference. There’s a 
lot of good intentions, but also empty rhetoric. And we felt we needed more 
than that, given thecurrent disregard for international law 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/19/yemen-msf-bombing-hospitals-schools-cannot-become-the-new-normal>
.”

Hawkins also warned that the summit’s goals had become too grand, and also too 
political for independent aid groups like hers to agree to. “For us, the word 
‘humanitarian’ has dropped out of the humanitarian summit,” Hawkins said. “It 
has become a summit about a much broader and longer-term political agenda, 
rather than being about core humanitarian assistance.”

Oxfam GB’s chief executive, Mark Goldring, said: “This summit needs to be more 
than an expensive talking shop by tackling the repeated failure of governments 
to resolve conflicts and end the culture of impunity in which civilians are 
killed without consequence.

Goldring added: “Rich nations cannot wash their hands of the suffering for 
which they are partly responsible and [must] do more to take in their fair 
share of the world’s most vulnerable people. Recent moves such as theEU-Turkey 
deal <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/08/eu-turkey-refugee-deal-qa> 
and the plans tooutsource EU border controls to African countries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/20/eu-italian-proposals-outsource-mediterranean-migrant-patrol-africa>
 with dubious human rights records set a dangerous precedent, horse trading the 
rights of refugees in order to keep them from our doorstep and shirking 
responsibility for their welfare.

“Last week, the Kenyan government pointed to the example of European countries 
turning away Syrian refugees when it announcedthe closure of the Dadaab refugee 
camp 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/13/refugees-urge-kenyan-leaders-to-rethink-closure-of-dadaab-camp>
.”

Verhoosel said he was disappointed by the criticism, arguing that the UN and 
its members had to start somewhere, and that this week’s gathering could be 
that starting point.

“We need to try to do what we can during the summit,” said Verhoosel, 
questioning how critics could pre-empt the outcome of an event that has not yet 
happened. “Maybe they have a crystal ball?”
