
Does the UK’s chronic skills shortage mean we are fated to become an also-ran 
in the global economic race? Three recent reports suggest this is a worryingly 
real prospect.

 We are not producing enough young people with the skills to meet the needs of 
UK employers, the research finds, and the skills they do have are well below 
the levels of our international competitors. If that were not enough, even 
those with advanced skills may soon be made redundant by the influx of smart 
machines into our workplaces.

The UK Commission on Employment and Skills 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/ukces-employer-skills-survey-2015-uk-report>
 report catalogues chronic shortages of skilled workers. Meanwhile, those with 
qualifications are not meeting employers’ expectations, the report says, 
leading to complaints that applicants from universities and colleges are not 
being adequately prepared.

Related: Divert more university students into further education, report says 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jan/28/english-university-students-further-education-oecd-report>

This gloomy picture is further darkened by a recent report 
<http://www.oecd.org/unitedkingdom/building-skills-for-all-review-of-england.pdf>
 from the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). It 
found that England’s teenagers were the most likely to have low levels of 
literacy among the 23 countries surveyed, and second most likely to have low 
numeracy. The country is forecast to fall to 28th out of 33 OECD countries for 
intermediate skills by 2020.

If that were not enough, in January the World Economic Forum 
<http://www.weforum.org/> predicted the demise of many previously secure careers
 <http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_FOJ_Executive_Summary_Jobs.pdf>, such as 
administration, accountancy and even law. The analysis suggests that the rise 
of intelligent machines and global disruptions will eliminate a variety of 
professional roles across almost every business sector. The only defence will 
be to invest in the human skills that computers cannot replace, such as 
interpersonal networking and entrepreneurship.

That is going to be difficult. The government has said 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/443898/Productivity_Plan_web.pdf>
 (pdf) that the UK’s national skills weaknesses are “of such long standing and 
such intractability that only the most radical actions can redress them”.

We need to rethink the way we define workforce skills, and reconstruct the 
systems through which we develop and employ highly skilled people. That means 
reforming current vocational education and training systems, which are rooted 
in the requirements of specific occupations.

In the future, sustainable careers will require flexible, transferable talents 
such as complex problem-solving and cross-cultural team working. We need to 
move away from teaching functional skills that are outdated almost as soon as 
they are learned and focus on real-world learning experiences.

We have to break down the old divisions between education and working life; 
between conventional academic achievement and lifelong employability.

One way to do this is to bring universities and colleges to together with 
employers and government agencies to form regional alliances that address local 
skills needs.

Related: Digital tech employees are offered 36% higher wage than UK average 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/10/digital-tech-employees-higher-wage-average>

We can see this approach in action in the Birmingham Skills Engine 
<http://www.birmingham.ac.uk/news/latest/2015/12/Midlands-Engine-041215.aspx>. 
This is an alliance of five universities and 11 colleges, along with employers, 
public services and civic authorities from across the Midlands. They are 
collaborating to build the capabilities of the local workforce, to meet the 
economic and social needs identified through local development strategies. What 
this means in practice is that these organisations share resources and new 
approaches to learning; they provide personalised career support to students; 
they use an online skills exchange that matches talented people to local 
opportunities.

What is particularly exciting is the way this enables universities to 
reconnect with their founding mission: to support the education and development 
of their local communities and to engage with partners in their region.

Another example can be found in Maastricht in Holland. Universities, industry 
partners and the provincial government have built theChemelot 
<http://www.chemelot.nl/?id=1033&template=algemeen_image.htm&taal=en> alliance 
to meet the skills needs of the local advanced chemicals sector.

Closer to home, meanwhile, the University of Northampton has fostered the 
creation of a number ofsocial enterprise partnerships 
<http://www.northampton.ac.uk/business-and-enterprise/enterprise/initiatives> 
with civic and public service partners to develop local talent.

It is too early to judge whether these kinds of local alliances will be enough 
to develop the 21st-century skills and talents the UK economy needs. But the 
pace of change in the global environment means we do not have long to decide 
whether we are prepared to make these radical changes to our skills systems.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
