
Being tired is the most common reason women give 
<http://metro.co.uk/2012/04/04/too-tired-tops-list-of-excuses-women-give-for-not-having-sex-with-partner-376771/>
 for not having sex with their partner. A survey three years ago showed that it 
had overtaken headaches as the most popular “excuse”. Butan American study 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/04/25/tired-at-work_n_5199118.html> last 
year of more than 1,000 employees from three companies found that 76% of 
workers felt tired “many days of the week”, so being too tired for sex may well 
be the truth, rather than a white lie.

We already know that lack of sleep contributes to obesity, heart disease and 
diabetes 
<http://www.nhs.uk/livewell/tiredness-and-fatigue/pages/lack-of-sleep-health-risks.aspx>
 as well as reducing life expectancy. So, why wouldn’t it ruin sex, too? There 
are, however, few studies of the impact of sleep on how women respond to sex.

A pilot study of 171 young women <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25772315> 
published in this month’s Journal of Sexual Medicine found that sleep affected 
how much they wanted sex and how easily they became aroused, but that this was 
unrelated to how tired they actually felt. An extra hour of sleep led to a 14% 
increase in the odds of sex the next day. More sleep also increased the ease 
with which women felt “genital arousal”, which was measured on theFemale Sexual 
Function Index’s genital arousal scale 
<http://www.obgynalliance.com/files/fsd/FSFI_Pocketcard.pdf>. So, will getting 
more sleep improve your sex life?

Related: It’s official: if you’re middle-aged and not sleeping enough, you’re 
rotting away 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/11/official-middle-aged-not-sleeping-rotting-government-campaign-sleep-deprivation-40-60>

The solution


The story of how lack of sleep reduces women’s desire is a complicated one, 
says the study’s lead author, Dr David Kalmbach from the University of 
Michigan. In fact, women’s sexual desire itself is complicated.Expert panels 
say that <http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022534705678287> 
between 20% and 50% of women have problems with sex – often to do with lack of 
desire or difficulty in becoming aroused. But how much of this is medical, and 
how much social and psychological, is highly debatable.

It is estimated that 20% of women have problems with lubrication – which could 
be due to anything from the menopause to insufficient foreplay. Kalmbach thinks 
it could also be due to lack of sleep – rapid- eye-movement (REM) sleep in 
women is associated with increased blood flow to the vagina, while lack of 
sleep also reduces levels of androgen hormones, which may reduce the desire for 
sex.

Sex is strangely complicated for such a natural, essential activity. Studies 
of loss of desire in womenoften cite psychological factors 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20574890>, such as overfamiliarity with a 
partner, the institutionalisation of relationships and loss of intimacy. Would 
sleep help any of these? That said, sleep is at least likely to promote healthy 
sexual responses through its regulatory actions on hormones, just as it 
safeguards against medical conditions.The recommended amount 
<http://sleepfoundation.org/how-sleep-works/how-much-sleep-do-we-really-need/page/0/1>
 for anyone over 18 is between seven and nine hours a night.
