
The Times’s editorial chiefs had a change of mind - change of heart? - on 
Tuesday evening. The first edition front page made no mention of the 
Hillsborough inquest verdict.

The second edition was different, as you can see above. A picture of 
snow-clearing in Teesside was replaced by one of the relatives of the Liverpool 
96 singing You’ll Never Walk Alone, a photograph carried on the front page in 
all editions of the Guardian and theDaily Telegraph 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/dailytelegraph>.

The Times <http://www.theguardian.com/media/thetimes> also replaced its banner 
at the top of the page, about “status handbags”, with a cross-reference to its 
Hillsborough coverage on pages 12 and 13.

Related: Hillsborough inquest verdict: the front pages 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/gallery/2016/apr/27/hillsborough-inquest-verdict-front-pages>

It was surely significant that the Times’s Liverpool-based football writer, 
Tony Barrett, took to Twitter after noting his paper’s failure to carry a front 
page report.

He sent two tweets. One, posted on Tuesday evening, simply said: 
“Unbelievable.” That generated a host of replies in which people realised he 
was bemoaning his paper’s lack of coverage.

The second, posted early on Wednesday, said: “To everyone who’s been let down, 
I’m so sorry.”

Although the Daily Mail and Daily Express 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/dailyexpress> did not splash on the inquest, 
both carried prominent boxes. The New Day, the Daily Star and i plus the 
Independent’s tablet edition all provided front page coverage.

Regional daily newspapers across Britain carried page 1 articles about the 
verdict, which also led every TV and radio bulletin on Tuesday afternoon and 
evening.

So the only paper that made no reference at all to the story on its front 
page, in any edition, was the Sun. How wise, given its history, was that?
