
When I learn of Icelandair’s “Buddy” scheme, it strikes me that it might just 
be the best marketing gimmick of all time. To promote its routes from Europe to 
North America, the airline has dreamed up a ruse to tempt people into spending 
a night in Reykjavik: it pairs you up with a local – or rather, one of its 
employees.

I’m sold on the brilliance of this plan before I’ve even been assigned a buddy 
– I love having a living person to grill rather than sitting in a cafe reading 
Lonely Planet by myself. There are “food buddies” and “culture buddies” and 
even a CEO buddy (Birkir Hólm Guðnason, head of Icelandair, is a volunteer) but 
I’ve asked for an “adventure buddy” and based on my stated interests (hiking, 
huts and hot springs), I’m allocated Captain Björn Ingi Haflidason, a dashing 
47-year-old pilot with a Benny-from-Abba beard whose interests include 
heli-skiing and extreme sports. What’s not to like? Especially when, a quick 
Google later, I discover his nickname is “Captain Gorgeous” and he’s starred in 
a viral video that involves his naked buttocks.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hcm6%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hcm6%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Febe67902188e83eb2ce24ed6295b9048a30b62bf%2F0_490_3263_1958%2F3263.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Iceland%E2%80%99s%20buddy%20brilliant%20stopover%20scheme&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hcm6%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Iceland%E2%80%99s+buddy+brilliant+stopover+scheme&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hcm6%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Febe67902188e83eb2ce24ed6295b9048a30b62bf%2F0_490_3263_1958%2F3263.jpg>
 Björn to be wild … Carole’s buddy, AKA Captain Gorgeous. Photograph: Carole 
Cadwalladr 
The buttocks are covered when we meet the next morning, which is probably just 
as well – he’s a happily married family man – but in his ski trousers and 
hand-knitted jumper, he looks every inch the Icelandic adventurer. What’s more, 
he has come up with an itinerary for me and my friend Louise that will spirit 
us from mountain to hot pool to fancy restaurant in his Land Cruiser. Within 
minutes Björn has got us in and out of a ski rental place and is cruising out 
of town in the pinkish morning light.

Within minutes we’re out of town and plunging through the kind of wilderness 
where you might find Bear Grylls lurking

We’d arrived in the dark and it’s our first glimpse of downtown Reykjavik, 
with its mountains that rise straight from the sea and a flashy glass landmark 
building on the waterfront.

“That’s the concert hall we built with the money we stole from you,” says 
Björn. Then he gestures to the other side of the road: “And that’s the 
financial sector where the banks that got us into this mess are.”

Within minutes, though, we’re out of town and plunging through the kind of 
wilderness where you might find Bear Grylls lurking. The sun is shining, the 
snow is blinding white, and Björn has plugged his phone into the car stereo and 
is blasting out Björk.

“Elf music,” he says. He was at school with her, it turns out. “And she’s 
actually very normal.” He hesitates slightly. “Well, normal for Björk.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hcm6%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hcm6%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27020951e3ab06964902ca77cc2dba3ad9c385ce%2F0_0_5172_3103%2F5172.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Iceland%E2%80%99s%20buddy%20brilliant%20stopover%20scheme&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hcm6%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Iceland%E2%80%99s+buddy+brilliant+stopover+scheme&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hcm6%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27020951e3ab06964902ca77cc2dba3ad9c385ce%2F0_0_5172_3103%2F5172.jpg>
 ‘As we drive to the Ion Luxury Adventure Hotel, Iceland pulls another 
spectacular out of the bag: there, streaking across the horizon, are the 
northern lights!’ Photograph: Alamy 
One of the few things I know about Iceland is that the language hasn’t really 
changed since the Middle Ages, so the sagas, Iceland’s great body of early 
literature, is accessible in a way that Old English literature isn’t.

“That’s right,” says Björn. “That’s why the elves are still such a big deal 
here. We love our elves.”

We’d said we’d quite like to try cross-country skiing so Björn simply pulls up 
by the side of the road, straps us into our skis and we set off. “Aren’t there 
supposed to be tracks?” I ask.

“Not in Iceland,” he says.

It’s exhilarating but then everything in Iceland seems a bit exhilarating: the 
spectacular Strokkur – the younger “son” of Iceland’s Great Geysir – that 
shoots boiling water up to 40 metres into the air and makes us almost jump out 
of our down jackets; the forest hike that ends up being through thigh-deep 
snow; and, best of all, a dip in our first Icelandic hot pool – Gamla Laugin, 
or the Secret Lagoon. We walk barefoot across the snow and then sink in. It’s 
municipal swimming pool-sized with just a few heads bobbing around. As the sun 
slowly sinks, it turns the great billows of sulphurous steam orange. It’s about 
as decadent as it gets in mid-winter.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hcm6%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hcm6%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44495c6ccea26d043c5dc15f4c0637e8cc0ee31a%2F0_16_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Iceland%E2%80%99s%20buddy%20brilliant%20stopover%20scheme&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hcm6%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Iceland%E2%80%99s+buddy+brilliant+stopover+scheme&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hcm6%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44495c6ccea26d043c5dc15f4c0637e8cc0ee31a%2F0_16_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 Harpa Concert Hall on Reykjavik’s waterfront. Photograph: Alamy 
When we finally drag ourselves away, Björn puts Icelandic rock band Sigur Rós 
on the stereo. “He is the serious elf,” he says of the band’s singer. As we 
drive off to the Ion Luxury Adventure Hotel for a feast of smoked Arctic char 
and buckthorn-flavoured ling, Iceland pulls another spectacular out of the bag: 
there, streaking across the horizon, are the northern lights!

It’s almost too much. It’s only taken a day and we’ve both fallen 
head-over-heels for Iceland. And our new buddy, Captain Gorgeous, who by now is 
actively showing off his viral video, is giving us the kind of shortcut to 
cultural immersion that makes us feel like we actually know the place – even 
though we’ve been here less than 24 hours.

By day two, we’ve gone to visit his Scandi dream house, tried on his pilot’s 
hat, had dinner with his wife, and taken in more geysers and cross-country ski 
jaunts. And even though his buddy duties are officially over, we lure him out 
on our third day to take us to Reykjavik’s geothermal beach, Nauthólsvík, where 
we soak in a hot pool before dashing into the sea, breaking the ice, and plunge 
screaming into freezing waters.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hcm6%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hcm6%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd930c630f8d92fe8332e5fc9d2ade44f5ba3a5f%2F0_358_3264_1959%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Iceland%E2%80%99s%20buddy%20brilliant%20stopover%20scheme&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hcm6%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Iceland%E2%80%99s+buddy+brilliant+stopover+scheme&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hcm6%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd930c630f8d92fe8332e5fc9d2ade44f5ba3a5f%2F0_358_3264_1959%2F3264.jpg>
 On the last day Carole visited Nauthólsvík, Reykjavik’s geothermal beach. 
Photograph: Carole Cadwalladr 
It’s not just the best municipal leisure facility I’ve ever been to, it’s also 
a fitting culmination to the land of fire and ice, being both fiery and icy. 
Afterwards, we continue our musical education with a soundtrack by Björn’s 
third top Iceland artist: Skálmöld, a Viking/folk metal band played at volume 
11.

It’s so cute, Iceland. Is it wrong to say that?

There are several of Björn’s colleagues in the hot pool but then there are 
only 320,000 people in the whole of the country, about as many as live in my 
London borough. “Do you know them all?” I ask Björn. He thinks for a minute. 
“Yes. Or I have a cousin who will.” We hang out in the brilliant sunshine and 
meet Scott, a Canadian immigration lawyer, who is on a stopover between 
Scotland and Vancouver. When we tell him about the buddy scheme, his eyes light 
up. “That’s exactly what I wanted. I was in central Reykjavik this morning and 
it was all tourists in overpriced shops and I was thinking, ‘Where are the 
locals?’” Too bad Scott, I say, Björn’s our buddy. Go and get your own.

How to do it

The trip was provided by Icelandair (icelandair.co.uk/stopover-buddy 
<http://www.icelandair.co.uk/stopover-buddy>). Any passenger on a transatlantic 
stopover can request a stopover buddy for up to a day of their stay in Iceland, 
for free until 30 April. Choose a theme and you only pay for your expenses.
