
In one display case is a pair of sculpted, pink fake breasts, donated by a 
woman whose husband made her wear them during sex: they were “of course, larger 
than mine … they turned him on … I left him”. Nearby, a blue frisbee, once of 
great sentimental value, is accompanied by the words: “Darling, should you ever 
get a ridiculous idea to walk into a cultural institution like a museum for the 
first time in your life, you will remember me.” In another glass cabinet, a 
diamond ring has the short, clever caption: “s(he) be(lie)ve(d)”.

The Museum of Broken Relationships <http://brokenships.la/> in Los Angeles 
exhibits the wreckage of lost love. On show are everyday objects submitted by 
ordinary people who have gone through a breakup or lost a loved one – the 
jilted and bitter, the nostalgic, the relieved. It is a collection of personal 
mementoes that permits a voyeuristic glimpse into a very private realm. The 
most mundane tokens – a watch, a bottle opener, a Zippo lighter – take on a 
strong emotional charge.

Next to each item are a few words written by the anonymous donor. They have a 
compressed power a bit like a short story: “I spent an entire summer making 
this birthday present, and he left it in my car”; or “You … did not want to 
sleep with me. I realised how much you loved me only after you died of Aids”. 
Some are little narratives of failed promise: “We met at a bar in NY; I lived 
in LA. 3 drinks, 2 poems, 1 walk later, we had sex on his friend’s couch … We 
saw the northern lights, but they were not as bright and vibrant as we thought 
they would be.”

The Museum of Broken Relationships was originally conceived in 2006 by two 
Croatian artists who, having split up, were about to throw out the detritus of 
their love affair – the small gifts, the photos – but decided that their time 
together should instead be celebrated. They openedpremises in Zagreb 
<https://brokenships.com/en/visit> in 2010 and now their collection has a 
second permanent home in LA. What better location than the heart of Hollywood – 
where dreams are supposed to come true but so often don’t and where shining new 
stories turn out to be full of tawdry cliches? Equally fitting, it has opened 
on the Hollywood Boulevard site of an iconic lingerie shop that went bankrupt.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktpd%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktpd%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b2da5155657be4ad40877c38a6e4b97230c19a4%2F0_750_3000_3000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20museum%20devoted%20to%20the%20wreckage%20of%20lost%20love&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktpd%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A+museum+devoted+to+the+wreckage+of+lost+love&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktpd%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b2da5155657be4ad40877c38a6e4b97230c19a4%2F0_750_3000_3000%2F3000.jpg>
 An axe to grind? … An exhibit from the original museum in Zagreb. Photograph: 
Courtesy of the Museum of Broken Relationships 
A few of the “greatest hits” from Zagreb are included in the opening 
exhibition, though not the axe that a woman used to chop up her partner’s 
furniture, before neatly arranging the fragments into small heaps for her 
former lover to take away. Or the jar of “love incense” captioned simply: 
“Doesn’t work.” Or the “toaster of vindication”, explained by the gleeful 
words: “I took the toaster. How are you going to toast anything now?”

But the LA museum has more than enough of its own compelling tales: some are 
rueful, some heart-rending; many offer a glimpse into the unknown interior of 
relationships. An alliance in Montreal that lasted 18 months is memorialised by 
a piece of belly button fluff. The text reads: “D’s stomach had a particular 
arrangement of body hair that made his belly button prone to collecting lint. 
Occasionally, he’d extract a piece and stick it to my body, sweaty after sex. 
One day … I met his oddity with my own; I put the lint in a small bag and 
concealed it away in the drawer of my bedside table.”

Having been sent the fluff, the museum staff had to provide special 
conservation instructions: “Because the submission is organic in nature, be 
sure to package it correctly.” There is a handful of pubic hair, too, and a 
Brazilian Playboy collection a boyfriend stored at his ex’s place and failed to 
pick up (“I would love to see this on display since it shows how silly a man 
can get over some nude pics”), though the curators draw the line at body 
fluids, which have been offered but turned down.

The for-profit Los Angeles museum was first dreamed of last year when a local 
lawyer, John B Quinn, visited the Zagreb collection on a family holiday and was 
struck by the complex emotions it generated. He determined that “more people 
should see this”, and began a process of licensing the name, and finding staff 
and a location close to home.

Since 2006, the collection put together by Olinka Vištica and Dražen Grubišić 
has been on tour to 33 cities in 21 countries, and has been growing all the 
time as more pieces are submitted along the way. Earlier this year, an appeal 
was made to heartbroken Californians: “Unburden the emotional load. Don’t throw 
away the debris of your romantic exploits – give it to us.”

Submissions poured in, according to the museum’s director Alexis Hyde, from 
California and all over the world, and a process of sifting began. The items 
sent usually have not very much physical value, but are “the kind of things 
that people talk about saving in a fire, that can’t be replaced, things with a 
lot of emotional heaviness to them,” she says.

For assistant director Amanda Vandenberg, the most successful totems are those 
that “transport you into a specific experience – that’s what will make the 
audience identify with a story the most”. What’s more, “in a world where our 
lives are increasingly digital … we can’t help but treasure these instances of 
tangible ephemera.”

A four-year relationship based in Austin, Texas, is recollected with a set of 
used, black emery boards. “My late husband Chad was a creative, spirited soul,” 
the text says. “He was also very self-destructive. He used to bite and gnaw on 
his cuticles until they ached and bled, and then would file them down further 
with emery boards. It was a true compulsion and he would do it everywhere: in 
public, while watching TV, even while riding in my car. It drove me crazy, and 
I was always asking him to stop it. Some of his self-destructive habits led 
indirectly to his early death at 42, and I miss him so much, every day.”

I also like the simplicity of the small heap of dried contact lenses, from 
Oberlin, Ohio, with the terse memo: “I continued to save them, curled up, on my 
own bedside table.” And it’s hard not to fall for the big blue dinosaur piñata. 
“This is the first birthday present my ex-boyfriend gave me. I’ve tried to 
throw it away multiple times, but it looks so sad sitting next to the trash.”

“You never really know what you’re going to open when you get the package,” 
Vandenberg has said, in relation to a pair of silicone implants, which in the 
display case look like transparent Yorkshire puddings. Telling a story of a 
demanding partner and multiple operations, their donor is resentful but 
defiant: “I finally decided to have the implants removed to reclaim my own 
natural body, and to close the door on any leftover influence that ex had on my 
life. What a beautiful send-off for these two lumps of silicone that caused me 
so much pain.”

Without the stories, the objects would most often be nothing. As Vištica has 
pointed out, “We turned the convention of classical museums upside down.” 
Unlike traditional galleries, where the labels provide a small amount of 
supporting factual background, in the Museum of BrokenRelationships 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/relationships>, the “text next to the 
object carries the excitement, the enjoyment and the emotion”.

The LA museum refrains from teasing out any distinctive national styles of 
expressing heartbreak, stressing more the universality of having to cope with 
the end of a relationship, and the sense of connection felt when encountering 
the objects. Visiting the display is based on “a shared experience”, Quinn 
tells me. It’s not only schadenfreude but solidarity: “Everyone encounters 
disappointments. Nobody is alone.” Hyde talks of a “journey as honest and 
relatable as it is cathartic and promising”. She believes that the display can 
give a hopeful message to thosetangled up in blue 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YwSZvHqf9qM>: after all, those who have given 
the relics “have survived and lived to tell the tale. We can too.”

Who hasn’t got keepsakes or legacies of past relationships? (My wife, for 
whatever reason, has kept a green, three-eyed Toy Story alien given to her by a 
highly sophisticated former lover; our kids are fond of it.) Who isn’t 
nostalgic for the intensity of their first love? One label in the LA show 
reads: “We ran hot for two years, laying naked in bed for twelve hours a day, 
doting and dwelling on each other’s perfection. It was pure bliss for a 
20-year-old.”

The LA curators highlight the exhibition’s therapeutic qualities. In Quinn’s 
words: “We don’t want visitors leaving the building saddened and depressed.” 
The final space in the exhibition hits a more uplifting tone, says Hyde. A 
burnt piece of a letter is captioned: “You helped me heal in more ways than you 
can possibly know. We desperately need more people with your character and 
courage.”

There is perhaps less humour and irreverence in the LA exhibits than in the 
previous shows. I miss the caption on the suspender belt, bought in Sarajevo: 
“I never put them on. The relationship might have lasted longer if I had.” And 
the G-string made of sweets, tagged: “After four years, he turned out to be as 
shabby as his presents.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktpd%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktpd%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0406e3d9b84c1a57d2d3fc9deff748496bdee6b%2F0_1350_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20museum%20devoted%20to%20the%20wreckage%20of%20lost%20love&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktpd%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A+museum+devoted+to+the+wreckage+of+lost+love&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktpd%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0406e3d9b84c1a57d2d3fc9deff748496bdee6b%2F0_1350_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 An ‘I love you’ teddy bear. Photograph: Courtesy of the Museum of Broken 
Relationships 
But the collection is very effective at including different types of 
relationship gone wrong. A gaudy religious icon is accompanied by the words: 
“In a misguided if well-intentioned gesture, I was baptised a Christian by my 
parents. It took me 15 years to be able to break that forced relationship.” 
There are a pair of jeans worn by a husband and father very badly injured by a 
motorbike crash: “He is still here, but I have had to learn how to live with a 
broken relationship, a one-sided relationship.” Also included is a fake-gold 
charm bracelet alongside the affecting words of an abandoned daughter, a 
“souvenir from the best and the worst holiday of my life. Disney World 1977. 
You stood at the entrance and promised to bring us back there one day. Mum told 
you not to make promises you can’t keep. I have given up trying to make sense 
of your rejection of your two little girls.”

There are about 120 exhibits at the museum – enough, the organisers think, for 
full submersion but not so many that repetition or exhaustion kicks in. The 
leopard-print carpet and red velvet dressing rooms of the old lingerie store 
have been replaced with gleaming art-gallery whiteness, the gift shop is fully 
stocked, and in the days before opening, intrigued passersby were rattling the 
doors, eager to get in.

About 90,000 people visit the Zagreb collection every year – probably as many 
as walk down the touristy Hollywood Boulevard each week. On the pavement right 
outside the LA museum are some of the terrazzo and brass stars of the 
ever-popular Hollywood Walk of Fame (in this case, Bing Crosby, Charlie 
Chaplin, Hanna-Barbera). Most of those strolling past must at some point have 
been torn apart by love. Or are perhaps on the look-out for a more unusual LA 
story. So Quinn’s hopes are high. And his own emotional history? He has, he 
says, “never had a broken relationship in his life”. Lucky him.

• The Museum of Broken Relationships <https://brokenships.com/> is at 6751 
Hollywood Boulevard, Los Angeles, California.

To donate an object, visit brokenships.la/donate-an-exhibit 
<http://brokenships.la/donate-an-exhibit/>
