
During a golden age of film animation, Willis Pyle, who has died aged 101, 
played a leading role in shaping some of the Walt Disney studio’s best-known 
characters. As an assistant animator, he cut his teeth on the 1940 musical 
fantasy Pinocchio. Milt Kahl, a legendary animator known as one ofDisney’s 
“nine old men” 
<http://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/jul/12/guardianobituaries.filmnews>, was 
responsible for the final design, going for a “cute boy” look rather than the 
“wooden puppet” persona of two previous incarnations that Disney believed would 
not elicit sympathy from audiences. Pyle then brought Pinocchio to life with 
his pencil drawings – making him walk and talk, and giving him different facial 
expressions – that were passed on to the artists in the inking and painting 
department.

“The character had to act – raise his eyebrows, turn and jump, and react to 
other characters,” Pyle said. “And the way you could do it was by looking at 
yourself in a mirror to see what that expression looked like.” In the film, he 
also drew the memorable scene in which Jiminy Cricket gets dressed at 
super-fast speed when he is running late.

Continuing as an assistant animator, Pyle drew the cupids for the mythological 
setting of the Pastoral Symphony scene inFantasia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/1999/oct/21/derekmalcolmscenturyoffilm> 
(1940), and inBambi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/oct/31/ramsey-campbell-stephen-king-horror-novel-rupert-bear-bambi>
 (1942) he drew the white-tailed deer of the title, his girlfriend, Faline, 
Flower, the skunk, and Thumper, the rabbit.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgKZcwsM3RH0&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgKZcwsM3RH0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgKZcwsM3RH0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgKZcwsM3RH0&media=>
 Mr Magoo’s first appearance. 
Later, as an animator at UPA (United Productions of America), Pyle was 
involved in several major successes. He worked on the Oscar-nominatedThe Magic 
Fluke <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=utKWCP9OfCU> (1949), Ragtime Bear 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gKZcwsM3RH0> (1949) – the first film to 
feature the near-sighted, accident-prone Mr Magoo – and the Oscar-winning 
Gerald McBoing-Boing (1950), which brought a Dr Seuss story to the screen for 
the first time, and included Pyle’s sequence of the title character performing 
sound effects for a nationwide radio audience.

Pyle was born near Lebanon, Kansas, the son of Ben, a farmer, and his wife 
Maude (nee Acton). When he was two, the family moved to Colorado, first to 
Bethune, then to Boulder, where he attended high school. He worked in a 
grocer’s for a year before studying art at the University of Colorado. While 
there, he was art editor of its satirical magazine, Colorado Dodo, and an 
advertising illustrator for a Denver clothing store, Gano-Downs.

However, in 1937, Pyle left university during his final year on being 
presented with the opportunity to join the Disney studios. After seeing a 
poster of Pluto with the words: “Draw me and earn $25,000 a year”, he had 
responded. He was told that he had too little experience – but he could have a 
job in Disney’s traffic department carrying supplies to the animators if he 
attended evening classes in its art studio. In less than three years, he was an 
assistant animator.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ma3b%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ma3b%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96f6f2160b8fa23dd6d400ae452742e3a6a5005a%2F0_46_1848_1109%2F1848.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Willis%20Pyle%20obituary&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ma3b%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Willis+Pyle+obituary&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ma3b%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96f6f2160b8fa23dd6d400ae452742e3a6a5005a%2F0_46_1848_1109%2F1848.jpg>
 Pinocchio (1940). Photograph: Allstar/Cinetext/Scott Free 
Pyle joined his colleagues on strike in a dispute over differentiations in 
staff pay and benefits in 1941 and never returned – he worked onWoody 
Woodpecker cartoons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/04/woody-woodpecker-cartoon-film-festival-archive>
 at Walter Lantz’s studio for six months, before serving in the US Army Air 
Corps. He spent much of the second world war animating training and propaganda 
films for the services’ First Motion Picture Unit at the Hal Roach studio in 
Culver City, California.

After joining UPA in 1946, Pyle earned extra money as a fashion illustrator 
for the magazines Vogue and Harper’s. In 1950, he moved to New York and opened 
his own studio, Willis Pyle Productions. For 30 years, he worked alone as an 
animator from the Abbey Victoria hotel, near the Rockefeller Center. “I was 
offered [full-time studio] jobs, but I wanted to get up from my desk and go to 
the Museum of Modern Art at three o’clock in the afternoon if I wanted to, or 
go to Macy’s and buy a tie,” he said in 2010.

Related: Disney turns away from hand-drawn animation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/mar/07/disney-hand-drawn-animation> 

Pyle made hundreds of television commercials, Peanuts cartoons, the Emmy 
award-winning Dr Seuss TV specialHalloween Is Grinch Night  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ygSEkwRCQPM>(1977) and the film Raggedy Ann & 
Andy: A Musical Adventure (1977), directed by Richard Williams.

At the age of 68, he retired from animation – although he made a brief return 
in 1989 with the television series This Is America, Charlie Brown – to 
concentrate on painting in oils and watercolours. He had exhibitions at the 
Montserrat Contemporary Art Gallery, in Manhattan, for more than 20 years.

Pyle was predeceased by his wife, Virginia (nee Morrison), whom he married in 
1946, and his brother, the actorDenver Pyle 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0701500/> – best known for his roles in The Life 
and Times of Grizzly Adams and The Dukes of Hazzard. He is survived by his 
nephews, Tony and David.

• Willis Acton Pyle, animator and painter, born 3 September 1914; died 2 June 
2016
