
Name: “White Saviour Barbie”.

Age: 20.

Appearance: The very model of western millennial egalitarianism.

Is that a compliment? No, definitely not. “Barbie Savior” is an Instagram 
account <https://www.instagram.com/barbiesavior/?hl=en> that satirises the 
messiah complex of affluent westerners who spend time travelling in the 
developing world.

I’m nothing like that. Really? But didn’t you once spend an afternoon helping 
out in a rural Guatemalan orphanage during your gap year?

Related: How Socality Barbie proves that Instagram has turned into reality TV 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/sep/14/how-socality-barbie-proves-that-instagram-has-turned-into-reality-tv>

Yes, but … And didn’t you spend the entire afternoon ignoring the staff and 
taking selfies with the kids?

Yes, but … And don’t those selfies now exist exclusively as a method to 
convince people that you are nicer than you are, mostly so that they will sleep 
with you?

Rats, busted. It’s OK. We have all done it. White Saviour Barbie just shines a 
light on that a little. In fact, the creators started the account after 
realising that they wereguilty of imitating her behaviour 
<http://mashable.com/2016/04/19/white-savior-barbie/#vH.iobfvEEqt>.

So what does White Saviour Barbie do? She essentially embodies the obnoxiously 
self-serving “They have nothing, but they’re so happy” attitude of many western 
travellers. For example, the caption under a photo ofBarbie hugging a black 
Barbie <https://www.instagram.com/p/BDivxtLsfX8/?taken-by=barbiesavior> is: 
“Orphans take the BEST pictures! So. Cute. #whatsyournameagain #orphans.”
 From Barbie Savior Instagram account. 
Is there more? A fortnight ago, she started a charity called Harness the Tears 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BD6SXhPsfUL/?taken-by=barbiesavior>, because: 
“Ever since I’ve been here, I’ve been crying almost 90% of the time. I realised 
how wasteful that was as there is such a need for water here! Given the fact 
that I’ve always wanted to be a CEO and I’m already 20 years old, I figured it 
was time to get moving!”

This all sounds a lot like the Sociality Barbie 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/sep/14/how-socality-barbie-proves-that-instagram-has-turned-into-reality-tv>
 Instagram account from last year.Truth be told, it is. Poor Barbie is quickly 
becoming the vessel by which white millennials chronicle their own 
self-loathing.

What could possibly be next? Barbie Already Nostalgic for 2011 Student Disco? 
Barbie Blaming Her Dire Financial Outlook on Baby Boomers by Tweeting a Sad 
Emoji on Her £750 Smartphone?

What about Barbie Silently Furious at the Condescension of an Apparently 
Ageing Media? Yes, OK, point taken.

Do say: “Check your privilege, White Saviour Barbie.”

Don’t say: “And don’t get me started on you, Masculine Hegemony Mr Potato 
Head.”
 From Barbie Saviour ‘Harness the Tears’. 