
My father, James Downey, who has died aged 82, was one of Ireland’s most 
distinguished journalists. His career of more than six decades spanned both the 
Irish Times, where he rose to become deputy editor, and then theIrish 
Independent <http://www.theguardian.com/media/irish-independent>, where he was 
a leading columnist.

Over the past 20 years his opinion columns in the Irish Independent 
<http://www.independent.ie/opinion/independent-journalists/james-downey/> were 
mandatory reading for anyone who wanted an authoritative analysis of Irish 
politics and international affairs. The main themes of his work were the 
exercising of power and a concern for transparency and accountability. His 
final Independent column, published the week before he died, celebrated the 
achievements of the journalists who exposed the tax avoidance of leading 
figures in the Panama papers.

During his tenure at the Irish Times he was twice London editor, and it was 
during his first period there in the 1970s that he was responsible for breaking 
a number of stories on the troubles in Northern Ireland, including the news 
that the British government intended to introduce direct rule toNorthern Ireland
 <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> in March 1972. His 
encyclopedic knowledge of Anglo-Irish affairs was set out in his book Them & Us 
(1983).

His career with the Irish Times <http://www.theguardian.com/media/irish-times> 
ended in 1988, following disappointment at being overlooked for the top job as 
editor. Before joining the Irish Independent as a columnist in 1989, he set up 
and published a new monthly current affairs magazine, the New Nation, which 
unfortunately ran for only 10 months.

My father was born in Dromahair, County Leitrim, in the north-west of Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>, to Patrick, a school principal, 
and his wife, Florence (nee McGowan). Florence was a civil servant in the War 
Office in London before returning to Dromahair to help her mother run the 
village post office. She died from cancer when my father was two years old and 
his grandmother and father brought him up.

He was educated at Newbridge college <http://www.newbridge-college.ie/>, 
County Kildare, a Dominican establishment. He began his journalistic career at 
the age of 18 with the Sligo Champion before moving to the Carlow Nationalist. 
He also worked for local newspapers in the east end of London and spent six 
months teaching English in Spain in 1957.

His experience of the questionable influence of an authoritarian Catholic 
Church informed his strong sense of social justice and the need to create a 
more progressive, inclusive society. This later led him to indulge a brief 
flirtation with electoral politics, when he unsuccessfully stood as Labour 
party candidate in the 1969 Irish general election. Polling only 895 votes, he 
said he was always “profoundly grateful that I did so badly” and abandoned all 
thoughts of a career in politics to focus instead on journalism.

In his 2009 memoir, In My Own Time: Inside Irish Politics and Society 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/My-Own-Time-James-Downey/dp/0717146367/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1466081880&sr=1-1&keywords=James+Downey>
, he described how writing for newspapers gave him “half a century and more of 
hard work and sheer pleasure”.

He is survived by his wife, Moira, whom he married in 1963, by my sister, 
Vanessa, and me, and by four grandchildren.
