
“I’ll meet you there,” I say. “I’ve got something to do first.” That’s a lie. 
I just don’t want to take an hour-long taxi with you; the fare for that is 
outrageous. No, better to take public transport and spend an extra hour and 
half to save the money.

You have no clue, though; none of my friends do. My parents have sent me to an 
expensive private school in the hope that I’ll get a good education and land a 
high-paying job. You are here for an education that was your birthright. I am 
here because my parents have scraped together every penny they have.

I’d be a fool not to take advantage of this education, and I’m one of my 
year’s top students, but it isn’t easy trying to hide my lack of money. Make no 
mistake, I am by no means poor, but by your standards I might as well be. When 
we go out for dinner, I scream inside at the cost. Often I don’t eat, saying 
I’ve had something already or I’m not hungry. Some people ask if I’m anorexic, 
because they never see me eat a proper meal outside school.

Related: What I’m really thinking: the female boxer 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/30/what-really-thinking-female-boxer>

I can’t complain. I have a stellar education, great friends and overall I’m 
happy. But it’s hard not to feel resentful when friends explain how their 
parents give them the equivalent of a month’s pay from my two part-time jobs. 
I’ve considered telling my closest friends how uncomfortable I feel when I 
simply cannot afford the outings and downright stupid wastes of money. But that 
would mean the end of our friendship as equals. It would be an acknowledgment 
that you are superior to me; you might protest, but in some small way, you 
would begin to pity me.




• Tell us what you’re really thinking – email mind@theguardian.com 
<mailto:mind@theguardian.com>
