
By the time the liquor store on Kalavasah Teni road in the south Indian city 
of Madurai opens for business at 10am on Monday, a small queue of regular 
customers has already begun to form outside.


Within minutes, bottles fly off the shelves. By the end of the day, the shop 
will have sold about 600 bottles of alcohol and made about 100,000 rupees 
(£1,000). On bank holidays or during religious festivals, sales can be 10 times 
that amount.

The Kalavasah Teni shop is one of 6,800 
<http://ttp://ijrmbs.com/vol2issue3/sivasankaran.pdf> in Tamil Nadu, and is 
controlled by a government-run organisation calledTasmac 
<http://tasmac.tn.gov.in/>, which has a state-wide monopoly on alcohol sales. 

Related: Banning alcohol to protect girls? India is missing the mark | Pauline 
Oosterhoff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/12/banning-alcohol-to-protect-girls-india-is-missing-the-mark>

Tasmac has seen an increase in revenue every year since 2003, when alcohol 
sales were taken over by the government.In 2014-15, Tasmac took in about 24,000 
crore rupees (£2.4bn) 
<http://www.business-standard.com/article/politics/tamil-nadu-on-its-way-to-becoming-a-liquor-free-state-116053000002_1.html>
, more than a quarter of the state’s total income for the year.

Before Tasmac, alcohol was a taboo, and people had to travel to obscure places 
to buy it. In the past decade, the government has opened Tasmac shops across 
the state, even next to schools, temples and in residential areas. As a result, 
alcoholism is spreading. Rates ofdivorce 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/Tamil-Nadu-has-highest-percentage-of-widowed/divorcees-in-India/articleshow/12541325.cms>
, street crime anddomestic violence are rising 
<http://thewire.in/2016/03/18/what-tamil-women-want-in-2016-an-end-to-domestic-violence-25050/>
.

According to the World Health Organisation 
<http://www.who.int/substance_abuse/publications/global_alcohol_report/profiles/ind.pdf>
, nearly one in 20 Indian men have an addiction or alcohol-related disorder.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k2yy%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k2yy%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1bf9a871c01a0b4631b27869e2215b2358680ce5%2F0_200_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=India%20counts%20the%20cost%20of%20trying%20to%20solve%20its%20drinking%20problem&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k2yy%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=India+counts+the+cost+of+trying+to+solve+its+drinking+problem&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k2yy%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1bf9a871c01a0b4631b27869e2215b2358680ce5%2F0_200_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
 A mural of Jayalalithaa, the chief minister, in Tamil Nadu. 
But now, chief minister Jayalalithaa, who introduced the monopoly in 2003, has 
promised to phase out alcohol sales completely after violent anti-alcohol 
clashes in the run-up to last month’s state elections. Since her swearing-in 
ceremony at the end of May, she has already announced that Tasmac’s retail 
hours will be reduced, and 500 stores closed.



In 2014, the neighbouring southern state of Kerala started phasing out 
alcohol, and this year, Bihar, one of India’s most populous states, declared an 
overnight liquor ban. Prohibition has been implemented to varying degrees in 
many states including Gujarat and Manipur, and Tamil Nadu has a history of 
periodically banning the bottle.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k2yy%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k2yy%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff21e7b55fc5dfa744efc7627183507c7d4c38a83%2F0_859_4000_5000%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=India%20counts%20the%20cost%20of%20trying%20to%20solve%20its%20drinking%20problem&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k2yy%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=India+counts+the+cost+of+trying+to+solve+its+drinking+problem&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k2yy%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff21e7b55fc5dfa744efc7627183507c7d4c38a83%2F0_859_4000_5000%2F4000.jpg>
 Nandhini Anandhan, a 24-year-old law student from Madurai. 
 Nandhini Anandhan, a 24-year-old law student from Madurai, is at the 
forefront of a massive student movement in favour of prohibition in Tamil Nadu. 
She and more than 200 students from Madurai Law College have linked with 
students in all the major cities of Tamil Nadu to coordinate protests in 
response to alcohol abuse among young people.

“Nowadays, it’s not only college students – kids start drinking as early as 
year nine [age 13 to 14],” Anandhan says. “The government has ruined three 
generations.”

At Sellur Vattara Kalinjiyam, a women’s rights organisation in Madurai, almost 
all the women have a sister, neighbour or friend with a story about alcohol 
abuse.

At its headquarters, dozens of volunteers have been collecting signatures to 
urge the government to close all Tasmac shops. More than 5,000 people have 
signed the petition so far.

One of the women, Savitri (many people in the region use one name), says: “My 
husband earns 500 rupees a day. From that, he gives me only 50 rupees for the 
household expenses. If I ask for more, he shouts at me and beats me. My older 
sister has the same problem. Her husband hits her and the children when he’s 
drunk.

“When our sons see their fathers, they start drinking too – these are school 
kids. We want a total ban, and if the promises of the election are not met, we 
will go and start a riot,” she says.

 For some women, easy access to alcohol has made public spaces inaccessible. 
One woman, Rajeshwari, says she avoids walking on roads with Tasmac shops. “The 
men stand outside the shop, crowded together. If we try to walk past them, they 
shout rude things. I don’t feel safe walking alone. Sometimes I change my route 
completely, just to avoid them.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k2yy%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k2yy%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa272f223c703c835aceacd3d6c94301710e7d12c%2F0_106_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=India%20counts%20the%20cost%20of%20trying%20to%20solve%20its%20drinking%20problem&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k2yy%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=India+counts+the+cost+of+trying+to+solve+its+drinking+problem&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k2yy%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa272f223c703c835aceacd3d6c94301710e7d12c%2F0_106_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
 Women gather at Sellur Vattara Kalinjiyam, a women’s rights organisation in 
Madurai. 
 But outlawing the sale of alcohol will not be easy. Politicians have close 
ties to the alcohol industry in Tamil Nadu. Both Jayalalithaa’s All India Anna 
Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam party and the opposition Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam 
party havegiven licences to produce alcohol to close aides 
<http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.com/2015-01-11/news/57940995_1_tasmac-illicit-liquor-quality-liquor>
.





The alcohol ban raises questions about how the state plans to continue funding 
public services without cash from Tasmac shops.

Among the concerns is whether cuts will be made to services to protect women.

“There is no evidence from any country in the world, or any state of India, 
that prohibition directly contributes to the reduction of violence against 
women,” saysVikram Patel 
<http://www.lshtm.ac.uk/newsevents/news/2015/vikram_patel_time_100.html>, an 
academic at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine.

“Even if it did, it would be the equivalent to banning cars to address road 
traffic accidents,” he says.

Related: 'I paid the price, I own your son': Indian brides fight back in 
anti-dowry films | Amrit Dhillon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/03/india-anti-dowry-films-i-paid-the-price-i-own-your-son-brides-fight-back>

“Policies that combat the deep-rooted gender inequality in India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>, for example through empowering women 
with sexual and reproductive rights, must remain the most important strategy to 
reduce violence against women.”

Dr K Jothi Sivagnanam, an economist at the University of Madras, says the 
reason a decision to ban alcohol took so long is because of the contribution 
sales make to public and private revenue. A slow implementation of prohibition 
will buy time to find alternative revenues. “[The government] have a few 
options to collect revenue to replace that income. Their commercial tax 
department has huge scope to collect VAT on large business transactions. Stamp 
and registration duty has also been low because of undervaluation,” he says.

But he says, after the promises, the government will need to close Tasmac 
shops sooner rather than later, “or else the opposition parties will use this 
against them in the next election”.

The Guardian has made many attempts to contact the Tamil Nadu government for 
comment but no response had been received at time of publication.
