
It’s hard to think of news sweeter than reports about how the “rich kids of 
Instagram <https://www.instagram.com/richkidsofinstagram/?hl=en>” – the 
preening, materialistic, status-obsessed douchebags whose self-awareness is so 
profoundly lacking that they have inadvertently become their own meme – are 
inadvertently ruining their parents’ lives.

Related: Yachts, jets and stacks of cash: super-rich discover risks of 
Instagram snaps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/03/super-rich-discover-hidden-risks-instagram-yachts-jets>

Cybersecurity firms use social media evidence of wealth in up to 75% of their 
litigation cases. So when your obnoxious children Instagram a selfie next to 
your gold-plated Ferrari, they’re telling the world exactly how rich you are. 
It’s a security nightmare – opening you up to fraudsters, lawsuits and divorce 
claims alike – but still they persist. So, let’s look at some of the most 
pervasiveInstagram <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/instagram> rich-kid 
tropes, and see what they reveal about the Rich Parents of Instagram’s assets – 
and how they could be used against them...

Chanel is everywhere

The rich kids of Instagram are some of the most strangely Chanel-fixated 
people on Earth. Sure, they take endless pictures of shopping bags, but that’s 
just the tip of the iceberg. You don’t have to delve too hard into the oeuvre 
to see that they’ll take pictures of anything if it’s got the Chanel logo on 
it. Often, this even extends to cake. You’d be staggered by the number of 
dimwitted debutantes who stand for photos next to cakes iced with the famous 
double-C. You know how you wanted a Spider-Man cake when you were little, and 
your mum made you Spider-Man cake, and it was the happiest birthday of your 
life? These people are just like that, except Spider-Man was a crime fighter 
with superhuman powers and not an expensive fashion brand worn by obnoxious 
goons, and also you were six and these people are legally entitled to vote.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t4em%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t4em%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53fec8b55185c6f545531ed7fcc53389ef483214%2F0_0_4928_3280%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fools'%20gold%3A%20super-rich%20Instagram%20decoded&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t4em%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fools%27+gold%3A+super-rich+Instagram+decoded&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t4em%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53fec8b55185c6f545531ed7fcc53389ef483214%2F0_0_4928_3280%2F4928.jpg>
 Rich kids will take pictures of anything if it’s got the Chanel logo on it. 
Photograph: Alamy 
Wasted champagne is telling


Beware the kid who posts pictures of champagne online. It simply isn’t worth 
going after any of their parents’ cash. Because have you seen the champagne 
photos that these people take? They don’t drink champagne in any of them. 
Visible champagne consumption is for pretenders. Instead, they just pour it. 
They pour it on people. They pour it on things. Sometimes they just turn the 
bottle upside down and tip the whole thing on the floor, and then wave the 
bottle around like the monkey from the start of Kubrick’s 2001: A Space 
Odyssey. A kid who burns through champagne this wastefully must have picked up 
the habit somewhere. Chances are their parents have already spunked everything 
they own. Good luck seizing any assets from them, buster.

Related: The Rich Kids of Instagram review​ – ​yacht parties, helicopter 
shopping: where do I sign up? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/dec/21/rich-kids-instagram-tv-review>

Pools win prizes


If financial investigators are really keen to catch out the parents of these 
preening dullards, they could do a lot worse than to examine their endless 
photographs of impractically tiny rooftop infinity pools. These photos – if you 
look past the gormless Wayfarer-wearing Joey Essex-alike pouring champagne off 
the roof in the foreground – might reveal the location of several hidden 
assets. Not only that, but you’re likely to see them without their tops on, 
which might help you assess their level of physical fitness in case you’re 
tempted to engage them in a foot chase.

Cash is a security risk

If your child has ever photographed themselves standing next to a pile of 
cash, you have given birth to the world’s dimmest nimrod. Not only are they 
saying that you are rich, they are saying that you haven’t even bothered to do 
anything with your wealth. It’s just lying around on the floor in great big 
piles, like you took theopening titles of Duck Tales 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CMU2NwaaXEA> as a weird asset management 
documentary. If anyone – thieves or fraudsters or competitors or aggrieved 
former spouses – were to see these pictures, they wouldn’t even have to try and 
part you from your riches. They could simply bung a hoover through your 
letterbox and have at it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t4em%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t4em%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc36e7c3dff16aaf44c63f39e60b739c09d9d31e%2F0_0_5760_3460%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fools'%20gold%3A%20super-rich%20Instagram%20decoded&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t4em%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fools%27+gold%3A+super-rich+Instagram+decoded&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t4em%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc36e7c3dff16aaf44c63f39e60b739c09d9d31e%2F0_0_5760_3460%2F5760.jpg>
 If your child has ever photographed themselves standing next to a pile of 
cash, you have given birth to the world’s dimmest nimrod. Photograph: Andrew 
Howe/Getty Images 
License plates are a giveaway

There’s an entire scale of douchey vehicles on the internet. It goes: car, 
then sports car, then golden sports car, then yacht, then yacht full of 
attractive people having fun, then yacht full of people who are bored because 
it’s only a yacht, then private jet, then private jet full of identical 
twentysomethings all looking out of the window in a weird pastiche of 
intellectual depth. Whatever the vehicle, though, you can guarantee that these 
prats have also snapped an identifying plate of some description.

Sunglasses never come off

Every single rich kid of Instagram wears sunglasses, regardless of where they 
are. It doesn’t matter if they are indoors, or in church, or in some sort of 
futuristic military prison’s retina-scanning station. They will never remove 
their expensive sunglasses. This is partly because they only go on holiday to 
exclusive resorts in warm locations, and partly because they don’t want anyone 
to see how hollow and utterly devoid of life their eyes are. The opportunities 
for monetary acquisition are endless here. Since they are so used to life 
behind shades, why not try running up behind them and knocking their aviators 
off? They’ll be so confused and disorientated by the glare of normal light that 
they won’t notice you confiscating all their parents’ antique vases.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t4em%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t4em%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8f763f40d916c8009cdc85f30d06224548d9f3f%2F0_0_1086_1357%2F1086.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fools'%20gold%3A%20super-rich%20Instagram%20decoded&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t4em%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fools%27+gold%3A+super-rich+Instagram+decoded&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t4em%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8f763f40d916c8009cdc85f30d06224548d9f3f%2F0_0_1086_1357%2F1086.jpg>
 Nobody really wears watches any more, do they? This douchebag owns a ton of 
them, though. Photograph: NICK RAZZELL/REX/Shutterstock 
Watches are useless

Nobody really wears watches any more, do they? This douchebag owns a ton of 
them, though. He owns so many of them that he can’t even wear them properly. 
Look at him, dumbly stuffing six on to each hand like a useless Swiss 
knuckle-duster. What an idiot. However, if he has an interest in one outdated 
status symbol, he probably has loads of others. What else are you going to 
defraud him out of? His fax machine? His collection of bejewelled beepers? That 
needlessly large display of gold-painted Amstrad E-M@iler phones? This is a 
lost cause, and you know it.

Receipts reveal all

This, despite everything we’ve been taught about basic internet security, is 
still a thing. A doltish young buck, hairless and pouting, will clatter through 
the doors of an annoying boutique. Then, once they’ve drained the place of its 
most unnecessary items, in a show of brazen materialism, they’ll photograph 
their receipt and post it online. Now the world not only knows what vast 
amounts of cash they have access to, but where they spend it and what they 
spend it on and – sometimes, in truly stupid cases – a vast majority of their 
personal details. Fire away, lawyers. With kids this dumb, it’ll be like 
shooting fish in a barrel.
