
How bizarre that the Daily Mail should think an iffy story, “Fury over plot to 
let 1.5m Turks into Britain 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3637523/Secret-plan-open-borders-1-5m-Turks-British-diplomats-admit-risk-tell-ministers-symbolic-gesture-Turkey.html>
”, was more important than what Mail Online called “the worst mass shooting in 
American history 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3638090/Pictured-victims-Orlando-massacre-named-city-works-contact-families-50-shot-dead.html>
.”

As news judgments go, the call by whoever was editing the Mail on Sunday 
evening must rank as one of the most eccentric in the paper’s history.

It didn’t even mention the massacre of 50 people at the Pulse nightclub in 
Orlando on its front page. The only recognition that it had initially 
underplayed the story in its first edition was to move its spread forward from 
pages 10-11 to pages 4-5 by the second.

The Mail’s extraordinary decision was echoed to an extent by the Daily Express 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/dailyexpress>, which led with reaction to 
David Cameron’s claim that pensions could be slashed if Britain quits the EU. 
It relegated the massacre to a cross-reference.

Similarly, its red-top sister, the Daily Star 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/dailystar>, splashed on the supposed threat 
to England’s European football championships, carrying only a paragraph on “gay 
club slaughter”.

What world do those three editors inhabit? How could they not realise the 
significance of what happened in Florida?

We are used to weird editorial decisions by the Express and the Star, papers 
that no longer have much, if any, credibility. Their owner, Richard Desmond, 
has run them into the ground.

But the Mail is a different matter altogether. Whatever you may think of its 
political and social agenda, this is Britain’s second-highest selling national 
title. It usually exhibits an acute news sense. Why did it desert it this time?

It would appear to have been a mixture of its Eurosceptic fanaticism (the 
so-what speculative splash) plus commercial cynicism (a preordained 
determination to plug its readers’ offer: “pearl and white sapphire earrings, 
inspired by the stunning pearl earrings worn by the Queen... worth £35”).

Its digital editor made no such error. Mail Online 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/mail-online> led with the “Isis massacre”. 
You had to scroll a long way down to find the article about “a secret plan to 
open Britain’s borders to 1.5million Turks”.

The Mail’s journalists, whether old hands and new recruits, will surely be 
wondering at their editor’s lack of wisdom. News values were turned on their 
head. Pearl earrings trumped mass murder. A routineEU referendum 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> story was preferred over 
murder most foul.

To borrow one of the phrases favoured by Mail columnist Richard Littlejohn: 
you couldn’t make it up.
