
The “I’ve got these points – what can I get?” attitude is not the way to 
approachClearing <http://www.theguardian.com/education/clearing>, says Simon 
Ells, head of admissions at Birmingham City University. “Don’t say ‘I’ll take 
anything,’ even if you’re devastated.” A wrong choice costs too much time and 
money.

Clearing can be overwhelming, not least for the sheer scope of courses on 
offer, so it pays to narrow your search down. Are you looking for the exact 
same course elsewhere? Or, if your heart’s set on a particular university, do 
they run a similar, but less well-known alternative?

While the most popular degrees – medicine, dentistry and veterinary science, 
for instance – are usually oversubscribed, related courses in the same field 
may draw less attention.

Related: University league tables 2016 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/ng-interactive/2015/may/25/university-league-tables-2016>

“Many courses build in the complexities of the modern world of work and this 
is changing the kind of titles they have,” says Nathan Uglow, head of 
humanities at Leeds Trinity University.

“For medics there are usually places on pharmacy courses, a range of 
bioscience courses and health science degrees,” says Anthony Fitzgerald, a 
member of theCareer Development Institute (CDI) <http://www.thecdi.net/> and 
director of careers at Newstead Wood School in Kent.

“Medics who have maths A-level are able to refocus their application through 
Clearing to chemical, biomedical or biochemical engineering, or materials 
science,” he says.

Instead of history, a heritage degree might appeal. A student who’s failed to 
get on to a teaching degree could study an education-related degree and 
complete a PGCE (postgraduate certificate in education) later. Creative and 
professional writing at Leeds Trinity, for example, could be an alternative for 
a traditional English degree.

And it’s not only the newer degrees that will have places – fluctuations in 
supply and demand on some prestigious courses means subjects such as geography 
or environmental studies may not be full and so will lower their grade 
requirements.

Places may also be available on combination degrees – such as philosophy and 
anthropology or psychology and sociology – even at top research universities, 
says Fitzgerald.

“Joint honours degrees can be a good compromise,” agrees Chris Ellicott, 
director of student services at Bath Spa University. “They still include many 
modules from your original choice, but with exciting new elements.”

And if students have researched, visited and arranged accommodation at a 
particular university, that uni may suggest alternative courses. Sometimes, 
says Ells, this can mean looking at anHND (higher national diploma) 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Higher_National_Diploma> in the same subject. 
These further education qualifications, while not offered at all universities, 
could lead to entry into the second or third year of a degree course down the 
line.

But Fitzgerald suggests taking your time to learn about any offers: “Seek 
advice from a qualified career adviser or teacher. Don’t risk dropping out 
after the first term with only a partial fees refund for the first year.”

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.

