
The mental health of babies and very young children can often be overlooked, 
but it is crucial to development later on in life. The time between conception 
and when the child reaches the age of two is especially vital for wellbeing and 
brain and language development.

This has been increasingly acknowledged in recent years; the independent 
Mental Health Taskforce has recommended that NHS England support 30,000 more 
pregnant women annually to accessspecialist perinatal mental health services 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/may/17/perinatal-mental-health-depression-psychosis>
. But there is still more to be done, particularly for children in care, for 
whom secure relationships are vital.

Related: Tackling underfunding in childrenâ€™s mental health services 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/may/17/ambitions-for-childrens-mental-health-services>

To discuss some of these issues, we have put together a panel of experts from 
the social care and mental health sectors. We will be talking about:

 * How can public services work together on infant mental health? 
 * Do the emotional and attachment needs of children get forgotten about when 
decisions are made around care? 
 * The importance of early intervention and prevention. 
 * Examples of good practice. 
The discussion will take place on Wednesday 8 June between 12 and 2pm in the 
comments section below this article. To take part, create a free Guardian 
account <https://id.theguardian.com/register> or log in using your Twitter or 
Facebook profiles to comment. Alternatively, you canemail 
<mailto:ruth.hardy@theguardian.com> us to post your questions for you.

Panellists

Matt Forde, head of service for Scotland, NSPCC

Jane Barlow, president of the Association for Infant Mental Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> (UK); professor of public health 
in the early years, University of Warwick

Karen Broadhurst, professor of social work, Lancaster University

David Shemmings, co-director of the Centre for Child Protection at the 
University of Kent and professor of child protection research

Julia Brown, co-founder, the FASD Trust

Alice Cook, independent family assessment practitioner currently doing a PhD 
on childhood trauma and the impact on parenting capacity at Royal Holloway 
University


Clea Barry, practice supervisor (public law), Cafcass

Susannah Bowyer, research and development manager, Research in Practice

Maria Kane, representative from the Cavendish Square Group of NHS trusts and 
chief executive of Barnet, Enfield and Haringey NHS mental health trusts

Gavin Moorghen, professional officer, British Association of Social Workers

Sheena Webb, consultant clinical psychologist and service manager for the 
London Family Drug and Alcohol Court

Discussion commissioned and controlled by the Guardian, funded by NSPCC.
