
Assassinations of senior officers and secret defections are crippling 
Burundi’s army, one year intoa crisis  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/10/burundi-ethnic-violence-refugees>
that has createdhundreds of thousands of refugees 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/04/burundi-fear-political-crisis-flee-pierre-nkurunziza>
 and led to the revival ofhate speech 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/12/un-to-vote-on-resolution-condemning-killings-torture-burundi-government>
 previously used to fuel genocidal massacres.

The military was once a symbol and defender of the country’s reconciliation, 
with quotas for majority Hutus and minority Tutsis that prevented it becoming 
the fiefdom of either group. But it is now being ripped apart by fear, 
suspicion and the destruction of its top ranks.

Related: The world looks away as blood flows in Burundi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/10/burundi-ethnic-violence-refugees>

“The army is itself a battlefield between the government and opposition,” said 
Thierry Vircoulon 
<http://www.crisisgroup.org/en/about/staff/field/africa/vircoulon-thierry.aspx>
, a senior consultant for the International Crisis Group. “They can perhaps 
carry on with targeted killings for quite some time, but this is destroying the 
army. There are quite a lot of defections that are unreported.”

More than a quarter of a million people have fled the central African nation 
<http://www.unhcr.org/56d97f2d9.html>, which neighbours Rwanda and shares with 
that country a history of ethnic bloodshed, since president Pierre Nkurunziza 
announced last April that he would defy the constitution andrun for a third term
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/05/violence-grips-burundi-president-nkurunziza-cleared-run-third-term>
.

Once hailed as a model for peace-building, Burundi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/burundi> has been sliding towards full-blown 
civil war, with thousands killed, tortured, abducted or jailed.

The widely feared Imbonerakure 
<http://www.irinnews.org/report/101418/who-are-imbonerakure-and-burundi-unravelling>
 militia, officially the youth wing of the ruling party, has been blamed for 
much of the abuse. Activists warn that, with weakened security forces, the 
group’s thugs will have a freer hand.

“They are trying to dismantle the army, so it will be very difficult to secure 
the people, secure the country,” warned Justine Nkurunziza, a civil society 
activist.

The most recent attack was on Monday, when a brigadier general believed to be 
close to the president was killed along with his wife and bodyguard as he 
dropped a child off at school; the daughter also later died of her injuries.

Not only pro-government officers have been targeted; up to half a dozen senior 
officers from both sides have been killed in the past month.

The army’s troubles come at a time when senior members of the government are 
increasingly reverting to ethnically charged propaganda, apparently trying to 
bolster its position by rekindling old animosities between Hutu and Tutsi.


“It’s the discourse of the past,” said Vircoulon. “It’s serious, because it 
shows a mindset, that the past is coming back and of course the radicalisation 
can only grow over time.”


Burundi has endured years of civil war and several genocidal massacres since 
claiming independence in 1962. Its power-sharing constitution, agreed as part 
of the peace deal that first brought Nkurunziza to power, was making real 
progress towards healing those old wounds, and banishing the spectre of another 
genocide.

But his decision to run for a third term was followed by a failed coup attempt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/14/burundi-violence-coup-protests-bujumbura-president-pierre-nkurunziza>
 and, as the rebellion across the country grew, the president and his inner 
circle appear to have calculated that appealing to ethnic fears and allegiances 
could be key to retaining power.

Related: Nowhere to run: Burundi violence follows escapees across borders 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/15/nowhere-to-run-burundi-violence-follows-escapees-across-borders>

“As they have no real arguments, they have started with another tactic, to 
show that he is a leader who draws power from the Hutus and protects the 
Hutus,” said Geneviève Kanyange, a former member of the ruling party who 
opposed Nkurunziza’s third term and fled into exile.

“There is resistance to these divisive ideas among both the Hutu and the Tutsi 
in the population. But in the long term, if things continue this way, I don’t 
know. Maybe you will have a situation where extremists attack each other.”

The escalation of violence and vicious propaganda comes at a time of 
increasing international focus on Burundi. The prosecutor of the international 
criminal court this weekopened a preliminary investigation of atrocities 
<http://europe.newsweek.com/burundi-war-crimes-court-probe-year-long-violence-452430>
 in the country over the past year, and the UN is weighing up dispatchinga new 
police mission 
<http://www.nation.co.ke/news/africa/UN-weighs-options-for-sending-3000-police-officers-to-Burundi/-/1066/3163672/-/miiou5/-/index.html>
.

Amnesty International earlier this year said satellite pictures from Burundi 
backed accounts of mass graves 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/press-releases/2016/01/burundi-satellite-evidence-supports-witness-accounts-of-mass-graves/>
, and Human Rights Watch warned of “increased brutality 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2016/02/25/burundi-abductions-killings-spread-fear> … 
[and] new levels of lawlessness”.

The crisis is so serious that the African Union earlier this year considered 
sending in peacekeeping troops without government consent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/30/burundi-president-pierre-nkurunziza-threatens-fight-african-union-peacekeepers>
. The plan was ultimately dropped, but theEU has halted aid payments 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/15/eu-suspends-aid-to-burundi-government>
 and European governments have joined the US in imposing sanctions on senior 
leaders.

Activists say the government has changed tack in a bid to mute criticism from 
abroad, but has not abandoned the use of brutal force.

“They are changing the modus operandi all the time. They are no longer leaving 
bodies in the street, or digging mass graves. Now they have two, three – 
maximum five bodies buried at once,” said Vital Nshimirimana, a leading civil 
society activist. “They are easier to dig, and you can have [graves] in many 
places at once, so it is not as obvious.”
