
Another week, another set of bad headlines 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3218987/How-RSPCA-snoops-wills-donors-claimed-seen-walking-wallets-charities.html>
 for charities, and again the allegations revolve around data.

Earlier this week reports suggested that charity fundraisers had bought and 
sold the personal data of an elderly man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/01/charities-face-scrutiny-over-trading-of-elderly-mans-data>
, which resulted in him losing thousands of pounds. And,today, the Daily Mail 
accused the RSPCA 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3218987/How-RSPCA-snoops-wills-donors-claimed-seen-walking-wallets-charities.html>
 of using personal data to work out how much money individuals can donate. The 
RSPCA hasdisputed the claims 
<http://www.thirdsector.co.uk/rspca-refutes-daily-mail-allegation-targets-elderly-vulnerable-people/fundraising/article/1362546>
.

These are serious accusations, with public trust in charities at their very 
heart. But what charities shouldn’t do, is retreat from collecting and using 
data.Data 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/data> is 
now so intrinsic to the way we live, from shopping to dating, that it would be 
absurd for the voluntary sector to pull away.

However, the Data Protection Act 
<https://www.gov.uk/data-protection/the-data-protection-act> (DPA) outlines how 
organisations should handle personal information securely. Based on these 
guidelines we, at New Philanthropy Capital (NPC), have produced anew report 
<http://www.thinknpc.org/publications/safe-use-of-personal-data/> that explains 
10 simple steps charities should take when dealing with personal data.

Related: Cyber security for charities – top tips 
<http://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/feb/04/cyber-security-charities-top-tips>

1. Understand what you have got

Charities have access to plenty of information, especially about their 
beneficiaries. So they should know where such data is stored (failure to know 
this iswhat got the British Pregnancy Advisory Service into trouble 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/07/abortion-service-website-hacker-information-commissioner-fine>
. Its website was hacked and the information commissioner ruled that the data 
was not secure enough).

2. Wherever possible, make sure people know what you’re going to do

The DPA requires people with access to data to act fairly and lawfully. In 
practice, this means letting the subjects of that data know who controls it and 
for what purposes. If a charity collects data as part of delivering its 
services, it will need consent before using it as part of fundraising.


3. You don’t always need people’s consent

For some charities — those working with the homeless, for example — obtaining 
consent will be especially difficult. One way around this is to anonymise your 
data: the DPA does not apply to anonymised datasets. But even without this, the 
DPA can be flexible, with exemptions for using data for research being one 
example.


4. Do you need the data you hold?

Don’t be a hoarder. Poorly stored data can get your charity into trouble. If 
you don’t need it, delete it.


Related: How charities can understand and manage data 
<http://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2014/aug/21/how-charities-can-understand-and-manage-data>

5. Remove it securely

The DPA doesn’t say how long you should keep personal data, but charities can 
make a sensible judgment call. An organisation providing intensive support to 
children in their early years will probably need to hold on to data much longer 
than somewhere providing non-intensive afterschool activities. TheInformation 
Commissioner’s Office <https://ico.org.uk/> (ICO) outlines lots of ways to 
delete data appropriately.


6. Keep your data up to date

No matter how onerous it feels, update your records as and when changes occur. 
If a client disputes the information you hold, either delete the record or add 
a note making this dispute clear.


7. Respect individual wishes

Fundraising controversies have shone a light on the obscure Privacy in 
Electronic Communications Regulations 
<https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/guide-to-pecr/>, which gives strong 
protections preventing direct marketing using individual data. Charity 
beneficiaries don’t want to read through long, complicated terms and 
conditions, they just need to know that a charity is transparent about its 
intentions and will respect consent given or refused.


Related: Everything you need to know about the charity fundraising crisis 
<http://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/jul/10/everything-you-need-to-know-charity-fundraising-crisis>

8. Train your staff

Fifty per cent of fines issued by the ICO related to insufficient staff 
training on handling private data, according to data watchdogBreach Watch 
<http://breachwatch.com/about/>. Staff should not, for example, be taking large 
amounts of personal data out of the office — it isn’t only public sector 
employees wholose sensitive information 
<http://www.derryjournal.com/news/probe-as-charity-misplaces-client-information-1-6083042>
.


9. Is your data even in the UK?

Cloud computing means that data might be stored far from the country where the 
charity is actually based. It’s important to remember that data should not be 
transferred outside of the European Economic Area unless to a country with 
adequate levels of data protection.


10. If in doubt, ask for help

There is no substitute for understanding the DPA in full. The Small Charities 
Coalition <http://www.smallcharities.org.uk/> provides a list of organisations 
that can help navigate these questions, as does theICO website 
<https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/charity/>. Charities should use them.

