
Italy offers so much to holidaymakers: food and wine, art and architecture, 
high peaks and bosomy Tuscan hills, but relatively few Brits come here for sun 
and sand. To UK tastes, Italy simply doesn’t do seaside very well: beaches are 
often given over to hotel and bar concessions, with rows of sunbeds 
differentiated only by the colour of their umbrellas and the trashiness of 
their euro-pop. Only a corner at the least attractive end will bespiaggia libera
 – for people who just want to rock up and lie on a towel.

Sardinia isn’t like that: lists of the island’s best beaches run into the 
hundreds, and there are many more unnamed coves and wedges of white, silver or 
golden sand around its 1,000km-plus of coastline, peninsulas and islands. Some 
popular beaches are concessionised – though even these tend to be so spacious 
that plenty of spiaggia libera remains. There are wild beaches for those 
prepared to tote their own supplies, but most have a shack selling drinks, 
ice-creams and snacks.
Sardinia map 
<http://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/07/travel_sardinia_map/giv-30080AWrfS1QbLO4W/>
And if you think Sardinia is expensive, think again. Its image is skewed by 
the Costa Smeralda, an undeniably beautiful area in the north-east around the 
town of Porto Cervo, developed by the Aga Khan in the 1960s. Its rash of 
yachting, golfing, millionaire-style development has spread as far as Palau in 
the north and south towards Olbia. But elsewhere, from the Catalan-flavoured 
north-west to the south’s white dunes, from the rocky east to sometimes 
surfable west, Sardinia’s coast offers space, surprisingly low prices (though 
accommodation costs jump in August) and a friendly welcome – particularly in 
these euro-critical times, when fewer Italians can afford a trip. Add budget 
flights to Alghero, Cagliari and Olbia, ancient villages,nuraghe (neolithic 
remains) for history buffs, and all the pizza, artisanal gelato and great-value 
wine you’d expect, and Sardinia is the perfect holiday island. Here are a few 
coastal favourites, with places to sleep and eat.

THE SOUTH

 Su Portu, the most intimate of Chia’s five beaches. Photograph: Alamy 
East of the island’s capital, Cagliari, beaches suffer from proximity to the 
city and the SP71 coast road. But an hour’s drive west and south – blue sea on 
your left, flamingo-dotted lagoons on your right – is ridiculously fortunateChia
. For a little resort to have not one perfect crescent of pale sand but five 
can only be called greedy. Even better, the beaches are backed by a strip of 
protected dunes, so there’s barely a building visible from the shore; most 
holiday homes and hotels cluster on a hillside a mile away.

The central beach, Campana, slopes gently into clear water and has several 
bars (with sunbeds) plus windsurf and kayak hire, but the most impressive is 
hugeSu Giudeu to the west, on a spit between lagoon and sea, its couple of bar 
concessions lost in the wide soft sands. My favourite is easternSu Portu, under 
the stone watchtower. One end is slightly stony at the water’s edge, but its 
intimate size and almost circular shape make up for that.

Another hour round the coast, linked by causeway to the “mainland”, is the 
laid-back island ofSant’Antioco. From the harbour, steep streets lead to the 
old town and one of Europe’s oldest churches, fifth-century Sant’Antioco. It’s 
worth paying €5 to tour the Roman, Punic and early Christian catacombs, 
complete with frescoes, and at a pleasant year-round 18C. Young guide Marco 
told us how there are catacombs under the whole old town, and one elderly 
resident uses those below her house as cool summer sleeping quarters – cheaper 
than aircon.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b3yc%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b3yc%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F30%2F1438269269405%2Fdd585e73-af02-4027-82f3-d7a21e7703fe-2060x1545.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holiday%20guide%20to%20Sardinia%E2%80%99s%20best%20beaches%2C%20plus%20restaurants%20and%20hotels&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b3yc%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holiday+guide+to+Sardinia%E2%80%99s+best+beaches%2C+plus+restaurants+and+hotels&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b3yc%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F30%2F1438269269405%2Fdd585e73-af02-4027-82f3-d7a21e7703fe-2060x1545.jpeg>
 Sotto Torre Calasetta. Photograph: Colin Boulter 
South of the causeway, Maladroxia beach is justly popular, if narrow by 
Sardinian standards, but the town ofCalasetta, on Sant’Antioco’s northern tip, 
is almost as well-favoured as Chia, with three white-sand bays in increasing 
sizes. The one nearest Calasetta,Sottotorre, is a pretty, perfect locals’ 
beach, with clear water and no concessions – but it’s worth driving a few 
kilometres toLe Saline and Spiaggia Grande, with their wide sweeps of sand, 
barely a building in sight, and free parking.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b3yc%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b3yc%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F30%2F1438269321396%2Ffecf2187-7dd6-437e-84f9-6758ee24d0d6-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holiday%20guide%20to%20Sardinia%E2%80%99s%20best%20beaches%2C%20plus%20restaurants%20and%20hotels&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b3yc%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holiday+guide+to+Sardinia%E2%80%99s+best+beaches%2C+plus+restaurants+and+hotels&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b3yc%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F30%2F1438269321396%2Ffecf2187-7dd6-437e-84f9-6758ee24d0d6-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Calasetta’s watch tower. Photograph: Alamy 
Calasetta’s grid of 18th-century streets is also home to a modern art gallery, 
theMACC (Museo d’Arte Contemporanea di Calasetta, via Savoia 2, €3, open 6-9pm 
only). Nearby, Piazzale Torre has a 1756 watchtower, a great setting for sunset 
yoga classes (7.30pm Tuesdays and Thursdays), and there are great views towards 
San Pietro island from the belevedere, where oldsters chat on granite benches 
still warm from the day’s sun.

Where to eat

The outdoor restaurant at Torre Chia campsite (pizzas from €4, fish mains from 
€10, +39 070 92 30 054, via del Porto 21,campeggiotorrechia.com 
<http://www.campeggiotorrechia.com/>) behind Su Portu beach is a good budget 
choice. Sardinians are less fixated on carb-heavyprimi piatti than the 
mainlanders: it’s normal to leap straight from (substantial) antipasto to the 
main meat or fish event. A shared fish antipasto of six little plates was €9 
and felt like a main meal.

You can dine on fish with your feet almost in the sand at Calasetta’s La 
Caletta (mains from €15, Via Sotto Torre 22, +39 345 253 3184), but we also 
enjoyed an evening in the hubbub of the central square. A few streets back on 
aptly named Piazza Belly, portions atIl Pirata (+39 078 188 025) were huge, 
service chaotic but friendly, and dinner for two with wine under €50. Try
fregola sarda (pasta balls) with seafood sauce, and mussels with fresh tomato.

Where to stay 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b3yc%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b3yc%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F30%2F1438276546958%2Fc14f73e5-187e-4cd1-a52c-6d1b3eb09fff-2060x1545.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holiday%20guide%20to%20Sardinia%E2%80%99s%20best%20beaches%2C%20plus%20restaurants%20and%20hotels&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b3yc%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holiday+guide+to+Sardinia%E2%80%99s+best+beaches%2C+plus+restaurants+and+hotels&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b3yc%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F30%2F1438276546958%2Fc14f73e5-187e-4cd1-a52c-6d1b3eb09fff-2060x1545.jpeg>
 Restaurant and pool at Hotel Spartivento. Photograph: Colin Boulter 
In Chia, Hotel Spartivento (doubles from €130 B&B, hotelspartivento.it 
<http://www.hotelspartivento.it/#!home-gb/cpfz>) is a little hard to find (turn 
right past the town’s only big hotel, the sprawling Laguna) but worth the 
effort. Low-rise buildings sit on a green slope with views over fields to Su 
Giudeu beach. Bedrooms are delved into the hillside, and some have little stone 
terraces with handy rosemary bushes for drying your swimwear. The outdoor 
dining room overlooks lawns dotted with trees, and a pool edged with rocks and 
driftwood. A free shuttle bus means guests can avoid paying (from €4 a day) to 
park down by the beach.

In a quiet residential area west of town, Calasetta’s newest hotel is 
two-storeyLe Sabbie (from €64 B&B, lesabbie.com <http://www.lesabbie.com/>) 
with super-friendly staff and 30 doubles. There’s no pool, but a short walk 
takes you to Sottotorre beach; the town centre is a short walk in the other 
direction.

THE WEST

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b3yc%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b3yc%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F30%2F1438269495038%2Fb8324373-983e-4e3c-9965-2009dec43ad4-2060x1492.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holiday%20guide%20to%20Sardinia%E2%80%99s%20best%20beaches%2C%20plus%20restaurants%20and%20hotels&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b3yc%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holiday+guide+to+Sardinia%E2%80%99s+best+beaches%2C+plus+restaurants+and+hotels&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b3yc%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F30%2F1438269495038%2Fb8324373-983e-4e3c-9965-2009dec43ad4-2060x1492.jpeg>
 Torre Grande beach is 3km long 
An hour’s drive north-west from Cagliari is the elegant provincial capital of 
Oristano, and some of the west’s best beaches are on the nearby Sinis 
peninsula, which is quiet, flat, and perfect for exploring by bike. At its edge,
Torre Grande has 3km of south-facing beach, backed by pinewoods and low grassy 
dunes. This is a good base for older families (the sand shelves steeply under 
the water – not ideal for toddlers). The low-rise town is nicely buzzy, with 
lots of cafes, a long traffic-free seafront full of cyclists and skateboarders, 
and teenagers playing football by the “big tower”.

Wild beach beauty is a short drive away. San Giovanni di Sinis at the far 
south of the peninsula is a gentle arc of fine sand backed by low, fossil-laden 
cliffs: perfect for snorkelling, it also has impressive Greek ruins. Further 
north,Is Arutas glistens white between ochre-coloured rocks, the “sand” 
actually tiny quartz pebbles like so much risotto rice. It’s very pretty, comfy 
to lie on and doesn’t get everywhere, unlike sand – no good for sandcastles, 
though. Parking is free and plentiful. The peninsula’s west-facing beaches are 
also, in spring and autumn, one of Italy’s few surf spots.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b3yc%2Fsfb%23img-6&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b3yc%2Fsfb%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F30%2F1438269597955%2F3fa1916c-25cc-435d-9598-e1bdbb946dc3-2060x1545.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holiday%20guide%20to%20Sardinia%E2%80%99s%20best%20beaches%2C%20plus%20restaurants%20and%20hotels&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b3yc%2Fstw%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holiday+guide+to+Sardinia%E2%80%99s+best+beaches%2C+plus+restaurants+and+hotels&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b3yc%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F30%2F1438269597955%2F3fa1916c-25cc-435d-9598-e1bdbb946dc3-2060x1545.jpeg>
 A sandy cove near Su Pallosu 
In northern Sinis, try parking almost anywhere on the Su Pallosu road and pick 
a footpath down to the shore. The corrugated headland hides myriad tiny sandy 
bays: follow the locals.

Where to eat 
 Grilled calamari at Stella del Mare, Putzu Idu 
 Unpretentious beach restaurants are the norm in Sinis: at Turroi in San 
Giovanni (via Lungomare, +39 334 302 9630) a marinated mullet antipasto was 
delicious and the pizza the best I’ve had in years (dinner for two with wine 
€50 including tip).Stella del Mare in Putzu Idu (via Benedetto Sanna, +39 342 
311 8005) was similar – hectic but smiley, with great prawns and calamari. Ring 
ahead to bag a table on the sea-view terrace.

Where to stay 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b3yc%2Fsfb%23img-7&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b3yc%2Fsfb%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F30%2F1438269741269%2F252f437b-5a63-46d5-bf25-4ed797ff82a6-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holiday%20guide%20to%20Sardinia%E2%80%99s%20best%20beaches%2C%20plus%20restaurants%20and%20hotels&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b3yc%2Fstw%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holiday+guide+to+Sardinia%E2%80%99s+best+beaches%2C+plus+restaurants+and+hotels&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b3yc%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F30%2F1438269741269%2F252f437b-5a63-46d5-bf25-4ed797ff82a6-2060x1373.jpeg>
 A bedroom in Hotel Sas Benas, in medieval Santu Lussurgiu 
A lovely walk through pinewoods from the beach, Hotel Gran Torre (doubles from 
€60 B&B,hotelgrantorre.it <http://www.hotelgrantorre.it/language/en/>), near 
Torre Grande, is pleasantly fuss-free, with blue-and-white rooms and a pool. In
Putzu Idu, 25km north of Oristano, slightly posher Hotel Raffael (doubles from 
€95 B&B,hotelraffael.com <http://www.hotelraffael.com/en>) has a pool and 
beautiful grounds. Putzu Idu’s white beach is minutes away, or hire bikes (€3 
an hour, €10 a day) and explore sandy tracks inland, between wheatfields and 
vineyards edged with palm trees.

Good road links to Oristano mean it’s possible to see a different Sardinia by 
staying a little way inland and visiting beaches by car. For atmosphere and 
settingSantu Lussurgiu, a 1,000-year-old village built into the caldera of a 
long-extinct volcano 35km from the coast, is hard to beat.Hotel Sas Benas, 
(doubles from €110,sasbenas.it <http://www.sasbenas.it/>) in its medieval 
centre, was converted in 2012 from several townhouses. Having to abandon the 
car and find it on foot when the satnav gave up in tiny streets was part of the 
fun. And its restaurant, on a nearby square, is excellent.

Active families would enjoy Sa Mola (doubles from €80 B&B, bungalow sleeping 
four from €110 B&B, onFacebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Sa-Mola/182093565173380>) in nearby Bonarcado 
at the foot of the Montiferru hills, which is gearing up to add horse riding to 
its walking and mountain biking activities (there’s no pool). Half-board deals 
are good value (€630 for a week for two in September) and food is very 
Sardinian –malloreddus pasta (like fat white grubs) and mint and rosemary 
flavourings, rather than the usual basil.

A good option in cooler weather is Antiche Terme di Sardara (from €81 a head 
full-board if you stay three days,termedisardara.it 
<http://www.termedisardara.it/dove-siamo/>), inland and half an hour south of 
Oristano. A spa in the grand old European sense, it has two outdoor pools at a 
natural 38C – perfect for a warming dip after seaside walks. Stays here are 
quite a retro experience: the dining hall serves good but slightly 
institutional food, fussed over by a white-jacketed maitre d’. Treatments in 
the brand new wellness centre start at €16.

THE NORTH

 La Pelosa beach, near Stintino, northern Sardinia. Photograph: /Francesco 
Iacobelli/JAI/Corbis 
Across the north from the Costa Smeralda, Alghero is the choice of ordinary 
Italian families. The city’s beaches are a little gritty and noisy, but to the 
north, near the surprisingly appealing fascist-era town of Fertilia,Lazzaretto 
andBombarde beaches offer kayaks and windsurfing for those who want them, plus 
expanses of silvery sand. Bombarde does have an ugly hotel at one end, but turn 
left and it grows quite wild, with low rocks enclosing little sandy “rooms”. 
For a romantic evening, park at Baratz lake, 10km to the north, and walk 
through woods (or drive in a 4WD) to wild, golden, west-facingPorto Ferro 
beach. You may well have the sunset to yourselves.

The area’s famous beach is La Pelosa, at the northern tip, but its white sand 
perfection and proximity to the Porto Torres ferry terminal mean it gets busy, 
and parking is expensive. The nearby town ofStintino, however, is a delight, 
squeezed between two harbours; south of it, follow signposts to several fine 
shingle beaches, including one calledCoscia di Donna (Lady’s Thigh).

Where to eat 

 Family-owned restaurant Il Paguro (via Zara 13, +39 079 930260) sits on a 
residential street in Fertilia. Its seafood spaghetti (€16) is excellent, and a 
starter of “roasted Sardinian pecorino” (€4) is a wicked bowl of runny cheese, 
with flatbread hot from the pizza oven.

Where to stay 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b3yc%2Fsfb%23img-8&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b3yc%2Fsfb%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F30%2F1438269922100%2F0253e5a9-61b6-42dc-b133-eb7a8dec86ec-1020x765.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holiday%20guide%20to%20Sardinia%E2%80%99s%20best%20beaches%2C%20plus%20restaurants%20and%20hotels&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b3yc%2Fstw%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holiday+guide+to+Sardinia%E2%80%99s+best+beaches%2C+plus+restaurants+and+hotels&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b3yc%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F30%2F1438269922100%2F0253e5a9-61b6-42dc-b133-eb7a8dec86ec-1020x765.jpeg>
 Hotel Domominore, near Alghero 
Keep life simple with a stay at Hotel Domominore (doubles from €100, 
hoteldomominore.it <http://www.hoteldomominore.it/>). In a rural setting with 
nice pool and lovely breakfast, it’s just 10 minutes from the airport (with 
very little plane noise) and 20 from the buzz of Alghero.

THE EAST

 Cala Goloritzè is one of Lonely Planet’s European top 10 beaches. Photograph: 
Alamy 
South from Olbia you are soon in mountains. After Orosei, the coast is so 
steep that beach access becomes an issue – unless you take to the water. Every 
morning from the town ofCala Gonone, boats depart for the beaches around the 
gulf, includingCala Goloritzé, one of Lonely Planet’s top 10 beaches in Europe. 
Returns cost €10-€28pp though, and run to strict timetables: a fun alternative 
is to hire an inflatable (gommone) with outboard motor (from €80 a day, max 12 
people) and cove-hop at will.

South again is the Costa Rei, an area said to rival the Costa Smeralda for 
beauty, but which beats it for unspoiled charm. Just to the north is one of my 
favourite beaches – wideColostrai, backed by a nature reserve, with golden sand 
sloping into water kept warm by a sandbar just offshore.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b3yc%2Fsfb%23img-9&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b3yc%2Fsfb%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F31%2F1438355848537%2F94db59c0-b6da-4202-9cdc-c985ed264796-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holiday%20guide%20to%20Sardinia%E2%80%99s%20best%20beaches%2C%20plus%20restaurants%20and%20hotels&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b3yc%2Fstw%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holiday+guide+to+Sardinia%E2%80%99s+best+beaches%2C+plus+restaurants+and+hotels&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b3yc%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F31%2F1438355848537%2F94db59c0-b6da-4202-9cdc-c985ed264796-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Cala Gonone beach, Sardinia Photograph: Liz Boulter 
It was near here that we found our private paradise. Just before Capo Ferrato 
village on the SP97, red-and-white panels mark a footpath between an olive 
grove and a wheatfield, leading to the multi-hued sea and white sand ofPorto 
Pirastu. Seaweed washes ashore at its northern end, but we turned right over 
some rocks and had the fine beach, with views down the whole Costa Rei, to 
ourselves on a July afternoon.

Where to eat 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b3yc%2Fsfb%23img-10&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b3yc%2Fsfb%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F30%2F1438270054316%2F73974cc7-7d5f-43f7-9e21-cad6bbc5c217-2060x1582.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holiday%20guide%20to%20Sardinia%E2%80%99s%20best%20beaches%2C%20plus%20restaurants%20and%20hotels&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b3yc%2Fstw%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holiday+guide+to+Sardinia%E2%80%99s+best+beaches%2C+plus+restaurants+and+hotels&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b3yc%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F30%2F1438270054316%2F73974cc7-7d5f-43f7-9e21-cad6bbc5c217-2060x1582.jpeg>
 Culurgiones with potatoes, mint and tomato sauce. Photograph: Alamy 
 Feast on excellent culurgiones (Sardinian ravioli) with cured tuna roe at Sa 
Serbidora in Arbatax town (Piazza Sindaco Porrà 5, +39 328 337 4338). 
Carnivores will love the typicalcena sarda at Torre Salinas’ on-site 
restaurant: a ham, salami and cheese antipasto, followed by speciality pasta, 
wood-roast suckling pig and/or braised goat, and aseadas pastry costs €30 a 
head with wine, coffee and liqueur.

Where to stay 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b3yc%2Fsfb%23img-11&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b3yc%2Fsfb%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F30%2F1438270114571%2Fc0a3f0d0-d213-4c03-a514-e960315a2cd5-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holiday%20guide%20to%20Sardinia%E2%80%99s%20best%20beaches%2C%20plus%20restaurants%20and%20hotels&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b3yc%2Fstw%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holiday+guide+to+Sardinia%E2%80%99s+best+beaches%2C+plus+restaurants+and+hotels&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b3yc%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F30%2F1438270114571%2Fc0a3f0d0-d213-4c03-a514-e960315a2cd5-2060x1236.jpeg>
 View of Gulf of Tortolì from Monte Turri restaurant. Photograph: Colin Boulter 
Spending a few nights at Monte Turri Hotel (doubles from €120, monteturri.com 
<http://www.monteturri.com/>) south of the Orosei gulf, is a treat. The hotel 
is part of a development that covers a rocky headland near the port of Arbatax. 
A lift takes guests down cliffs to a private swimming spot, and there’s a huge 
spa and a nature park with native animals. The views rival anything on the 
Amalfi coast.

For a simpler stay, try a beachside campsite. Torre Salinas (one-bedroom 
cottage sleeping two adults and two children from €55,
campingvillagetorresalinas.it <http://www.campingvillagetorresalinas.it/>) near 
Muravera, north of the Costa Rei, is a peaceful spot overlooking a lagoon.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b3yc%2Fsfb%23img-12&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b3yc%2Fsfb%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F30%2F1438270204355%2F5c43cd8c-ad26-4da9-8c3a-c53f13b5e227-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holiday%20guide%20to%20Sardinia%E2%80%99s%20best%20beaches%2C%20plus%20restaurants%20and%20hotels&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b3yc%2Fstw%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holiday+guide+to+Sardinia%E2%80%99s+best+beaches%2C+plus+restaurants+and+hotels&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4b3yc%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F30%2F1438270204355%2F5c43cd8c-ad26-4da9-8c3a-c53f13b5e227-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Cottages at Torre Salinas campsite 
Villas Direct still has summer availability in several properties on the Costa 
Rei.Adele (from €451 a week, sleeps 6, villasdirect.com 
<http://www.villasdirect.com/property/adele-sleeps-6/68267>) is 200 metres from 
the sea.

• The trip was arranged by Sardinia destination specialist Tiziana Tirelli (
twitter.com/tiztire <>), with accommodation provided by the hotels mentioned. 
Car hire was provided by Villas Direct (villasdirect.com 
<http://www.villasdirect.com/>), which has more than 100 properties in Sardinia
