
Why are women so obsessed with makeovers?
Pete, by email

Are we? Every one of us? It’s true, there are some days when I can barely get 
out of bed because my mind is so possessed by thoughts of how I can make over 
myself. But really, I think we can all agree that, when it comes to narcissism, 
a fashion columnist is probably at the thin end of the wedge.

The truth is, Pete, I don’t think women are obsessed with makeovers. But I do 
think that media aimed at women, from movies to magazines to TV shows, strongly 
believe they should be, and this is manifested in a variety of ways. There’s 
the subtle way: the constant message that women can and must improve their 
physical appearance in some way, and not to do so will result in loneliness and 
self-loathing. There’s the less subtle way, which is the media veneration of 
female celebrities who achieve Nobel prize-winning feats in 
self-transformation, such as losing weight after having a baby. Then there’s 
the straightforward no-bother-with-subtlety approach, which is simply to 
celebrate makeovers in themselves.

The latter has been a staple of TV schedules for so long now, it’s actually 
impossible to imagine a time when evenings did not involve a woman being 
marched in front of a full-length mirror and forced to marvel at her 
soon-to-be-transformed ugliness. The frankly baffling success of Trinny Woodall 
and Susannah Constantine about a decade ago – two posh women who went around 
the country and bossily told other women to change their lives by wearing long 
T-shirts under V-neck jumpers – was perhaps the most irritating manifestation 
of this tendency, but by no means the most extreme, or even the worst. For 
that, I’d suggest The Biggest Loser, a reality TV show in which fat people are 
screamed at on TV for the viewing pleasure of millions. But really, I hate all 
makeovers, if only for the simple reason that they almost always make women 
look worse than they did originally.

Just think of makeovers in movies. They always infuriate me. Allison in The 
Breakfast Club swapping her eyeliner and cool gothiness for a boring Alice band 
and sloaniness; Tai in Clueless, being torn asunder from her 90s skater-grrrrl 
outfits and sweet stoner-ness in order to wear kilts and be a Beverly Hills 
bitch; Laney Boggs in She’s All That losing her sexy nerd-chic style so as to 
attract the attentions of Freddie Prinze Jr, for heaven’s sake. Heck, I prefer 
Julia Roberts’ amazing curly mane of hair at the beginning of Pretty Woman to 
the tedious Los Angeles blowdry she subjects herself to for Richard Gere’s 
pleasure. Also, her Beverly Hills outfits are gross and forgettable. Seriously, 
try to remember a single posh outfit Roberts wears in that movie – you can’t, 
of course. But the mini skirt and over the knee boots she sports at the 
beginning? Movie wardrobe classic.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F47k95%2Fsfb%23img-1&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F47k95%2Fsfb%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F20%2F1429526975897%2F93fa85ef-1df8-4e14-b157-3da9b27ccc1a-1020x673.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20trouble%20with%20makeovers%3F%20It%E2%80%99s%20far%20better%20to%20look%20like%20yourself&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F47k95%2Fstw%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+trouble+with+makeovers%3F+It%E2%80%99s+far+better+to+look+like+yourself&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F47k95%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F20%2F1429526975897%2F93fa85ef-1df8-4e14-b157-3da9b27ccc1a-1020x673.jpeg>
 Laney Boggs (Rachael Leigh Cook) embarks on a makeover in She’s All That. 
Don’t do it, Laney! Film4 Photograph: Film4 
And yes, I do prefer Gigi’s adorable schoolgirl outfits in the eponymous 1958 
musical to the evening gown her grandmother and great aunt make her wear so as 
to look like an escort (yes, really). The only film makeover I can vaguely get 
behind is the one in My Fair Lady, when Audrey Hepburn is transformed from a 
cockney flower seller to a society queen bee, but that is more to do with bad 
casting than any improvement in Eliza Doolittle. Hepburn is the most unlikely 
cockney of all time – and I am including Dick Van Dyke – so watching her force 
herself at the beginning of the film to drop her aitches and smear mud on her 
cheeks actually makes me itchy with anxiety, and don’t even get me started on 
her dubbed-over songs (no disrespect, Audrey Hepburn, but, seriously, that 
casting director must have been smoking something when he picked you over Julie 
Andrews for the part).

The point is, the reason I hate makeovers is that they are predicated on the 
idea that personality and individuality are nothing next to conventional ideas 
of attractiveness, and anyone with a modicum of a soul knows that this is 
bullcrap. Makeover stylists insist they are merely helping a caterpillar emerge 
from their cocoon of badly fitted leggings and become a butterfly. I’d like to 
see any evidence that a person who is subjected to a makeover on reality TV 
leaves with anything other than decimated self-confidence. Ahh, tomayto, 
tomahto. I mean,just look at old (pre-2009) photos of Kim Kardashian 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/elliewoodward/i-created-kim-kardashian-her-family-owes-me-life#.ft3Jw3R4n>
 and see how much happier she looked wearing patterns and baby-doll dresses 
than she does now, forced by Kanye West into horrible fashion-forward (read: 
“fugly”) clothes.

And yet, because so many women grow up with this ingrained belief that 
self-improvement is all, there will always be something fascinating about 
looking at Before and After comparisons and imagining that such a 
transformation is possible. Because it is, ladies, it is. It is honestly not 
that hard to look like everyone else. The question is, though, do you really 
want to?

Post your questions to Hadley Freeman, Ask Hadley, The Guardian, Kings Place, 
90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Emailask.hadley@theguardian.com 
<mailto:ask.hadley@theguardian.com>.
