
I was 25 in 1975 when I first went to Manhattan and was utterly enthralled. I 
watched the sunrise from the top of the Commodore Hotel (now theGrand Hyatt 
<http://grandnewyork.hyatt.com/en/hotel/home.html>) above Grand Central 
station, and thought, I’m moving here. Two years later I did, and I stayed for 
20 years.

The city never sleeps although I’ve had trouble getting a steak sandwich after 
4am. Years ago, I had sushi in a place full of Japanese businessmen and only 
three westerners, and I remember approaching sushi bravely, never having had 
raw fish. Was that puréed cheese? No, wasabi! It told me New York was a place 
of exotic cultures.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F475gk%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F475gk%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F1%2F1427903598178%2Fece0c4e3-d211-4c22-b00f-eeefed776034-1354x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Crime%20writer%20Jeffery%20Deaver%20on%20the%20unexpected%20side%20of%20New%20York%20City&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F475gk%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Crime+writer+Jeffery+Deaver+on+the+unexpected+side+of+New+York+City&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F475gk%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F1%2F1427903598178%2Fece0c4e3-d211-4c22-b00f-eeefed776034-1354x2040.jpeg>
 Jeffery Deaver. Photograph: REX 
Signs everywhere say, “DON’T EVEN THINK OF PARKING HERE.” When I moved to New 
York, I got four parking tickets in one day. I sold my car a week later. You 
can walk the island in two hours; it’s impossible to get lost.

One of Lower Manhattan’s most beautiful buildings is the Surrogate’s Court 
<https://www.nycourts.gov/COURTS/nyc/surrogates/index.shtml>. It’s an ornate 
century-old building near City Hall and covered with sculptures. It’s been a 
location for countless movies – Batman Forever, Romeo is Bleeding, Devil’s 
Advocate. I wander the streets and find things I wouldn’t have known existed. I 
love the concept of old New York history surviving, and I’d say around 60-70% 
of Manhattan is preserved.

The Lower East Side is where many immigrants who came through Ellis Island 
settled. Much of what visitors wouldn’t necessarily find is here. A few blocks 
to the north on 2nd Avenue, there’s a little-known Ukrainian community, and
Veselka <http://veselka.com/>, a popular Ukrainian restaurant which began 60 
years ago as a newsstand serving soup, and is now a 24-hour gathering place. It 
sells borscht, goulash and pierogis filled with goat’s cheese or short ribs.

The midtown Mansfield hotel <http://www.mansfieldhotel.com/> is opulence on 
steroids. I like staying in quirky places, and the Mansfield, in the theatre 
district, was a private residence. I can’t imagine what the family did for a 
living because their house is all beautiful copperwork and grand stone facade.

You can still find the old folk music scene a few blocks south of Washington 
Square Park. The Greenwich Village coffee houses where people like Peter, Paul 
and Mary and Woody Allen performed are still there. TheBitter End  
<http://www.bitterend.com/>on Bleecker Street is still going seven days a week 
and has open jam sessions. And there’s the originalCafé Wha? 
<http://cafewha.com/> on Macdouglall Street, where Bob Dylan and Jimi Hendrix 
played.
 A jam session at the Bitter End. Photograph: Derek Storm/Splash News/Corbis 
Harlem has seen a big renaissance of African-American tradition with hip-hop 
and Latino performers. You will also find southern cooking up there. I’m not 
saying it’s good if you’re on a diet – corn bread, chicken and gravy, fried 
chicken. You can also get Latin American dishes, which many visitors don’t 
find, such as Puerto Ricanbacalaítos (salt cod fritters) and Dominican 
chicharrón (fried pork rib belly) at Cuchifritos on East 116th Street, and 
mofongo de mariscos (mashed plantain with salmon, shrimp and calamari) at La 
Fonda Boricua <http://www.fondaboricua.com/>on East 106th Street.

I like hole-in-the-wall diners. I go to places like the dining car-style 
Empire Diner <http://empire-diner.com/>on the corner of 22nd Street and 10th 
Avenue in Chelsea, orKatz’s Deli  <http://katzsdelicatessen.com/> on the Lower 
East Side, which was sort of discovered by the “I’ll have what she’s having” 
scene in the 1989 movie When Harry Met Sally. It serves the best deli food and 
you get abused by the staff – they are traditionally rude. Yet I’ve engaged 
some staff members in conversation and they’re positively charming! A bit like 
New York itself.

• Jeffery Deaver’s latest novel, The Skin Collector, is out now (Hodder & 
Stoughton, £18.99). To order for £15.19, including UK p & p, visit theGuardian 
Bookshop <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/skin-collector.html>
