
Zero hours, short term contracts, low pay, physical and verbal abuse, and 
muscular problems from standing for too long. Add in privatisation, job cuts 
and imposed changes to working conditions, and the picture is bleak for museum 
and gallery workers in the UK.

Cuts to arts funding by the previous Tory-led government and now this one have 
been the main driver of our sector becoming one of the lowest paid in the 
country. Despite the obvious attraction of working at some of the finest art 
and cultural institutions in the world, many young people are being priced out 
by the poverty pay on offer.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kyjt%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kyjt%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe379855be23154998729c91bc12df630accac761%2F8_43_5741_3973%2F5741.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Museums%20are%20too%20vital%20to%20be%20abandoned%20to%20free-market%20Tory%20dogma&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kyjt%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Museums+are+too+vital+to+be+abandoned+to+free-market+Tory+dogma&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kyjt%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe379855be23154998729c91bc12df630accac761%2F8_43_5741_3973%2F5741.jpg>
 The Victoria and Albert, in London, where new staff have reduced maternity and 
paternity entitlements. Photograph: Alamy 
On the back of last year’s comprehensive spending review, the Department for 
Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS) has issued guidance to all museums on new 
so-called freedom protocols, giving employers the green light to slash pensions 
and redundancy rights.

The Victoria and Albert in South Kensington has been one of the first to take 
advantage of this. As of January this year, all new staff are employed on 
worsened contractstaking them out of the civil service pension scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/feb/01/petition-protest-privatisation-v-and-a-staff-contracts-40000>
 with reduced maternity and paternity entitlements. The museum is also refusing 
to allow new workers to be part of the collective agreement arrangements 
currently in place for existing staff. More than 45,000 people have signed a 
petition against these plans.

When visitor services at the Imperial War Museum were privatised in 2014 we 
warned that handing them to a security firm with no museums experience would be 
a mistake. The company, Shield, has now gone bust and staff are still waiting 
for outstanding pension contributions. In the relatively short time the firm 
was in charge, our representatives raised numerous concerns about health and 
safety on HMS Belfast and security issues at the main Lambeth site.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kyjt%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kyjt%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b120554529b15123d0d279e3f36a50c8044f804%2F298_0_4610_3294%2F4610.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Museums%20are%20too%20vital%20to%20be%20abandoned%20to%20free-market%20Tory%20dogma&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kyjt%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Museums+are+too+vital+to+be+abandoned+to+free-market+Tory+dogma&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kyjt%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b120554529b15123d0d279e3f36a50c8044f804%2F298_0_4610_3294%2F4610.jpg>
 National Gallery staff went on strike in 2015 over plans to privatise parts of 
the London museum. Photograph: Alamy 
At the National Gallery, where outsourcing of visitor services to Securitas 
triggered a high profile dispute last year, workers wince atpress reports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/apr/27/national-gallery-gabriele-finaldi-interview>
 that director Gabriele Finaldi thinks the privatisation is “working rather 
well”. This is not the experience of staff who have been engaged in a six-month 
battle just to have seats provided during exhibitions and are still waiting for 
the commitment to pay them the living wage to be finalised. The same company 
has recently won a lucrative contract to supply zero-hour staff at the Tate and 
is trying to deny workers their collective trade union rights as part of our 
recognition agreement.

In Wales, our members at the national museums are continuing their indefinite 
strike 
<http://www.pcs.org.uk/en/wales/whats-new-in-wales.cfm/media-release-union-steps-up-strike-action-in-response-to-museum-bosses-intransigence>
 against an attempt to get staff to sign new contracts that could see them lose 
£3,000 a year.

According to the Museums <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/museums> 
Association, the role of DCMS is “to protect the nation’s heritage for this and 
future generations and to create the conditions for museums to flourish: to be 
sustainable, relevant, accessible and excellent”. It is difficult to see how 
these incredibly important aims are being met at the moment.

Minimum standards on safety and wellbeing in our museums and galleries are 
badly needed, as are improvements to pay, terms and conditions. DCMS must 
accept it has a responsibility to look after the staff who look after our 
nation’s treasures. We want to sit down with the department to negotiate on 
these and other issues.

We believe our museums are better off in public hands than being at the mercy 
of unstable gambles with the private sector, and we want an end to any more 
privatisation and for failing contracts to be brought back in-house.

Related: I'm worried this government will extinguish the passion of museum 
staff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/may/28/government-passion-museum-staff-zero-hours>

Over the past year, 52% of people visited a UK museum. The benefits of arts 
and culture to our wellbeing and our society are clear and unarguable. This 
sector is too important to be left to the free-market dogma favoured by the 
Tories.

Unions like ours can play a vital role in promoting a positive alternative to 
commercialisation and the race to the bottom of working conditions, which would 
not only improve the working lives of staff but also enhance access and the 
visitor experience.

Tracy Edwards is group secretary at PCS union

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
