
Police in Ireland are investigating claims made by a young Irish woman with a 
black eye who has posted a self-made videoon her Facebook page 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Emma-Murphy/647305061992822?sk=timeline>.

In the video, Emma Murphy, a 26-year-old mother of two children who lives in 
Dublin, alleges that she was punched by her partner after confronting him over 
an affair with another woman.

Originally posted on Monday, the video has since gone viral after being 
reposted by other people on YouTube, and carried on other media outlets in 
Ireland (here 
<http://www.independent.ie/irish-news/news/emma-murphy-the-brave-dublin-mum-who-is-taking-a-stand-against-domestic-abuse-with-viral-video-31358416.html>
 on the Irish Independent website) and alsoon the Daily Mail site 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-3151853/Mother-two-left-black-eye-punched-ex-lover-posts-emotional-video-domestic-violence-torture.html>
.

But the allegations have been disputed by Murphy’s partner, Francis Usanga, 
who is quotedin today’s Irish edition of the Sun  
<http://www.thesun.ie/irishsol/homepage/news/6533757/Gardai-hope-to-quiz-Usanga-over-models-punch-report.html>
as denying that he punched her.


“I did push her,” he told the newspaper. “I didn’t punch her.” Usanga, a 
gym-owner aged 28 who once appeared on an Irish television dating show, 
contends that her bruised eye may have been caused by the subsequent fall [from 
his push].

In the video, during which Murphy talks tearfully to camera while one of her 
children plays behind her, she says

“I’m in a relationship with a guy I thought was the love of my life. He was 
the love of my life. Loved him with all my heart.

We’ve had ups and downs. I cherished the ups. I won’t miss the downs. 
Unfortunately last year I found out he cheated on me. He denied it. She 
contacted me and told me she was pregnant...

You think you know somebody. It was such a hard time for me, I loved him so 
much I gave him another chance and took him back. And he did it again.’

And when I confronted him, he denied it — of course. And when I threw away his 
phone he punched me in the face.”

Murphy has been widely praised for her bravery in speaking out, especially by 
campaigners against domestic violence. But there has also been some criticism 
on radio phone-ins by callers who believe Usanga has been unfairly subjected to 
“trial by media.”

The Irish police have confirmed that they have launched an investigation. 
