
There are many ways to fight a mid-life crisis – for me, it is my psychology 
PhD <http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/phd>. Today I sit in a 
drop-in centre in Birmingham, talking to a few of the regulars, as they top up 
on toast and Rice Krispies. A year ago I would have stayed standing, looking 
and feeling like an outsider. Now I sit, chat and catch up.

Related: My PhD shines a light on the hidden lives of adoptive mothers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jun/06/my-phd-shines-a-light-on-the-hidden-side-of-motherhood>

But no one is completely relaxed in the drop-in centre. Everyone here is a 
stranger and no amount of industrial-strength tea can anesthetise that feeling. 
The centre is open every weekday from 9am to 1pm. Anyone sober (or close to it) 
and over 18 is welcome to come in, get warm, have a shower, eat and hang out. 
When you have nothing, it is a place to come to.

On a busy morning, more than 100 people will visit. Some just sit and wait for 
lunch, as others talk to the staff, receive advice and get some “new” (old) 
clothes. Some days they can get a free haircut from young people studying to 
become hairdressers. On others there will be a music or art class. But people 
usually just sit, drink tea and wait.

I am now halfway through my PhD on the work and relationships of those who are 
experiencing homelessness, or have done in the past. I visit the drop-in centre 
to recruit participants and conduct interviews.

Homelessness creates anguish across society. It is steeped in stereotypes and 
prejudice. For most us, experience of this group is rare, based on brief 
moments of proximity as we step swiftly past someone sleeping in a shop doorway 
or trying to sell us a copy of The Big Issue.

Related: My PhD gives a voice to women abused by their husbands in the '80s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/apr/11/my-phd-gives-a-voice-to-women-abused-by-their-husbands-in-the-80s>

But the issue has been well researched. Its causes and consequences are well 
understood and continue to be re-examined as society evolves. The policies 
designed to tackle the issue evolve too, but generally fail to make any more 
than temporary improvements. Charities and not-for-profit organisations provide 
respite and support, but are unable to create sustainable reform. Homelessness 
is a broad and nuanced problem, resisting simple definitions and clear 
solutions.

However, as I sit in a little room in the drop-in centre, looking into the 
eyes of the man I am about to interview, all the theories about homelessness 
become redundant. No longer do I see someone to be researched.

We connect as our conversation becomes intimate and personal. This is the 
first time he is telling someone about his world, someone who neither judges 
nor blames, someone who listens intently. The story is rich in humour, violence 
and despair. He tells me about his struggle with alcohol, depression and loss. 
We are both moved to tears. I am no longer a researcher – I have become a 
witness, a biographer of someone who has walked many dark and lonely paths.

We move on to art and writing and he shares some of his poems and short 
stories. He reads me his latest story, entitled A Pocket Full of Sand, which is 
about how quickly the little money he has disappears and how he has to be 
constantly vigilant to stop people taking advantage of him.

He tells me about his goal of earning £1,000 from selling his stories – £1,000 
that he will donate to a charity to take disadvantaged children on a summer 
holiday. He says he wants to give children who have never been to the beach 
that opportunity.

Related: Five years of hard graft in a pub kitchen fired up my PhD 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/feb/15/five-years-of-hard-graft-in-a-pub-kitchen-fired-up-my-phd>

I arrived here in my new car, having travelled from my house in the country, 
worrying about a deadline for a paper I am writing. But in that moment I am 
brought to my knees by this man; I am humbled.

Then the moment has gone, he cracks another joke and tells me more about his 
world.

This is why I love my PhD. It changes and affects me, and shows me a world I 
am not familiar with. And it makes me see my own world with new eyes.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
