
The number of students seeking help for mental health related difficulties is 
rising. Ruth Caleb, head of counselling at Brunel University,has said 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2014/may/27/students-mental-health-risk-cuts-nhs-services>
 that there has been an “enormous growth in students requiring their services.” 
And universities have echoed this statement, with Imperial College London and 
the University of York both reporting that increasing numbers of students are 
asking to attend counselling.

The strain on counselling services, due to rising demand and low funding, has 
led to long waiting times and sporadic appointments – leading many students to 
become frustrated. One student, who wishes to remain anonymous, says she feels 
let down by university counselling services. “I was trying to arrange an 
appointment and I never heard back,” she says. “I didn’t see a counsellor for 
the whole semester because no one got back to me. When you don’t feel good 
anyway, it’s hard to chase people up and I felt let down.

Related: Tuition fees 'have led to surge in students seeking counselling' 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/13/tuition-fees-have-led-to-surge-in-students-seeking-counselling>

“All of the counsellors and the people who work in the department are very 
nice and you can tell they are doing their best. They just don’t have enough 
people for the demand. They are constantly booked out.”

But there are alternatives to university counselling. After all, one-on-one 
meetings are not for everyone due to their irregularity and the limits on what 
a counsellor can do. Other options are usually under-publicised or rarely 
recommended but, fortunately, they do exist.

 Peer intervention


Student Minds <http://www.studentminds.org.uk/>, the UK’s leading student 
mental health charity, promotes the idea of “peer intervention”. Anoushka 
Bonwick, projects and relationships officer at Student Minds, says peer 
intervention is about students helping each other. “It’s support provided by 
and for people with similar conditions, problems or experiences. Because people 
who have faced and overcome adversity can offer support, encouragement and hope 
to others facing similar situations.”

Peer supporters are trained to identify and spot problems that require 
professional help and so they serve as a filter, lowering the strain on support 
services.

Related: Loneliness: a silent plague that is hurting young people most 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/jul/20/loneliness-britains-silent-plague-hurts-young-people-most>

One of the most common feelings expressed by students with mental health 
difficulties is loneliness.In 2010 the Mental Health Foundation found 
<https://www.mentalhealth.org.nz/assets/ResourceFinder/the-lonely-society-report-MHF-UK.pdf>
 it to be a greater concern among young people than the elderly. Peer support 
groups can also connect people who previously thought they were suffering alone.

This approach has been adopted by some universities. The University of Glasgow 
introduced an experimental peer support programme two years ago. This involves 
students undertaking a 30-hour course that covers areas such as suicide 
awareness, self-care and crisis intervention. These students can then help 
their struggling peers, organise events and offer informal and formal support.

Helen Orr is a counsellor at the university and helped introduce the 
programme. She says: “Not all issues require the services of a counsellor or 
psychologist.Students <http://www.theguardian.com/education/students> are an 
amazing resource which is underutilised.”

Taking time away from university


An often neglected option is taking time off. This may not be suitable in all 
cases, but if the stress of university work is becoming overbearing then it 
should be considered.

Spending time at home, with friends and family, is a good way of escaping the 
pressures that higher education often brings. Whether it is for a few days or 
an entire semester, taking a break has worked well for some.

Related: Majority of students experience mental health issues, says NUS survey 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/dec/14/majority-of-students-experience-mental-health-issues-says-nus-survey>

A spokesman from the support service at the University of Warwick says: “It 
can be beneficial for a student to take time out from their studies. If they 
are struggling with significant stress and anxiety it can give them time to 
access appropriate medical or mental health support and engage with the 
relevant help without the worry of keeping up with studies or further 
exacerbating their difficulties.”

Anousha Bonwick, of Student Minds, agrees: “Taking time off from university 
can give a student time and space to focus on themselves. You can discuss this 
with staff members, such as mental health advisors on campus. There are a lot 
of universities that do their best to accommodate students who are thinking 
about taking time out.”

Matt Irvine, a student at the University of Sheffield, took time off last year 
due to the stress of January exams. “I was struggling to sleep and eat because 
I was so worried about exams. But because I wasn’t sleeping and eating I 
couldn’t revise, it was a vicious cycle,” he says. “I was lucky because my 
tutors were so understanding. I took a leave of absence for one semester and 
sat my exams later on.”

Often students fear taking time out for mental health reasons, but there are 
systems in place to help, such as leaves of absence and extenuating 
circumstances. This, along with peer support, may help if you find your 
university counselling service is backlogged or short-staffed.

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
