
The death of Jo Cox casts a dark shadow over UK politics today – and the UK 
more widely. Tributes have come from across the political spectrum and across 
national boundaries: US presidential candidateHillary Clinton called it “a 
violent act of political intolerance”.

Friends, colleagues, constituents and those who knew little of Cox before 
Thursday’s devastating events attended vigils to show respect for an MPcut down 
as she went about her work 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/16/jo-cox-attack-people-screamed-brought-towels-a-77-year-old-tried-to-help-in-the-end-they-laid-floral-tributes>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yh33%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yh33%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33d5f53dde8b7ae8d712f05f0d7065f55475dcf1%2F0_0_3600_2438%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%20morning%20briefing%3A%20campaigning%20suspended%20after%20death%20of%20Jo%20Cox&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yh33%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EU+referendum+morning+briefing%3A+campaigning+suspended+after+death+of+Jo+Cox&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yh33%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33d5f53dde8b7ae8d712f05f0d7065f55475dcf1%2F0_0_3600_2438%2F3600.jpg>
 Tributes at Parliament Square to Jo Cox. Photograph: Yui Mok/PA 
Here is what we now know:

 * Jo Cox, the 41-year-old Labour MP for Batley and Spen, was killed after 
being stabbed and shot 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/16/jo-cox-killing-shooting-mp-birstall-west-yorkshire>
 in the street outside the library in Birstall, West Yorkshire, where she held 
her regular constituency surgery. 
 * She was pronounced dead at 1.48pm on Thursday. 
 * A 52-year-old man, named in reports as Thomas Mair, has been arrested. Mair 
lived locally and was known to have had mental health problems. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/16/suspect-in-mp-killing-described-as-quiet-polite-and-reserved>
 There are reports that he was alleged to have had links to extremist groups. 
Eye-witnesses said he shouted “Britain first” as he attacked Cox, with what 
witnesses described as a hunting knife and a “home-made” gun. 
Related: Jo Cox death: police investigate motive for killing of Labour MP – 
latest updates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/live/2016/jun/17/jo-cox-death-police-labour-mp-latest-updates>

 * A 77-year-old man who apparently tried to help Cox was also injured, 
although not seriously. 
 * Brendan Cox, the MP’s husband, said his wife “would have no regrets about 
her life – she lived every day of it to the full”. The couple have two young 
children. He added: 
I and Jo’s friends and family are going to work every moment of our lives to 
love and nurture our kids and to fight against the hate that killed Jo.


Jo believed in a better world and she fought for it every day of her life.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yh33%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yh33%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa23e52d914d94248f02846054386a3cf92edbf8a%2F0_418_768_461%2F768.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%20morning%20briefing%3A%20campaigning%20suspended%20after%20death%20of%20Jo%20Cox&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yh33%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EU+referendum+morning+briefing%3A+campaigning+suspended+after+death+of+Jo+Cox&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yh33%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa23e52d914d94248f02846054386a3cf92edbf8a%2F0_418_768_461%2F768.jpg>
 Jo Cox in a picture posted on Twitter by her husband, Brendan Cox. Photograph: 
Brendan Cox (@MrBrendanCox)/Twitter 
 * Three months ago, a man was cautioned by police for sending malicious 
communications to Cox. Police have confirmed that this is not the same man 
under arrest for the attack in Birstall. 
 * Campaigning in the EU referendum is suspended 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/16/politicians-suspend-eu-rivalries-after-cox-killing>
. ChancellorGeorge Osborne eschewed his Mansion House speech on the EU on 
Thursday night to instead make a brief statement: 
 The referendum is a great exercise in democracy. But the campaign has been 
suspended, on both sides, out of respect for Jo and her family – and for that 
democracy that she served.


One of the virtues of our parliamentary democracy is the everyday 
accessibility of MPs to the people they represent. It’s what makes the way we 
govern ourselves very different from many others. We believe in freedom, 
liberty and justice … Today’s horrible events are an assault on all of these 
values.

 * Rosena Allin-Khan, who last night won the Tooting byelection for Labour 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/17/labours-rosena-allin-khan-holds-tooting-in-byelection>
, discarded her victory speech to pay tribute to her colleague: 
 Jo’s death reminds us that our democracy is precious but fragile – we must 
never forget to cherish it.

 * Allin-Khan should have become Labour’s 100th female MP. Instead the tally 
remains at 99.  Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fjo-cox-british-mp-jeremy-corbyn-tribute-video&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fjo-cox-british-mp-jeremy-corbyn-tribute-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jeremy%20Corbyn%20pays%20tribute%20to%20MP%20Jo%20Cox%3A%20%E2%80%98We%20lost%20a%20wonderful%20woman%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fjo-cox-british-mp-jeremy-corbyn-tribute-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jeremy+Corbyn+pays+tribute+to+MP+Jo+Cox%3A+%E2%80%98We+lost+a+wonderful+woman%E2%80%99+%E2%80%93+video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fjo-cox-british-mp-jeremy-corbyn-tribute-video&media=>
Jeremy Corbyn pays tribute to MP Jo Cox: ‘We lost a wonderful woman’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jun/16/jo-cox-british-mp-jeremy-corbyn-tribute-video>
Further reading

 * Grief and shock the over death of an ‘MP with huge compassion’ 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/16/jo-cox-killing-shooting-mp-birstall-west-yorkshire>
 * A profile of Jo Cox: Labour’s rising star 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/16/jo-cox-global-aid-worker-to-labour-adviser>
 * Campaigner, humanitarian, politician: an obituary 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/16/jo-cox-obituary> 
 * Watch Cox’s maiden speech to the House of Commons 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jun/16/labour-mp-jo-cox-maiden-speech-parliament-video>
 * The Guardian view: an attack on humanity, idealism and democracy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/16/the-guardian-view-on-jo-cox-an-attack-on-humanity-idealism-and-democracy>
 * How the attack unfolded: shots, screams and sadness 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/16/jo-cox-attack-people-screamed-brought-towels-a-77-year-old-tried-to-help-in-the-end-they-laid-floral-tributes>

 * What we know about the suspect, Thomas Mair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/16/suspect-in-mp-killing-described-as-quiet-polite-and-reserved>
Commentary

Inevitably, we want to know what was behind the killing, what it means and 
what it says about us, our political system, our language and its consequences. 
It’s easy in these circumstances to assume and inflame; harder to be thoughtful 
and careful.

This column <http://blogs.spectator.co.uk/2016/06/a-day-of-infamy/> by Alex 
Massiein the Spectator has been widely praised:

When you shout BREAKING POINT over and over again, you don’t get to be 
surprised when someone breaks. When you present politics as a matter of life 
and death, as a question of national survival, don’t be surprised if someone 
takes you at your word. You didn’t make them do it, no, but you didn’t do much 
to stop it either.

Sometimes rhetoric has consequences. If you spend days, weeks, months, years 
telling people they are under threat, that their country has been stolen from 
them, that they have been betrayed and sold down the river, that their 
birthright has been pilfered, that their problem is they’re too slow to realise 
any of this is happening, that their problem is they’re not sufficiently mad as 
hell, then at some point, in some place, something or someone is going to snap. 
And then something terrible is going to happen.

Polly Toynbee in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/16/mood-ugly-mp-dead-jo-cox>
 says we have been encouraged “to despise the political class”:

Contempt for politics is dangerous and contagious, yet it has become a 
widespread default sneer. There wasJo Cox, a dedicated MP, going about her 
business, doing what good MPs do, making herself available to any constituents 
with any problems to drop in to her surgery. Just why she became the victim of 
such a vicious attack, we may learn eventually. But in the aftermath of her 
death, there are truths of which we should remind ourselves right now.

Democracy is precious and precarious. It relies on a degree of respect for the 
opinions of others, soliciting support for political ideas without stirring up 
undue savagery and hatred against opponents …

Something close to a chilling culture war is breaking out in Britain, a divide 
deeper than I have ever known, as I listen to the anger aroused by this 
referendum campaign. The air is corrosive, it has been rendered so. One can 
register shock at what has happened, but not complete surprise.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yh33%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yh33%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5355f885ac85982db7b103b03687ee86ed97802%2F0_0_3500_2334%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%20morning%20briefing%3A%20campaigning%20suspended%20after%20death%20of%20Jo%20Cox&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yh33%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EU+referendum+morning+briefing%3A+campaigning+suspended+after+death+of+Jo+Cox&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yh33%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5355f885ac85982db7b103b03687ee86ed97802%2F0_0_3500_2334%2F3500.jpg>
 A message to Jo Cox near the scene where she was killed in Birstall. 
Photograph: Phil Noble/Reuters 
Conservative MP Andrew Mitchell has written a personal tribute in the Telegraph
 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/06/16/my-fearless-friend-jo-cox-a-five-foot-bundle-of-yorkshire-grit/>
 to “my fearless friend Jo Cox”. Mitchell and Cox together set up the all-party 
parliamentary group on Syria, he writes:

At the time, her party leadership was against military intervention in Syria 
and mine was in favour, which meant the atmosphere around the issue was quite 
heated. But she was completely uninterested in any of that. She just wanted to 
do the right thing …


It’s hard to believe that someone so brave and fearless and fun is dead, but 
the hardest thing to think about is her two lovely little children. They would 
come in to Portcullis House for tea with their mum, and now she’s gone.

Friday’s other politics news

Bill Gates has backed Britain remaining in the EU. In a letter to the Times 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/>, the Microsoft says the UK is “stronger, more 
prosperous and more influential” as a member of the union, and warns that 
Brexit would make it a “significantly less attractive place to do business and 
invest”.

Labour’s Rosena Allin-Khan won the Tooting byelection 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/17/labours-rosena-allin-khan-holds-tooting-in-byelection>
 in south London last night, in a contest overshadowed by the loss of her 
colleague. Allin-Khan took more than 50% of votes cast – albeit on a turnout 
much reduced since the 2015 general election (69.7% then to 42.5% today) – and 
with a majority of 6,357 over Conservative candidateDan Watkins.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yh33%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yh33%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6a8d3b63a2ffc28d221ccde096cadecbb9534dc%2F0_101_3077_1847%2F3077.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%20morning%20briefing%3A%20campaigning%20suspended%20after%20death%20of%20Jo%20Cox&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yh33%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EU+referendum+morning+briefing%3A+campaigning+suspended+after+death+of+Jo+Cox&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yh33%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6a8d3b63a2ffc28d221ccde096cadecbb9534dc%2F0_101_3077_1847%2F3077.jpg>
 New Labour MP Rosena Allin-Khan at the Tooting by-election count. Photograph: 
Anthony Devlin/PA 
A poster unveiled by Nigel Farage for the leave campaign has been reported to 
the police 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/16/nigel-farage-defends-ukip-breaking-point-poster-queue-of-migrants>
 with a complaint that it incites racial hatred. The Unison union general 
secretary,Dave Prentis, said he had contacted the Metropolitan police. The 
poster shows a queue of refugees with the slogan “Breaking point: the EU has 
failed us all.”Boris Johnson, head of the official Vote Leave campaign, said 
the poster was “not our campaign” and “not my politics”.

