
1 | Remember deterring corruption is the best solution

A few years ago, I advised the people behind the Trade Route Incident Mapping 
System <http://www.trimsonline.org> (TRIMS) in Nigeria - a crowdsourced whistle 
blowing system which allowed truckers and small traders stuck at border check 
points (some real, some artificial, set up to harass and extort bribes) to 
report corrupt officials using a mobile phone. There may have been no direct 
link to officials being punished, but there were stories of a deterrent effect: 
some truckers mentioned TRIMS and they were let go without being harassed for 
bribes.Hari Mulukutla, managing director, Stream House 
<http://www.streamhouse.org>, New York, United States

2 | Use technological tools to develop institutional trust

My observations in an east African country recently were that despite decent 
anti-corruption institutions, an active civil society and a relatively free 
press, corruption seemed to be ingrained. Leadership in government, media and 
NGOs seemed cynical. One of my recommendations was to use secure case 
management systems with audit trails and secure workspaces so investigators can 
trust these tools and that their work won’t be undermined or leaked.Hari 
Mulukutla

3| Automate tax collection

Related: Is fighting corruption like fighting zombies? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/oct/13/fighting-corruption-zombies-development-anti-corruption>

Automation is playing an important contribution to reducing discretionary 
practices in tax collection. Taxpayers hoping to pay less and tax 
administrators hoping to earn more can easily lead to bribery and corruption in 
the tax office. In Afghanistan, we implemented an automated tax administration 
system that moved taxpayer information from being hidden in a desk drawer to 
being recorded electronically and only accessed by the people who need it. This 
helped reduce opportunities for corruption, built public trust in the tax 
system, and increased revenue collection from $250m to almost $2bn since 2004.
Iker Lekuona, senior manager, Adam Smith International 
<http://www.adamsmithinternational.com>, Kampala, Uganda @AdamSmithInt 
<https://twitter.com/AdamSmithInt>

4 | Share information across borders

Corruption doesn’t stop at national borders. Sharing information 
internationally on aid, public contracts, or company ownership, for example 
through a public registry of beneficial owners, can be really powerful to 
compare, identify, and prosecute. Agreeing an open data standard also reduces 
discussions on which information should be public and this being different in 
different countries. In Ukraine, implementing the standard has led to 14% in 
savings.Georg Neumann, senior manager, Open Contracting Partnership 
<http://www.open-contracting.org/>, Washington DC, USA @georg_neu 
<https://twitter.com/georg_neu> @opencontracting 
<https://twitter.com/opencontracting>

5 | Digitise public services

Due to the fact that there is a 40% unemployment rate in Kosovo, recruitment 
is very often prone to bribes. One way we are helping local governments to 
prevent corrupt practices by public service personnel is to put their entire 
recruitment process online. We’ve also used social innovation challenges and 
hackathons to build tools that show budget expenditures in real time.Shqipe 
Neziri Vela, manager of the Anti-Corruption Programme at UNDP Kosovo 
<http://www.ks.undp.org/>, Prishtina, Kosovo @Shqipe_Neziri 
<https://twitter.com/Shqipe_Neziri> @UNDP_Kosovo 
<https://twitter.com/UNDP_Kosovo>

6 | Take inspiration from other initiatives around the world

From a UK point of view, I think the OCCRP <https://www.occrp.org/en>, 
OpenCorporates <https://opencorporates.com/> and mySociety 
<https://www.mysociety.org/> really stand out as organisations who’ve used 
technology to prevent, detect and deter corruption. OpenCorporates, for 
example, pulled together a global register of companies, and partnered with 
Global Witness to do some great research into corruption in the jade trade in 
Myanmar.Steve Goodrich, senior researcher, Transparency International UK 
<http://www.transparency.org.uk/>, London, UK @SteveJGoodrich 
<https://twitter.com/SteveJGoodrich> @TransparencyUK 
<https://twitter.com/TransparencyUK>

7 | Pay attention to local contexts 

Related: Anti-corruption protests around the world - in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/gallery/2016/mar/18/anti-corruption-protests-around-the-world-in-pictures>

Replicability is a tricky issue. I think mySociety and Fundación Ciudadano 
Inteligente <http://ciudadanointeligente.org/> have done a great job at 
creating tools that are easily adjustable to local contexts because they are 
very specific. The risk is sometimes with tools likeUshahidi  
<https://www.ushahidi.com/>that provide a great technology, but when 
implemented locally, people’s motivation for why they would or wouldn’t use the 
service is overlooked.Georg Neumann

8 | Be aware using technology to fight corruption is not risk free

In countries where the state tightly controls the internet and other 
communication networks, it is possible that some governments could try to block 
or censor anti-corruption campaigns, particularly as many corrupt acts are 
often committed by state actors.Kwami Ahiabenu II, executive director, 
Penplusbytes <>, Accra, Ghana @kwamigh <https://twitter.com/kwamigh> 
@penplusbytes <https://twitter.com/penplusbytes>

9 | And remember technology doesn’t always democratise access

In India, in order to access subsidised fertilisers and seeds farmers have to 
submit their land registration certificates which they have to obtain from the 
land registration department, providing ample opportunities for corrupt 
officers. The government of Karnataka initiated a project called ‘Bhoomi’ where 
technology was used to load all details about land ownership and copies of 
these documents could be obtained though an IT booth. However, lack of literacy 
meant that middlemen were still able to use the vulnerabilities of the service 
seeker to demand money.Professor Indira Carr, research professor of law, 
University of Surrey <http://www.surrey.ac.uk>, Guildford, UK

Read the full Q&A here 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/05/live-qa-technology-fighting-corruption-london-anti-corruption-summit>
.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
