
When the film Suffragette was released last year, to fanfare and red carpet 
protests 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/09/domestic-violence-campaigners-suffragette-movie-kanye-west>
, it revived interest in the movement that had lost some of its colour, and had 
been relegated to the odd mention in literature and GCSE history classrooms.

Related: Suffragette reminds us why it's a lie that feminists need men's 
approval | Michelle Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/29/suffragette-reminds-us-why-its-a-lie-that-feminists-need-mens-approval>

The suffragettes have always held a special place in my own consciousness, of 
course: my great-grandmother wasEmmeline Pankhurst, and my grandmother was her 
more radical, left-wing daughter, Sylvia 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/sep/12/courageous-suffragettes-helen-pankhurst-film>
. My connection to them was a central pillar of my childhood – I was raised, 
and still live for some of the time, in Sylvia’s house in Ethiopia. Growing up, 
I felt guided by her towards work in international development and women’s 
rights. And my great-grandmother, too, has been an inspiration.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h8az%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h8az%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86271319d42736c871ebca15737feab1a0d67668%2F0_0_3504_2640%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20great-grandmother%2C%20Emmeline%20Pankhurst%2C%20would%20still%20be%20fighting%20for%20equality%20today&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h8az%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My+great-grandmother%2C+Emmeline+Pankhurst%2C+would+still+be+fighting+for+equality+today&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h8az%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86271319d42736c871ebca15737feab1a0d67668%2F0_0_3504_2640%2F3504.jpg>
 Emmeline Pankhurst (1858 - 1928). Photograph: Topical Press Agency/Getty Images
Through the film, in which Meryl Streep plays Emmeline, my heritage and 
ancestry – my family’s story – has found contemporary fame. For the last two 
years, the making and publicity around the film – commenting on the script, 
approving designs, having a cameo role in the film alongside my daughter – have 
been a big, unexpected and colourful part of my life. And I want to capitalise 
on this spotlight, in just the same way Emmeline capitalised on hers, to 
continue the same fight, 100 years on.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h8az%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h8az%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F568392e1589ba5f954a9e707c2e76f316e8a7f9f%2F0_0_3724_2579%2F3724.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20great-grandmother%2C%20Emmeline%20Pankhurst%2C%20would%20still%20be%20fighting%20for%20equality%20today&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h8az%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My+great-grandmother%2C+Emmeline+Pankhurst%2C+would+still+be+fighting+for+equality+today&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h8az%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F568392e1589ba5f954a9e707c2e76f316e8a7f9f%2F0_0_3724_2579%2F3724.jpg>
 Women advertsing a suffragettes meeting. Photograph: N. Miller/Getty Images 
We are still very far from equality – globally, the vote was only ever the 
beginning.Today, women represent two-thirds of those who cannot read and write 
<http://www.unesco.org/new/en/education/themes/education-building-blocks/literacy/resources/statistics>
;less than one in five landholders are women 
<http://oxfam.ca/sites/default/files/imce/gender-justice-why-equality-matters.pdf>
;one in three women worldwide are exposed to physical or sexual violence 
<http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs239/en/> from a partner in their 
lifetime; globally,women earn 24% less than men and on average 
<http://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/presscenter/pressreleases/2015/05/06/women-still-earn-24-percent-less-than-men-20-years-on-after-two-decades-of-concerted-efforts-to-boost-women-s-rights-reducing-poverty-among-women-and-girls-remains-critical-for-development-progress-say-officials-at-global-women-s-conference-.html>
, women spend twice as much time onhousehold chores 
<http://stats.oecd.org/index.aspx?queryid=54757> than men, and four times as 
much time on childcare.

And so, after all the distractions of this great couple of years, crossing 
continents and walking red carpets, what is important is the power of the film. 
Through clever storytelling, it has been possible to shrink time and space, to 
take current generations back into the past in a way that engages, instructs 
and provokes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h8az%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h8az%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cd632d0a25e4c2ad1a4a5261bfa00ebf567fbd5%2F0_0_3504_2331%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20great-grandmother%2C%20Emmeline%20Pankhurst%2C%20would%20still%20be%20fighting%20for%20equality%20today&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h8az%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My+great-grandmother%2C+Emmeline+Pankhurst%2C+would+still+be+fighting+for+equality+today&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h8az%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cd632d0a25e4c2ad1a4a5261bfa00ebf567fbd5%2F0_0_3504_2331%2F3504.jpg>
 Anne-Marie Duff and Carey Mulligan in Suffragette. Photograph: 
Allstar/Allstar/Focus Features 
The film can spark powerful discussions with people of all backgrounds about 
our progress towards equality; I recently visited an elite boys’ school, where 
a group of them have started up a feminist society. The conversation focused on 
ideas of unconscious privilege, and the different dimensions of power and 
inequality.

The film is being used to explore the commonality and differences in the 
women’s rights movements around the world. In recent discussions with feminists 
in Ethiopia, for example, I had conversations about how rural and urban factors 
play into the battles women face, as well as the impact of age on those 
struggles.

I’m convinced that the legacy of the film is not just that people will 
remember and honour the past, but that they will demand more of the future. 
Even the making and subsequent media around the film politicised those 
involved, giving cast and crew greater courage to draw attention to the gender 
inequalities in the film industry.

At the premiere, activists from the Sisters Uncut feminist direct action 
group, drew attention to the ongoing horrors of violence against women 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/09/domestic-violence-campaigners-suffragette-movie-kanye-west>
 and the cuts in domestic abuse services. Controversy about colour and gender 
also surfaced – as did the fact that in many countries, for example Australia, 
indigenous populations were the last to get the vote – encouraging 
conversations about intersectionality.

For me, already steeped in both historical and contemporary activism, the film 
and the connections I have made have increased my visibility and sense of 
purpose. And there still is so much more to do.

This Sunday, 6 March, in advance of International Women’s Day, my daughter and 
I will be leading the annual launch of CARE’s Walk In Her Shoes Campaign, 
encouraging people in the UK to walk in solidarity with women and girls 
worldwide who endure inequality and injustice. We will be joined by some of the 
cast and crew from the film, along with ordinary women and men who want to join 
this collective stepping forward. Please join us.

Suffragette is now out on DVD. #WalkInHerShoes will be taking place this 
Sunday, 6 March in London. For more information, you can visit theFacebook page 
<http://careint.uk/FacebookWIHS>. You can follow Helen on Twitter here 
<mailto:@helenpankhurst>.
