
Old San Juan is a visual delight, with narrow hilly streets of blue 
cobblestones lined with brightly coloured 16th- and 17th-century buildings, 
mostly within the old city walls, behind the forts of San Felipe and San 
Cristóbal. Its churches and palaces are mostly interspersed with tacky gift 
shops aimed at the thousands of cruise-ship visitors who descend every year 
but, never fear, there’s lots of authentic Puerto Rican life close by.

The Atlantic-facing beaches east of the centre mostly feature high-rise hotels 
and condos, but pretty Ocean Park (take bus 52 from the station behind Plaza 
Colón) is an exception. And its grid of leafy streets and low-rise houses just 
happens to be home to San Juan’s most happening street: Calle Loíza. Once San 
Juan’s main shopping venue, it fell into decline in the 1950s with the arrival 
of US supermarket chains. But this summer things started looking up and it is 
now home to yoga studios, vintage shops and a huge choice of restaurants and 
bars. In a tropical downpour, I sheltered in the doorway ofLa Cueva del Mar 
<https://www.facebook.com/lacuevadelmar> at no 1857 and was invited in by a 
friendly waitress. I sat at the bar for a banging mojito and the best fish taco 
I’ve ever tasted.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4emqh%2Fsfb%23img-1&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4emqh%2Fsfb%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b6331f07a23bf847062fb61730750acec3540d4%2F0_113_3264_1959%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20foodie%20tour%20of%20Puerto%20Rico&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4emqh%2Fstw%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A+foodie+tour+of+Puerto+Rico&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4emqh%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b6331f07a23bf847062fb61730750acec3540d4%2F0_113_3264_1959%2F3264.jpg>
 Gustavo Antonetti at Tresbé. Photograph: Liz Boulter 
To learn more about the city’s fascinating food culture, I enlisted the help of
Spoon Food Tours <http://www.spoonfoodtours.com/>, set up three years ago by 
Gustavo Antonetti and Paulina Salach, to offer off-the-beaten-track gastro 
experiences. Gustavo and I began at a yellow shipping container on Calle Loíza. 
It looks basic but hides some serious kitchen gear, and turns out food to match.
Called Tresbé <https://www.facebook.com/tresbecafe?_rdr=p> (meaning three Bs – 
bueno, bonito, barato, which translates best as good to eat, good-looking and 
good value), it was started by Mario Ormaza, who worked in the US with 
Michelin-starred chef Jean-Georges Vongerichten but moved back to San Juan 
after the 2008 crash. On benches outside the container, we snacked on grouper 
ceviche sparkling with oregano, papaya andquenepa (Spanish lime) flavours, 
served with a quintessential Puerto Rican treat: crisp, moreish plantaintostones
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4emqh%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4emqh%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64b98318dba45965fed09b8fb4b4e4a17446759d%2F0_210_3264_1959%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20foodie%20tour%20of%20Puerto%20Rico&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4emqh%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A+foodie+tour+of+Puerto+Rico&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4emqh%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64b98318dba45965fed09b8fb4b4e4a17446759d%2F0_210_3264_1959%2F3264.jpg>
 Piñones food shack. Photograph: Liz Boulter 
The tour also took in cocktails at the city’s liveliest nightlife spot – La 
Placita in the Santurce district, which is a farmers’ market by day and party 
central by night, with clubs and salsa bars open till dawn – plus top coffee 
spotCafe Don Ruiz <https://www.facebook.com/cafesdonruiz>, which uses beans 
from its own farm and is setting up a small coffee museum, and high-end tapas 
by chef Rafael Alamo at Hotel El Convento in Old San Juan.

But the most fascinating eating was at a place far more basic than the 
container: east of the city, Piñones is a village settled by freed slaves at 
the end of the 1700s. Its laid-back, rustic feel and cycle paths by the beach 
and forest make it a popular weekend venue for young Sanjuaneros, and its main 
road is lined with shacks where descendants of those slaves sell local fare, 
such as salt cod fritters and croquettes of mashed roots stuffed with prawns, 
all fried (over wood fires), all pretty bad for you, and all delicious.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4emqh%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4emqh%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a9998e1a48e6c485f5b54b222c38e4f3d14f5b9%2F0_0_5184_3456%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20foodie%20tour%20of%20Puerto%20Rico&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4emqh%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A+foodie+tour+of+Puerto+Rico&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4emqh%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a9998e1a48e6c485f5b54b222c38e4f3d14f5b9%2F0_0_5184_3456%2F5184.jpg>
 Dreamcatcher Guesthouse 
There was healthier fare at Dreamcatcher Guesthouse, one block from the beach 
in Ocean Park. Sylvia de Marco was one of the pioneers of Calle Loíza’s 
renaissance, opening her vegetarian haven in 2012 and festooning it with 
hammocks, plants, buddhas, candles and, yes, dreamcatchers. The vibe is 
resolutely new-agey: you’re thanked for “sharing your energy in our home and 
being part of the beautiful menagerie that creates the Dreamcatcher”. And while 
guests can cook their own (meat-free) food in the two kitchens, it also has a 
chef, the talented Jerome Valencia, whose daily three-course veggie breakfasts 
are more luxy than hippy: pumpkin porridge with papaya and nuts, then scrambled 
eggs on portabella mushrooms with spinach, cheese and guava salsa, and 
indulgent chocolate and avocado mousse.

• Spoon Food Tours <http://www.spoonfoodtours.com/> cost from $69pp. 
Accommodation was provided byDreamcatcher Guesthouse 
<http://www.dreamcatcherpr.com/>, which has doubles from $79, breakfast 
one-course $11, three-course $17. Flights were provided byNorwegian 
<http://www.norwegian.com/uk/> which flies to San Juan from Gatwick from £338 
return
