
I found out that my PhD application had been successful during a typical day 
in the pub kitchen – I had started at 5.30am, cleaning litres of grease off the 
oven filters. What was meant to be temporary work to support my master’s degree 
had become a full-time job, and in five years I had moved from being a kitchen 
porter to a shift leader and stand-in manager.

Related: My PhD takes me into a world of space molecules and alien fart jokes 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jan/04/my-phd-takes-me-into-a-world-of-space-molecules-and-alien-fart-jokes>

My heart was racing during the breakfast shift as I waited for the news about 
my PhD. But checking my emails on my phone was out of the question – I had to 
concentrate. A busy kitchen requires full focus at all times; drift off for a 
few seconds and you can end up losing a finger. And if I took longer than eight 
minutes to deliver a full English breakfast, I would have to sit down with my 
manager and explain where I had failed. So I finally got the good news at the 
end of my shift and walked out of the pub feeling like the luckiest person in 
the world.

Today I am just over two years into my PhD in political science at the 
Institute for Advanced Studies in Vienna. I am exploring the communication 
between members of parliament and their constituents. We elect MPs to represent 
our beliefs, ideas, and interests, but without communication, they may never 
know what our interests actually are. And so this back and forth is crucial for 
a healthy, representative democracy.

I want to discover how MPs choose what to communicate to their constituents. 
My initial plan was to talk to MPs themselves, but, as my supervisor had wisely 
warned me, this didn’t work. I soon found out that MPs don’t want to 
communicate with PhD students – they would rather invest their time in 
conversations with people who will help them to earn votes.

Related: My PhD busts the old stereotypes about 'selfish, smug' only children 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jan/18/my-phd-busts-the-old-stereotypes-about-selfish-smug-only-children>

So instead of asking MPs about how they communicate with their constituents, I 
decided to use email contact from constituents to analyse MPs’ behaviour. My 
experiment was one of the first to use this methodology to study elected 
representatives in Europe and I was thrilled to win the 2015Pademia 
<http://www.pademia.eu/> Student Paper Award, for the best student research in 
parliamentary democracy in Europe.

I love my PhD because research is what I live for. I don’t see it as a job 
like the pub. Days off from the kitchen were precious and never enough, but now 
I have to force myself to stay away from my office to rest and recuperate. I 
often find myself spending the weekends there reading, analysing data and 
writing, not because I have to but because I love to.

My days in kitchen provided valuable experience for my research. The physical 
and mental grind of the long hours gave me a strong work ethic and mean that I 
have a sense of perspective when things get tough on my PhD.

And I have kept the early-morning starts – well, almost. I begin work at 
6.30am, so I get an extra hour in bed. Although I can now check my emails 
whenever I want and procrastinate without getting into trouble, I know how to 
avoid getting too distracted.

Putting in these hours on my PhD has helped me to overcome some of the 
mistakes that I have made along the way. Assuming that MPs would respond to my 
questions, for example, meant that I wasted 10 months designing questionnaires 
and interviews. But I am on course to finish writing my thesis within two and a 
half years, six months ahead of time.

Related: My PhD could save an endangered species with time-travelling mud 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/feb/01/phd-save-endangered-species-common-scoter-bird-mud>

My story so far goes against the stereotype of the PhD as a long, torturous 
journey that students have to suffer through. I enjoy working on the answer to 
the question I have chosen because it really matters. When I start working 
before sunrise, I know that I am not making multimillionaires slightly richer 
while they sleep. I know that my research will never make me rich either, but I 
hope that it will benefit society.

An exceptional outcome, whether it’s an English breakfast or a PhD thesis, is 
difficult to achieve with average ingredients, no matter how hard you try. I 
know how frustrating it is to be without support from my days in the kitchen, 
where we were often understaffed. Thankfully I have all the resources that I 
need now, including two inspirational supervisors. It was worth waiting, and 
working, for the right opportunity to come along.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
, and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@guardian.co.uk
