
During the second world war, my late father-in-law was conscripted into the 
army and forced to fight for Nazi Germany. My mother was a young girl in 
London, running to air raid shelters and seeing local streets destroyed by the 
blitz.

A first meeting of the in-laws might have been awkward but Albert had been 
captured and taken as a prisoner of war to Scotland. Waiting to be repatriated, 
he had made friends with local people and acquired fluent English. When my 
mother came from Britain to meet him, he delighted in reminiscing and swapping 
stories from Scotland.

Sharing a language did not just smooth over potential tension, it gave two 
people then in their seventies a rare opportunity to ask questions of each 
other with a perspective that could not be more different on the most formative 
time in their lives.

As a nation of proud monoglots, we’ve never much minded that foreign language 
study has been declining in the UK for years – even though our lack of 
languages is estimatedto cost the economy around £48bn a year 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/dec/10/language-skills-deficit-costs-uk-economy>
. Few people objected when schoolchildren were relieved of compulsory foreign 
language lessons; being a linguist in the UK can feel like belonging to a 
minority.

So the potentially damaging impact of Brexit on learning, teaching and using 
modern foreign languages in the UK is unlikely to cause many sleepless nights.
 However, for those of us who have studied French, Spanish, German and other 
languages, used them at work abroad – and in the UK – and whose lives have been 
enriched immeasurably by being able to access other cultures and perspectives 
via another language, the risk of these opportunities shrinking further for us 
and our children in a post-Brexit Britain is not just depressing but downright 
scary.

How would Brexit impact on language learning in the UK? The education 
secretary, Nicky Morgan, has warned that native language speakers who assist at 
schools or teach in language centres could find it more difficult to live in 
the UK. No one yet knows how Brexit would affect travel to continental Europe 
or school exchange schemes, but both might become more costly and complicated.

Could Brexit deliver a fatal blow to foreign language study, which has been on 
and off the education agenda for years? The Labour government ended compulsory 
language lessons for 14-16 year-olds in 2004 and, to reverse the decline, the 
coalition governmentintroduced the English Baccalaureate 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2011/jan/11/league-table-secondary-english-baccalaureate>
 but the uptake has been slow. In 1998, 85.5% of all candidates took a GCSE in 
a foreign language – by 2015, this had fallen to 47.6% 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/aug/20/gcse-results-fall-numbers-foreign-languages>
.

The picture is even worse for A-Level study of languages, with students 
discouraged from taking them in favour of subjects they are toldmake it easier 
to achieve higher grades for university entrance 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwiil4Dx6LfNAhUkCMAKHXaKB_YQFggeMAA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.britishcouncil.org%2Fsites%2Fdefault%2Ffiles%2Flanguage_trends_survey_2015.pdf&usg=AFQjCNEB7z_RVHo4WlMExziGRx73Lfw9hw&sig2=9DWh0NuT4Fi9NVlO8uiZqQ>
 [pdf].

So far, around 200,000 students and 20,000 university staff have spent time 
abroad through Erasmus, the EU-funded scheme for study, travel and traineeships 
for young people, which is set to give the UK €1bn over seven years. Those 
funds are unlikely to be replaced if Britain leaves the EU, depriving British 
students of not just immersion in foreign languages but mind-broadening, 
life-enriching connections to other cultures and people.

Studying or speaking a foreign language is necessarily a humbling experience, 
forcing the speaker to listen and adapt their perspective, chipping away at 
those philosophical or political certainties that can be limiting, removing 
barriers and nurturing curiosity. Moreover, in our globalized world, it is a 
more essential skill than ever, not just for economic success but all trade and 
negotiation. Acquiring the languages of our European neighbours ought to be the 
easy bit – crack Spanish at school and you already are on the way to mastering 
Mandarin, since each additional language is easier to learn after the first.

While the Leave campaign seem to say, you can have boring old Europe, we’ll 
take the rest of the world, this may not be quite so easy if we’ve lost the 
ability to speak other languages – and perhaps fewer people may be interested 
in learning ours.

As Europe has grown closer over the past 20 or so years, so a European 
sensibility has emerged. This is not just a liking for cheap mini-breaks or 
familiarity with the menu in an Italian restaurant, but an active engagement 
with different perspectives and cultures that is rooted in understanding 
others’ languages. For many educated Europeans,this is simply taken for granted 
<http://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2014/sep/26/europeans-multiple-languages-uk-ireland>
.

For many Britons who share this sensibility, Brexit threatens a retreat to a 
narrow, monoglot world view and rejection of the expansionist inspiration that 
has come from closer integration within the EU, whose institutions have always 
made cultural exchange a priority. The prospect fills us with dread.

