
It was once just a remote, semi-arid area of north-eastern Kenya, a nowhere 
land where droughts were frequent and visitors rare. But a quarter of a century 
after the first refugee camps were constructed in Dadaab, it has become the
third largest population centre 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/27/life-dadaab-three-generations-of-refugees-isolated-from-kenyan-society>
 in the country and the largest refugee camp in the world. The camp was set up 
to receive people escaping the civil war in Somalia. Thousands more people 
arrived followingsevere drought in Somalia in 2011 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2011/jun/06/somalia-devastated-by-drought-crisis>
. Twenty-five years on, Dadaab –which now consists of five camps and hosts 
nearly 330,000 people 
<http://data.unhcr.org/horn-of-africa/region.php?id=3&country=110> – is a 
glaring example of the trend towards protracted refugee situations.

Related: Dadaab refugee camps in Kenya, 20 years on – in pictures 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2011/mar/24/dadaab-refugee-camps-in-pictures>

According to the UN refugee agency, UNHCR, by 1993 the average refugee crisis 
was lasting fornine years <http://www.unhcr.org/4444afcb0.pdf> (pdf). A decade 
later, that had risen to 17 years. Long-term refugee life is becoming a new 
type of humanitarian phenomenon, driven by complex crises such as those in 
Syria, Yemen and Ethiopia. Conflict in the east of theDemocratic Republic of 
the Congo <http://www.unhcr.org/pages/49e45c366.html> has prompted more than 
450,000 citizens to flee to neighbouring countries, even as DRC deals with an 
influx of refugees from Burundi and Central African Republic. Fighting inSomalia
 <http://data.unhcr.org/horn-of-africa/regional.php> has forced Somalis to seek 
shelter in Kenya, including in the Dadaab complex.

In Dadaab, we are witnessing not only one generation of young people born in 
the camp and growing up in exile, but now their children. Without greater 
efforts by the international community, their grandchildren will face life as 
refugees. For generations of people here, it is the norm to have food weighed 
out by the pound every month. Their “government” and “law-makers” are the UN 
and humanitarian organisations such as Care.

 Protracted crises force the aid community to rethink some of our core 
principles 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/17/fix-the-aid-system-or-you-will-fail-the-poor-experts-warn-world-leaders>
 of humanitarian response. It is no longer a case of just providing lifesaving 
aid – water, food and shelter – for a few months.

With generations now growing up as refugees, aid agencies need to provide 
structures, opportunities and inspiration within the restricted context of the 
camp. Organisations have to look at programming years down the line, at how to 
ensure new generations have necessary skills and education to get by outside a 
camp and, perhaps most crucially for those spending prolonged periods of time 
in exile, how to maintain hope.

 Ideally, refugees should participate in the design of the camp and help run 
it. Care has made this a priority. Of our nearly 2,000 staff in Dadaab, 90% are 
refugees. Not only does this offer employment and training, it also provides 
people with a sense of ownership and purpose.

Related: Life in Dadaab: three generations of refugees isolated from Kenyan 
society 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/27/life-dadaab-three-generations-of-refugees-isolated-from-kenyan-society>

The continuing need for a refugee camp, 25 years on, leaves little to 
celebrate, but there are achievements to be recognised. Girls in the camp now 
have greater access to primary, secondary and limited tertiary education. When 
the camp was established in 1991, girls made up only 5% of the total number of 
children in education in Dadaab (UNHCR figures); there is now an almost 50:50 
girl-boy ratio at primary schools. In Somali culture, girls are often expected 
to stay at home, marry and look after the household, so this is a great 
achievement – not only for those girls living in the camp, but also for the 
future ofSomalia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/somalia>. In total, 41% of 
the camp’s children are in primary education, according to Unicef, although the 
figure falls to 8.5% for those in secondary schools.

 Yet a durable and comprehensive solution to Dadaab is needed urgently. One of 
these is the voluntary return of Somali refugees from Dadaab, but this should
only be done when and where it is safe 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/20/dadaab-refugee-camp-kenya-repatriation-somalia>
 and possible to do so. We also need to remain realistic: with the ongoing 
instability and the long-term rehabilitation needs of Somalia, it’s likely that 
there will continue to be a need for a safe space for Somalis and refugees of 
other nationalities within Kenya and we should preserve this.

 May’s world humanitarian summit <https://www.worldhumanitariansummit.org/> in 
Istanbul must be a turning point for the way the world responds to, and acts to 
prevent, humanitarian disasters.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkvq%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkvq%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00a655bd90d53d2301b5af29c356d1b3a71e0de0%2F0_0_1594_1142%2F1594.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20do%20we%20make%20life%20better%20for%20people%20living%20as%20refugees%20for%20generations%3F%20%7C%20Laurie%20Lee&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkvq%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+do+we+make+life+better+for+people+living+as+refugees+for+generations%3F+%7C+Laurie+Lee&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkvq%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00a655bd90d53d2301b5af29c356d1b3a71e0de0%2F0_0_1594_1142%2F1594.jpg>
 Newly arrived refugees queue outside Dagahaley refugee camp reception centre, 
to be registered and receive food and other aid. Photograph: J Brouwer/UNHCR 
World leaders need to agree and act on key priorities: a better system for 
finding political solutions to conflicts; tearing down an often artificial 
divide between long-term aid and humanitarian assistance; and ensuring that 
people affected by crises are themselves able to participate in the planning 
and delivery of emergency assistance.

We need to ensure that countries who enact basic humanitarian principles by 
receiving significant numbers of refugees, as illustrated by Dadaab, can give 
those refugees access to education and jobs, so that their lives are not merely 
put on hold for years on end.

• Laurie Lee is chief executive of Care International UK 
<http://www.careinternational.org.uk/your-donation-x2>

