
It has not been the best of times for education ministers. The past few months 
have been dominated by the fallout from the white paper and a trail of problems 
and complaints with this year’s statutory tests. It must be tempting to dismiss 
this overlap of events as no more than a coincidence – after all, it isn’t 
unusual for departments to have a run of problems once they are in the 
spotlight. But in this case, it is less bad luck and more evidence of serious 
cracks beginning to emerge in key areas  of policy.

The present ministerial team under Nicky Morgan claim to be devolutionists. 
They rally around a banner of freeing schools, trusting teachers and schools 
leading the system. But it is the growing divergence between this rhetoric and 
the reality that is a major cause of the present crises. While politicians talk 
about the new freedoms they are giving schools, our teachers are working with a 
curriculum, assessment and pedagogy that are increasingly directed by 
ministers’ own priorities and prejudices.

Related: Dear Nicky Morgan: so much for freeing schools from ‘government 
diktats’ | Michael Rosen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/05/nicky-morgan-schools-government-diktats-education>

Yes, the recent problems are partly due to a failure to listen, poor 
administration and bad politics but the fundamental problem is a stark 
contradiction between words and actions. Many critics of the white paper are 
not opposedto academies 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/30/primary-school-tests-not-about-pass-or-fail-nicky-morgan>
, but to the power grab by ministers and theloss of freedom 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/video/2016/mar/26/nicky-morgan-heckled-nasuwt-conference-education-schools-video>
 for schools and parents to make their own decisions.

The same fault line underpins a lot of the unhappiness about testing 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/03/sats-tests-parents-children-boycott-primary-school-exams>
. Teachers, parents, politicians and the wider public all subscribe to the 
necessity of assessment; we need to know how both pupils and schools are 
performing. So how has an area of agreed importance become such a battlefield – 
distraught teachers, rebellious parents andstressed children 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/03/morgan-sats-test-children-primary-school-pupils>
?

Certainly, the last-minute change of mind about the reliability of the 
baseline assessment 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/07/baseline-tests-dropped-for-reception-pupils-education-primary-school>
, the shortage of time to prepare for new tests and theabandonment of the 
grammar, punctuation and spelling tests for seven-years-olds 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/22/dfe-withdraws-spelling-test-after-it-accidentally-appeared-online>
 when the paper accidentally appeared online, haven’t helped. But the deep 
unhappiness of some teachers and parents is about more than administrative 
chaos.

Teachers are constantly being told that they will have discretion over what is 
taught andflexibility 
<http://www.conservativehome.com/platform/2015/06/nicky-morgan-mp-more-academies-greater-freedom-higher-standards-more-opportunity-what-our-education-bill-will-deliver.html>
 to act in the best interest of every child – together with parents, they know 
best. But the influence ministers now exercise over what is assessed, how it is 
assessed and the consequences of the results is so powerful that many teachers 
feel utterly constrained in the decisions they are free to make.

Related: Determination becomes obstinacy at the Department for Education | 
Estelle Morris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/23/determination-obstinacy-department-education-estelle-morris>

The emphasis on knowing facts, the downgrading of skills, the importance given 
to exam success in traditional academic subjects via the EBacc and the removal 
of the creative arts from any measurement that matters; the requirement for 
children to learn and remember but not to explore and imagine – all this eats 
away at teachers’ sense of freedom and autonomy. Teachers often have to make a 
decision between what they think is appropriate for a pupil and what the 
consequences might be for the school’s rating.

The tests are now so high risk that in some struggling schools, what gets 
tested is what gets taught. Even in schools that are confident enough to extend 
the curriculum and find time for teaching beyond the tests, there is still the 
feeling that wider achievements go unrecognised and unrewarded.

It is open to ministers to make the case that teachers’ flexibility should be 
heavily curtailed by a national framework. Ministers could argue that they have 
a responsibility to impose what they believe works best. Instead there is this 
growing divergence between speeches and actions, and it is becoming 
increasingly difficult to find an accommodation between the two.

It is now clear that when the government talks about freedom, it only means 
freedom from its bete-noire, local authorities, not freedom from Whitehall. The 
irony is that much of the control government attributes to councils ceased to 
exist years ago; ministerial control is present and real.  

Neither of these summer crises is likely to be quickly resolved. Nothing 
ministers have said would lead us to think that they won’t continue to pursue 
universal academisation through other means, or that they will loosen their 
control over the curriculum and assessment.

Dogged determination and focus in the face of opposition can be a great 
political strength, but not when you have set out your stall on a promise to 
trust others.

Until ministers can explain this contradiction that runs through the heart of 
their programme, we will no doubt see other disputes that lead to the same 
anger and frustration that have recently dominated the agenda. Sadly, this will 
continue to undermine the trust between teachers and government and do nothing 
to support the challenge of raising standards for children.
