
Tests on a drug with the potential to stop Alzheimer’s in its tracks are being 
funded by raffles, pensioners’ donations and a sponsored walk – because the 
research team cannot find money for pre-clinical safety tests any other way.

The team of researchers led by Dr David Allsop at Lancaster University’s 
division of biomedicine and life sciences is running a crowdfunding campaign, 
DefyingDementia <https://www.theguardian.com/society/dementia>, to carry out 
the necessary preparatory testing on their drug in the belief they may be 
looking at a cure for the progressive brain disease. So far they have raised 
£52,000 towards their target of £165,000.


The global financial crisis has blocked access to credit and funding for basic 
and clinical research, leading some health researchers – particularly in the US 
– to turn to crowdfunding. American crowdfunding sites such asExperiment 
<https://experiment.com/discover> display an array of competing projects, from 
finding the cause of sarcomas in children and dogs (103% of the way to its 
target) to examining sweetener safety (3%).

Many crowdfunding websites are cautious about revealing exactly how much money 
has been raised for science, butSciFund Challenge <http://scifundchallenge.org/>
 has allowed nearly 200 researchers to raise an average of $2,000 (£1,272) for 
159 different projects. In the UK, crowdfunding is common in the arts and 
community project fields, but not in basic medical research.

Defying Dementia is different because it is run by a university department to 
fund basic medical research. Allsop’s team chose to break the mould after 
working for more than eight years on the drug R1-OR2-TAT, which they think 
could change the Alzheimer’s landscape, only to find they could not fund its 
preparation for phase one trials, even though a clinical research company in 
the north-west of England, MAC, has licensed the patent and the Alzheimer’s 
Society has awarded the team £150,000.

Crowdfunding <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/crowdfunding> donations – 
some as small as £5 – are enabling Defying Dementia to carry out smaller tests 
piecemeal, which Allsop says is enough to keep research advancing until more 
lucrative sources emerge. He says: “We are really excited because we think that 
we are on to something that stands a chance of working, but without 
crowdfunding we would have been stumped.”

It seems like a drop in the ocean in the face of 850,000 people with dementia 
in the UK – of which Alzheimer’s is the most common form – and numbers set to 
rise to more than 1 million by 2025, without a cure in sight.

Part of the problem for Defying Dementia is that R1-OR2-TAT represents a new 
approach. It works on a substance called beta-amyloid, found in the brains of 
people with Alzheimer’s, prevents beta-amyloid from clumping, and blocks its 
toxic effect on nerve cells. Other pharmaceutical attempts to produce drugs for 
dementia have, so far unsuccessfully, tackled other aspects of the disease.

A recent editorial in the Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease talked about the 
difficulty of gaining funding for novel approaches. One of the authors, Prof 
Richard Lathe from Edinburgh University, says: “The obstacle to progress – and 
to funding – is that outdated theories are held tenaciously by the 
protagonists, and they decry any alternatives.”

Crowdfunding comes into its own by raising awareness. Events such as Defying 
Dementia’s bluebell walk on 14 May might only raise £2,000, but they spread the 
word about the threat posed by dementia.

This awareness-raising aspect has been used to good effect by Nick Sireau, 
whose two sons were born with the rare genetic diseasealkaptonuria 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alkaptonuria>. He has raised huge sums of money 
to work with patient groups, clinicians and industry in search of a cure for 
rare diseases.

Related: The price of health: the cost of developing new medicines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/mar/30/new-drugs-development-costs-pharma>

Prof David Nutt, a neuropsychopharmacologist at Imperial College London – who 
was controversiallysacked from the UK government’s Advisory Council 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/oct/30/drugs-adviser-david-nutt-sacked>
 on the Misuse of Drugs over his views on ecstasy and LSD – launched a bid to 
raise funding for research into the effects of LSD on the brain through 
British-based crowdfunding siteWalacea <http://walacea.com/>.

The head of translational research for the Medical Research Council, Dr Chris 
Watkins, acknowledges the funding problems facing medical innovation and 
believes that crowdfunding may have a place – perhaps in increasing the number 
of people prepared to volunteer for clinical trials – as long as the ideas 
requesting funding have undergone robust independent scrutiny.

He says: “To approach the public directly and to say ‘please fund this’ 
without questioning whether the individuals have enough knowledge to decide 
whether it is a good study is unethical.”

But Watkins also has a number of reservations about what influences public 
decisions to back a cause – often based on personal experience, and with a bias 
towards children and animals. He worries, too, that crowdfunding may be misused 
by researchers who have failed to gain financial backing on quality grounds. 
The answer, he believes, is to go to major charities such as the British Heart 
Foundation, which themselves carry out crowdfunding, but with the quality 
assurance of being members of the Association of Research Charities.

“There is never enough money to spend on good research,” he says. “But it’s 
not just a case of throwing money at it. Sometimes we do not yet have the tools 
to answer the questions and medical research takes a long time.”

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
