
When Firoza handed her two grandsons Kalashnikovs and enlisted them in her 
militia, it was, she says, to give them a chance to avenge their father who was 
killed by the Taliban.

Known in Helmand by her nom de guerre – Hajani – 54-year-old Firoza fought for 
years to repel the militants from Sistani, in Marjah district, commanding a 
unit of the US-backed government militia called the Afghan Local Police (ALP). 
During the war, in which she lost three of her six adult sons, she armed most 
of her male family members, including two children.

The eldest, Nabi*, a shy boy with bags under his eyes, echoes his grandmother. 
“The enemy killed my father so I am also fighting,” he says.

Related: UK firm 'employed former child soldiers' as mercenaries in Iraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/17/uk-firm-employed-former-child-soldiers-as-mercenaries-in-iraq>

According to Firoza, the government pays Nabi the standard 9,500 afghanis 
(£100) local police salary; his younger brother, Habib, is not paid.

Firoza says Nabi is 18. Many Afghans don’t know their age, but that claim 
seems improbable. Face smooth, voice unbroken, he looks perhaps 14. Firoza says 
she gave her grandsons weapons five years ago.

Despite government pledges to rid its armed forces of children, a growing 
number of minors are recruited to fight in the intensifying war, according to 
experts.

The UN verified 48 boys recruited to fight last year, more than double the 
number for 2014 <https://childrenandarmedconflict.un.org/countries/afghanistan/>
. Yet the real number is certainly much higher, given the limited access around 
the country.

The government forces, including the ALP, receive much of their funding from 
international partners. The UK has committed£70m annually until at least next 
year 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/defence-secretary-announces-70m-for-afghan-security-forces>
. The US Defense Department alone funds the ALPwith about $120m (£80m) a year 
<http://www.crisisgroup.org/~/media/Files/asia/south-asia/pakistan/268-the-future-of-the-afghan-local-police.pdf>
.

Firoza assumed command of the ALP in Sistani when her husband was removed from 
duty several years ago. Once in charge, she asked the government for 
reinforcements. Turned down, she armed 40 members of her family, she says.

Even some of the youngest, though not armed, were useful. A six-year-old boy 
walked between checkpoints with a flashlight to keep soldiers awake, Firoza 
says.

When the Taliban advanced earlier this year, Firoza relocated to a small base 
in Helmand’s provincial capital, Lashkar Gah. For two days after their escape, 
her grandsons didn’t speak, she says. The six-year-old, who, along with some 
unarmed female family members, was at the house when the Taliban came, recounts 
how one Taliban fighter had asked him: “Where is Hajani? We want to cut off her 
head.”

Firoza agrees that her grandchildren are too young for war. “But they fight to 
avenge their father. When they see other children with fathers, they become 
very sad and want to take revenge,” she says. “Everybody wants a good life in 
peace. But when you’re on the frontline, do you stay silent? We’re compelled to 
fight.”

She says the government has never told her not to use children. “They can tell 
me that the day they are able to provide security,” she says.

The war is taking a mounting toll on children. Close to one in three of those 
killed and injured 
<https://unama.unmissions.org/un-chief-afghanistan-do-more-now-protect-civilians-unama-releases-civilian-casualty-data-first>
 are now children. Most of them are bystanders, but not all.

In February, the Taliban killed Wasil Ahmad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/04/afghanistan-child-soldier-taliban-us-military-afghan-local-police>
, a 10-year-old boy fighting in his uncle’s local police unit in Uruzgan. After 
this killing, the interior ministry stressed that the boy was not an ALP 
employee. But that distinction is irrelevant, says Danielle Bell, human rights 
director for the UN in Afghanistan.

“Whether children are part of a security force, formally or informally, they 
are still being denied access to education, and to the normal life to which 
they are entitled,” Bell said.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j639%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j639%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5a77186f4b5eabc09cfc7ed84c053dd2b7cf2da9%2F0_167_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='My%20grandsons'%20fight%20to%20avenge%20their%20father'%3A%20child%20soldiers%20in%20Afghanistan&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j639%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27My+grandsons%27+fight+to+avenge+their+father%27%3A+child+soldiers+in+Afghanistan&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j639%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5a77186f4b5eabc09cfc7ed84c053dd2b7cf2da9%2F0_167_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
 Firoza, a grandmother who commands a unit of the Afghan Local Police. During 
the war, in which she lost three of her six adult sons, she armed most of her 
male family members, including two children. Photograph: Andrew Quilty 
To avoid bankrolling forces that employ child soldiers, the US government 
signed into law the 2008 Child Soldiers Prevention Act (CSPA), banning aid to
eight countries that use child soldiers 
<http://www.state.gov/j/tip/rls/tiprpt/2015/245236.htm>. But Afghanistan is not 
on the list.

Despite several requests, the US State Department did not explain this. In an 
email, a spokesperson said: “The department has not includedAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> on the CSPA list based on its 
assessment of the relevant facts under the legislation.”

Related: When will the UK stand up to save education from bullets and bombs? | 
Martin Bell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/06/education-conflict-uk-stand-up-to-save-education-from-bullets-and-bombs>

The omission of Afghanistan was criticised by Charu Lata Hogg of Child 
Soldiers International in arecent editorial 
<https://www.opensocietyfoundations.org/voices/loophole-lets-us-government-fund-use-child-soldiers>
: “Excluding the recruitment and use of children by Afghan police forces from 
the CSPA listing mechanism is inconsistent with international humanitarian and 
human rights laws.”

According to Brigadier General Charles H Cleveland, spokesman for US forces in 
Afghanistan, recruitment of children has picked up partly because the US 
military,after the troop withdrawal 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/nov/27/afghanistan-nato-troops-withdraw-ashraf-ghani>
, can’t monitor as thoroughly as before.

“There was a period where we didn’t get our hands into the ALP,” he said. 
“When you’ve got less than 15,000 people here, you don’t have the same 
visibility of what’s going on in the country.” He said the US had told the 
Afghan government “to go through a rigorous vetting process”.

The Afghan government denies using child soldiers 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/child-soldiers>, telling the 
Guardian that the ministry of interior has completed two recent assessments of 
the ALP.

“With completion of these assessments, we are confident that young people 
under age 18 are not recruited and even under difficult circumstances they will 
not be recruited or paid by [the ministry of the interior],” said Sediq 
Seddiqi, a ministry spokesman.

The reasons behind child recruitment are complex, ranging from patriotism and 
honour to financial hardship and exploitation.

Children <https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> are not always armed 
with parental consent. Bilal Siddiqui, head of the Afghanistan Independent 
Human Rights Commission in Helmand, said parents had complained to him of 
police commanders hiring their children without informing them.

For Firoza, fighting is a family duty. At the moment, though, the relative 
calm of Lashkar Gah has allowed for some normality in her grandchildren’s lives.

“At the moment, they go to school,” she says, “but if we have to go back to 
Marjah, of course they will take up weapons again.”

*Names have been changed to protect identities

• This article was amended on 27 May. The original stated that the UN 
identified a total of 43 boys recruited to fight in Afghanistan in 2015. The UN 
has confirmed that the correct number is in fact 48. 
