
Perhaps better known, even in Britain (where we have too much ancient respect 
for the classic chip to deem anything else worthy of the name) as courgette 
fries, these have piggybacked on the neverending burger trend to become the 
side dish de jour – an ersatz healthy option for those for whom a slice of beef 
tomato and gherkin isn’t enough in the way of roughage.

But, the thing is, while courgette spaghetti is a cruel joke 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/apr/30/food-gadgets-test-three-course-meal-save-time-trouble>
 on anyone who has ever tasted actual pasta, courgette fries are really rather 
nice. Not quite as nice as a chip, perhaps, but definitely nicer than a green 
salad – and, from experience, good courgette friesare a hell of a lot easier to 
make at home 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2010/may/20/how-to-fry-perfect-chips>
 than their potato-based equivalent.

So, if you’ve got squash coming out of your ears as summer comes to an end, 
forget courgette carbonara – treat it with respect and deep fry it instead. 
Just think of it as insulation for the long cold months ahead.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c8gq%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c8gq%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441800314906%2F2f13894d-789b-4e8a-996b-c6192480dbb6-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20courgette%20chips&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c8gq%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+courgette+chips&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c8gq%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441800314906%2F2f13894d-789b-4e8a-996b-c6192480dbb6-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Jasmine and Melissa Hemsley favour large courgettes. Photograph: Felicity 
Cloake for the Guardian 
The courgettes


Antonio Carluccio specifies baby courgettes 
<http://www.goodtoknow.co.uk/recipes/527432/antonio-carluccio-s-courgette-fries>
, andJasmine and Melissa Hemsley large ones 
<http://www.itv.com/thismorning/food/beef-ragu-courgetti-courgette-fries-hemsley-and-hemsley-recipes>
 – the virtue of smaller fruit is, of course, that proportionally they have 
more flesh than older specimens, though Carluccio still removes the seedy core, 
which he says is “too watery for frying”. He’s right; too much moisture will 
cause the batter to steam, rather than fry, which is why I’m also going to salt 
the flesh, as in the recipe fromBen Tish’s Salt Yard 
<http://goodfood.uktv.co.uk/recipe/courgette-fries/>, both to draw the liquid 
out and to season the fries from the inside out.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c8gq%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c8gq%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441800523959%2Fa808d5d2-8c7d-49db-80e2-c11d059002ad-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20courgette%20chips&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c8gq%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+courgette+chips&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c8gq%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441800523959%2Fa808d5d2-8c7d-49db-80e2-c11d059002ad-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Stevie Parle’s whoppers. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
The cut

Instructions vary from the 2cm-wide whoppers favoured by Stevie Parle 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/foodanddrink/recipes/10959042/Courgette-fries-with-lemon-and-feta-sauce-recipe.html>
 to the tangle of spindly strips preferred by Tish and Gizzi Erskine’s Kitchen 
Magic. The larger pieces have a more distinct courgette flavour and texture, 
but the slimmer fries are definitely crisper, presumably because they contain 
less moisture. I’m torn, but in the end decide to go for Erskine’s matchsticks; 
slightly thicker than Tish’s noodles, but more delicate than the batons 
favoured by the others, they make a good compromise between crisp and courgette.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c8gq%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c8gq%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441800714585%2Fb674379c-4a81-4241-9430-93eab12be4ac-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20courgette%20chips&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c8gq%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+courgette+chips&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c8gq%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441800714585%2Fb674379c-4a81-4241-9430-93eab12be4ac-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Jane Baxter’s airy, tempura-like recipe wins the prize for crispness. 
Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Better with batter?

The coating ranges from the very simple – Erskine’s well-seasoned flour – to 
the elaborate, such as Parle’s, aerated by sparkling water and whisked egg 
whites, and the time-consuming,like Jane Baxter’s version in the Riverford Farm 
Cook Book <http://www.riverford.co.uk/recipes/view/recipe/courgettes-in-batter>
, which requires resting for 20 minutes before use. Baxter’s airy tempura-like 
recipe wins the prize for crispness, though Tish’s milk and flour also gives a 
pleasingly crunchy result if you don’t happen to have any eggs in the house. 
The Hemsleys go completely off-piste with a ground almond, parmesan and herb 
crust bound with egg, which, though as tasty as nuts and cheese, are wont to 
be, steals the show from the courgettes themselves.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c8gq%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c8gq%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441800880494%2Feecc25cf-7225-44cd-ba95-2825d39bb7ef-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20courgette%20chips&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c8gq%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+courgette+chips&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c8gq%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441800880494%2Feecc25cf-7225-44cd-ba95-2825d39bb7ef-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Antonio Carluccio favours olive oil. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the 
Guardian 
Cooking

The sisters also bake their courgette fries, which feels like a Trade 
Descriptions Act violation for anyone expecting a crisp chip substitute: 
they’re a bit floppy, to be honest and, like oven chips or baked doughnuts, a 
definite second best to the real thing. Tish and Carluccio fry theirs in olive 
oil while Parle uses neutral vegetable oil, which would generally be my first 
choice for anything deep fried. In this case, however, the flavour of the 
courgettes is delicate enough for the more assertive olive oil to be worth the 
investment if you can run to it, complementing and enhancing, rather than 
competing with the main ingredient. But they will still taste good in vegetable 
oil, if using an entire bottle of expensive stuff on your dinner seems an 
extravagance – hot, crisp and salty: perhaps the three most beautiful words in 
the English language.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c8gq%2Fsfb%23img-6&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c8gq%2Fsfb%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441801014699%2Ff0997934-c8ea-4027-ac7a-4a5999558040-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20courgette%20chips&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c8gq%2Fstw%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+courgette+chips&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4c8gq%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441801014699%2Ff0997934-c8ea-4027-ac7a-4a5999558040-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Felicity Cloake’s version. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Felicity Cloake’s perfect courgette chips

Serves four as a side
2 medium courgettes
Salt
150g plain flour
2 egg whites
Olive or vegetable oil, to fry

Slice the courgettes laterally about 0.5cm thick (a mandolin would be useful), 
then lengthwise into long matchsticks, then cut these in half. Toss with a 
little salt and drain in a colander for 30 minutes.

Meanwhile, in a wide, shallow dish stir together the flour with enough 
lukewarm water (roughly around 250ml) to give the consistency of double cream. 
Season lightly and leave to rest for 20 minutes. Whisk the egg whites to stiff 
peaks then fold this into the batter.

Heat a large pan a third full of oil to 170C and put the oven on low. Squeeze 
the courgettes and dry on kitchen paper, then tip into the batter and toss to 
coat.

When the oil is at temperature, add a handful of the courgette strips a few at 
a time and stir gently to separate, then fry until golden. Scoop out with a 
slotted spoon on to kitchen paper and season lightly, then put in the oven to 
keep warm while you fry the rest in batches. Serve immediately.

Courgette chips: an irritating distraction from proper chips, or a valid 
alternative? And, if you are a fan, do they work in any situation a chip would, 
or are they a different proposition altogether? And, lastly, where on the high 
street can you find the best versions?
