
1. Dancing Dads
Yes, massive clich√©, but consider this: IT IS NOW WORSE. A generation ago, the 
only people to see Dad do his 'Saturday night Fever' fandango at Auntie 
Pauline's wedding/Uncle Eric's wake were the assembled appalled family members 
and dad's horrified children. Now in our glorious social media age, the whole 
online world can see dad do 'big fish little fish' to 'Don't you want me baby.' 
Oh-oh, indeed.

2. Dads and 'Awkward Telly'
Again, the stakes have risen dramatically in our multi-channel 'what the 
hell's a watershed anyway?' age. When I was a kid, the most we'd be forced to 
watch together was David Attenborough and naughty beetles, or perhaps a Kate 
Bush video that would make dad cough a bit and send you out to make a cup of 
tea. Now you can't even watch the X Factor without a nervous hand on the 
remote. Miley Cyrus, you are not forgiven.

3. Dad clothes
Age-appropriate clothing works both ways. Dads, if you object to your 11-year 
old princess going out dressed like a Mexican streetwalker, don't go out in a 
baseball cap, box-fresh trainers, and a Snoop Doggy Dog T-shirt. Oh, and for 
all you Shoreditch dads with your comedy moustaches, flannel shirts and little 
hats? You're embarrassing me, let alone your kids.

4. Snap-happy dads
We all know the most precious thing in the world are the pictures of our loved 
ones, and they get more valued and important with each passing day. However, 
good luck getting a photograph of a child post-11. They HATE it, usually 
because there's some kind of self-image issue they're beginning to grapple 
with. But it still looks like my eldest girl spent 8 years with a coat over her 
head. Or she was in court a lot on armed robbery charges

5. Life and soul of the party dads
The organisers, the joiner-inners, the 'it'll be fun'-ers. The visible 
volunteers. The dads who put on school discos, who want wet sponges lobbed at 
them at fetes, who get to wear a uniform (from scouts to refs), the 
am-drammers. The dads who dress up as Dobby the house-elf to raise money, or as 
Oliver Cromwell just for laughs. This is why we need more sheds, dad's 
traditional lair. Forget the housing crisis, if the government built more sheds 
for us, then kids all over the country would not have their weekends ruined 
trying not to be seen with Dad aka King Olaf the Flatulent from the Budleigh 
Salterton Viking Re-enactment Society.

6. Outdoor dads
Hiking boots, woolly socks, kagouls, and damp rucksacks are not a good look. 
Our children do not want to be seen wearing them. Or wearing mud, or pond scum. 
The reason they are 'stuck indoors on a beautiful day like today' is because 
they've got an iPod and Facetime and 'proper friends who need to talk, OK' and 
there's not even 3G up Mount McMuddy. (By the way, if Frodo had known about 
Netflix and lack of broadband in Mordor, he would have stayed at home and The 
Lord of the Rings would have been a much quicker read).

7. Entertaining dads
My youngest daughter's BFF told me her dad's most embarrassing habit was doing 
Serbian folk dancing in front of her friends. Fair enough, that's a bit 
specific, but the urge to impress your little one's pals runs deep. There's 
something about kids that brings out the showbiz monster lurking in us. There's 
a reason your juggling balls, ukulele and big compendium of magic are locked in 
the attic. They didn't impress your missus, either, now did they?

8. Famous dads
Bono is a dad. So is Sting. Even the whiney bloke from Coldplay who was 
bullied at school is a father. Lord help us, so is Simon Cowell. Pity the poor 
children, people.

9. Know it all dads
When dragging your unwilling offspring on a guided tour of a boring old church 
or art gallery remember that a) your kids don't want to be there in the first 
place unless there's a secret passage to Hogwarts or a doom bunker of evil; b) 
they do not want to be seen dead with middle-aged American tourists in pastel 
trousers; and c) you are not supposed to argue the toss with the guide. It 
doesn't matter if the frescoes were painted by Caravaggio or Leonardo or Dave 
Spong the builder from two doors down. Just shut up and move on to Maccy D's.

10. BFF dads
This is going to hurt, but post-12, give it up, baldy. They never were your 
friends, but it looked like it once, didn't it? Desperate, matey dads are 
excruciating, because it's obvious to all onlookers that the kids don't want to 
share their toys with you anymore. So you have two gender-specific options. 
Boys: learn football IMMEDIATELY. You will be able to negotiate the most 
complex of teenage boy emotions via the form of Fernando Torres or why Andy 
Carroll should never, ever, be picked for England. Teenage girls: nah, you're 
just in for a world of pain. Suck it up, pilgrim.
