 She knows she has a problem with interviews. She thinks it is because she is 
'prickly' but a better epithet might be snotty. She can't really see why anyone 
has the right to ask, let alone know, any more than she chooses to tell them. 
And she believes (wrongly, in my view) that people ask her questions they would 
never dream of asking a man. For instance, I asked how she and her husband 
spent their joint income of £122,000 and she duly freaked. 'It's really, 
frankly... (sputter, sputter) ... If you go over to Tony and ask him and Cherie 
what they do with their money, and he answers, then I'll answer you. I'm fed up 
with not answering these questions on my own behalf, because I feel it's making 
me look kind of secretive. But perhaps you would ask Tony how he spends his 
money?' 'Yes of course I would.' 'Anyway, I'm not answering that question.'
Odd. Obviously she doesn't have to tell anyone how she spends her money (not 
on clothes, judging from the outfit she was wearing), but she shouldn't find it 
amazing to be asked, any more than Tony Blair should. But she has the sort of 
damn-you-for-your-impudence attitude one expects more from Tories than New 
Labour. Moreover, she believes that the media have conspired to misrepresent 
her: 'Some of the descriptions of me I just can't recognise. Thick. Docile. 
Acquiescing. Walking out.

'I mean there's a whole load of things that people use to describe me which 
might be a suitable description to describe something but they're not 
describing me.'

Really? Let's start with Thick. I asked what degree she got and she said 
'Politics'. Once we'd established that she got a 2:1 at York University, I 
asked why she thought people said she was thick. 'Well, I mean, people do write 
lots of... things. But I've never kind of felt the lack of... I mean, I just 
think it's ridiculous, absolutely ridiculous.

'And actually, you know, there's lots of people in politics they say are very 
clever but there's no evidence of their brains. I mean, at one time I was 
shadowing William Waldegrave and everyone used to say he was terribly clever, a 
Fellow of All Souls, but actually I used to look really hard and think, "Where 
is the evidence of any brain? What is clever about him?" And actually, you 
know, clever is as clever does. I have never ever had an intellectual 
inferiority complex.'

Hmm. Of course, not having an intellectual inferiority complex is not exactly 
proof that you are clever. But let's continue. What about walking out? This 
accusation presumably started in February when she, er, removed herself from a 
Woman's Hour interview mid-question. Jenni Murray asked if she was going to be 
sacked, and she said 'Must go now. Must, must, must. Bye-ee.' The innocent 
listener might well have imagined she was walking out unless, of course, she 
was running. But, 'I don't walk out. I never walk out. I mean, bombs drop on my 
head and I carry on, so I never walked out. I could easily have stayed there 
and just not answered the question. That's my way of avoiding the difficulty 
and it's not a very good thing to be doing, but I didn't walk out, that's just 
wrong.' She claims that she told Murray beforehand she could only stay for five 
minutes, because she had promised to help her son with his GCSEs, and when the 
five minutes was up, she departed. 'Basically I was in trouble and being 
criticised, and so I was fair game. And it was a great irony that it was 
Woman's Hour, don't you think?'

Duh? Does she seriously mean that, because she is a woman, Woman's Hour is not 
allowed to attack her? Perhaps we should file this example under Thick. She 
evinced a similar attitude when we talked about the public reaction to her cuts 
to lone mothers' benefits. Didn't she anticipate trouble? Evidently not but it 
is her explanation for why not that is so amazing. 'For many years I was the 
sole voice in parliament speaking up for lone mothers. And therefore I didn't 
think that people would think that I'd got into government to do down lone 
parents. But the timing of the machinery of government meant that I was 
standing there with what looked like a very anti-lone-parents proposal, and I 
actually thought that people might realise that we had a longer-term view. I 
thought that people would actually recognise that I hadn't turned into somebody 
different when I came into government. I actually thought that my track record 
would count for something.'

Trust me, I'm Harriet Harman? It was at this point that I completely lost 
whatever sympathy I might have had for her. The idea of single mothers sitting 
around in their council flats saying, 'Well the money's less, but I know I'll 
be all right because Harriet Harman is in charge,' is frankly bizarre.

I think what she means is that she never thought about public reaction at all, 
and couldn't imagine it if she did. Imagination is not her strong point - she 
has lived almost her entire adult life among Labour activists.

But it is accusations of her being 'docile' or 'acquiescent' that seem to 
annoy her most. Perhaps she realises too late that in being a totally obedient 
Blairite, she has entirely lost any popularity or personal credibility she 
might once have had. Time and again, she told me that she was never docile, 
never acquiescent. And yet, she also told me: 'You know, in the old days in 
Opposition, the worst thing you could do in a way was to say something that 
then made a story run.

'I'll never forget I was doing a series of local radio interviews, and we got 
to Radio Cumbria, and suddenly, at the end, the interviewer asked me something 
about Sellafield. Now, I kind of knew about it, but I didn't know what the line 
was. I wasn't doing Environment at the time, or Energy and I actually thought, 
"If I say something that creates a frenzy among the environmentalists, or the 
people working in Sellafield, this will be a real problem." So I kind of felt 
myself choosing to just sound completely ignorant. Because the people listening 
might think "Bloody hell! What an airhead!" but actually it wouldn't go 
anywhere, it wouldn't cause problems for my colleagues... But I think 
problem-avoidance has meant that sometimes I've created a situation where I 
look as if I've got a problem myself!'

This must surely be the purest exposition we have ever heard of Mandelsonian 
politics. You have to know 'the line'. If you don't know the line, you are not 
allowed to speak. You are not allowed to have views, or even knowledge, of 
anything outside your brief. Better to fall on your sword and say that you have 
never heard of Sellafield than to express a non-line view about it. It is a 
remarkable tribute to her docility, though not perhaps to her common sense, 
that she went along with it so wholeheartedly. And now she complains that she 
is seen as an automaton.
Harriet Harman was sacked in July 1998, two months after this article was 
published. This is an edited extract


