
In one rehearsal of Vassa Zheleznova 
<http://southwarkplayhouse.co.uk/show/vassa-zheleznova/>, the new adaptation of 
the Maxim Gorky play by London-based theatre companyThe Faction 
<http://www.thefaction.org.uk/>, one of the male actors made a quip. “So, this 
is what it feels like,” he said, noting how the female characters were on stage 
while the men had to wait by the side. Rachel Valentine Smith, the play’s 
director, said: “I was like: ‘Welcome to 500 years of theatre.’ I loved that 
moment – it’s usually women who are forced to hang around.”

As a classical theatre company, The Faction hasn’t had many opportunities to 
star female-heavy casts within the classic texts it interprets. It usually 
involves changing the characters’ genders – as the group did in its recent 
production of Richard III – to get enough women on stage. Valentine Smith, 
co-artistic director of the ensemble company, remembers the first rehearsal of 
The Faction’s firstrepertory season 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Repertory_theatre>: “Walking into the rehearsal 
room, I looked around and said out loud: ‘Oh my God, there are so many men in 
here.’”

Vassa Zheleznova, a seldom-performed play that was first shown in 1911 (Gorky, 
exiled for the second time from Russia, later wrote a far harsher second 
version shortly before his death in 1936), came with a ready-made female lead 
and a strong female cast. Emily Juniper, writer of The Faction’s adaptation, 
has given it an updated setting, the action playing out against the background 
of theLiverpool dockers’ strike 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liverpool_dockers%27_strike> in the mid-1990s. 
As in the original, the matriarch of the Zheleznova family is Vassa, a 
working-class girl who has taken over her feckless husband’s shipping company 
and made it successful. Now in danger of the business going under, she has to 
try to keep it – and her family – together.

On a hot day, the actors are running through a scene from act one in the 
rehearsal room above the Southwark Playhouse, less than a week before the play 
opens. The fire escape is open to the heat and the sound of the traffic outside 
swells below. The stage area is marked out by plasters and the space is stark – 
there is only a desk, filing cabinet and an Eames chair to show this is Vassa’s 
office (an extravagance for The Faction; the company has become known for 
usually having no set and minimal props).

Vassa, played by Sian Polhill-Thomas, is hard and cold. She looks like Karren 
Brady <https://www.theguardian.com/football/karren-brady>, is as ruthless as a 
mob boss and – I think it’s the Liverpudlian accent – has a touch of Mrs 
Boswell, the matriarch in the 80s sitcomBread 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bread_(TV_series)>, about her (it’s not all doom 
in this play; there are some comic moments, too). Vassa is ignoring her 
youngest daughter Luda’s pleas for attention. Her other daughter, Nata, is 
asking why she put up with her father all these years – he emerges as someone 
violent and depraved, and he is about to go on trial for something horrific, 
which could sink the business. “Because I love my family,” she answers, though 
you wouldn’t necessarily guess this by the way she treats them. Valentine Smith 
sits at the edge of the room and, when the scene is over, moves around the 
actors giving notes quietly and calmly.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yvgz%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yvgz%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F052333ac7c427b7bcdd9e1857a66e6b069d6bdb2%2F0_111_2971_1783%2F2971.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rewriting%20classical%20theatre%3A%20%E2%80%98Female%20characters%20are%20sad%2C%20have%20babies%20or%20talk%20about%20men%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yvgz%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rewriting+classical+theatre%3A+%E2%80%98Female+characters+are+sad%2C+have+babies+or+talk+about+men%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yvgz%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F052333ac7c427b7bcdd9e1857a66e6b069d6bdb2%2F0_111_2971_1783%2F2971.jpg>
 Director Rachel Valentine Smith: ‘The way men say something is very different 
from how I might have to say it as a woman.’ Photograph: Ricky J 
Payne/Invisible Darkness 
“I think it’s really interesting how brutal their world is – and you can still 
care about these characters,” she says afterwards, sitting in the bar 
downstairs with Juniper. “If you compare Gorky’s writing withAnton Chekhov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/chekhov>’s, it’s a lot less forgiving. It 
was interesting, as we were reading it, that it gets so dark ... That’s almost 
what’s funny about it.”

Valentine Smith thought she would become a film director until a friend asked 
her to direct an Edinburgh show. She then decided that was what she wanted to 
do.Women <http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> are still so 
underrepresented in theatre – just over a third are artistic directors of 
significant theatre companies; at the top arts organisations, this falls to 
below a quarter. “Working so closely with Mark [Leipacher, The Faction’s 
founder and co-artistic director – and Valentine Smith’s husband] in the same 
group of actors, the way he says something is very different from how I might 
have to say it as a woman. It depends on the company and the context, of 
course, but, for example, I’ve found that Mark saying the words ‘I don’t know’ 
is more acceptable than if I say it. If I say it, the response can be: ‘Oh my 
God, she doesn’t know what she’s doing, she’s out of control.’ If Mark says it, 
it’s like: ‘He’s so creative.’ I try to keep an awareness of it but, at the 
same time, I think it’s important not to make it all about that.”

Juniper <https://twitter.com/juniperbespoke>, who is also an illustrator and 
runs an arts journal, has worked with The Faction before. As a former actor, 
she went through a period where she was getting parts, but no lines. “At the 
end of one casting, they said: ‘Can you just wobble your thighs because we want 
to see how your thighs wobble.’ I felt sidelined as a woman. I was like: ‘I’ve 
got things I want to say, I don’t just want to shimmy.’”

She started writing, and has adapted a number of classic plays for The 
Faction. “Classical theatre is hard on women,” she says. “The characters who do 
things, change things and make choices are often men; and the female characters 
are sad, have babies, or are talking about men.” What’s wonderful about this 
play, written more than 100 years ago, she says, is that “it’s the women who 
are doing things, changing the course of the story”.

•Vassa Zheleznova is at the Southwark Playhouse 
<http://southwarkplayhouse.co.uk/show/vassa-zheleznova/> from 15 June to 9 July
