
When you think of the Kardashians, is it Kim’s lauded bottom that comes to 
mind? Or Kris’s reputation as a controlling “momager”? Perhaps it’s something 
more nebulous, like the family’s reputation for being shallow and talentless; a 
view sharedby the 500,000 people who signed a petition in 2012 to boycott the 
Kardashians 
<http://boycottthekardashians.com/500000-sign-petition-to-boycott-the-kardashians/>
 and “bring back smarter TV”.

Back in November, I hosted Kimposium!; 
<http://www.brunel.ac.uk/cbass/social-sciences-media-communications/sociology/kimposium>
 a symposium about all things Kardashian at Brunel University in London. The 
very idea of scholarly attention being given to the world’s most famous reality 
television family came under attack, especially on Twitter and other online 
forums.

Related: Why aren't there more university graduates on Coronation Street? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/nov/19/why-arent-there-more-university-graduates-on-coronation-street>

In the lead up to the Kimposium I was interviewed several times for press and 
radio and each time was asked to justify the notion of taking the Kardashians 
seriously. I found myself wondering whether a symposium around, say, Bear 
Grylls, would have caused the same furore. I doubt it, because the broadcasting 
of Grylls’ overtly masculine set of skills and the cultural relevance of his 
labour as a professional wilderness survivor and adventurer seem go 
unquestioned, despite their irrelevance to the lives of most people.

Keeping Up with the Kardashians follows Kris Jenner and her five adult 
daughters as they deal with work, love, relationships and children: the 
programme is about quintessentially “feminine” concerns. In her book The 
Triumph of Reality TV: The Revolution in American Television, Leigh H Edwards 
notes that although the programme is “polarising, not least because of [its] 
obvious profit motive and manipulation … the engine that drives the connection 
to fans is the storytelling”.

This storytelling often emphasises the love and intimacy between the 
Kardashian women. In the first episode of the current series, a tearful Kris 
tells Kourtney, who is separating from her partner,“it breaks my heart to see 
you in pain”. The episode centres around the women working to protect each 
other’s emotional health in relation to both Kourtney’s separation and their 
stepfather Caitlyn Jenner’s gender transition.

Support is a word that is used repeatedly. Kim says: “I just have to balance 
out all the people and make everyone feel supported.” Younger sister Kendall 
adds: “I want to be supportive of my mom with what she’s going through.”

Related: Feminist academics take note: women are not all white and straight 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/mar/03/feminist-academics-take-note-women-are-not-all-white-and-straight>

It has occurred to me that the hostility around the Kardashians may not be 
about their supposed shallowness or vanity, but the fact that there are hardly 
any men on the show — it is about highly successful women and their 
relationships with each other.


The discipline of popular culture studies is most criticised when it examines 
the lives of women, the creative work of women, and feminist issues. A black 
feminism course titled Feminist Perspectives: Politicising Beyoncé, taught at 
Rutgers University in the US, was recentlycancelled despite having been 
oversubscribed for years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/dec/16/politicizing-beyonce-rutgers-controversy-after-university-cancels-black-feminism-class>
. In contrast,The Beatles, Popular Music and Society 
<http://www.hope.ac.uk/postgraduate/postgraduatecourses/thebeatlespopularmusicandsocietyma/>
 MA taught at Liverpool Hope University goes without comment.

The study of popular culture, from graffiti to hip-hop to reality television, 
can enhance philosophical, political and sociological discussions. At the 
Kimposium we talked about labour, death, respectability, the digital world, 
trauma and democracy, as well as the more predictable themes of gender, body 
image, beauty and race.

Popular culture can be used as a pathway into theoretical discussions because 
it is crucially connected to them, and the more we accept this intertwining, 
the better we will understand our world. Speaking to students in familiar 
cultural language is invaluable. But performers like Beyoncé and the 
Kardashians are important in their own right. These women artists are worthy of 
study for what they create, represent, and for the cultural texts and dialogues 
that they are part of.


Related: Sexuality and culture: the appeal of studying gender at university 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jan/14/sexuality-and-culture-the-appeal-of-studying-gender-at-university>

Elizabeth Wissinger, a professor from the City University of New York , argued 
at the Kimposium that what the Kardashians do, or perform, is a prototypical 
feminine kind of labour — she calls it “glamour labour”. This is a form of work 
that many women (and some men) consciously or subconsciously undertake to some 
degree. It includes the daily toil of exercising, dieting, removing or adding 
hair, exfoliating, appling make up, dyeing hair, having cosmetic surgery, and 
so on and so on. Glamour labour points to the deep interest in the presentation 
of the body that has become central to cultures in all rich and many poorer 
parts of the world since the second half of the 20th century.

Watching Bear Grylls kill an alligator, drink his own urine or eat giant 
beetle larva is fascinating and entertaining. But watching the Kardashians 
conduct their daily, intimate, feminine lives, and seeing how they perform 
their glamour labour is more relevant.

Kim and her family won’t teach us how to survive in the wilderness, but they 
may give us insight into what it means to live in a world where image is 
crucial, and how to share intimacies and support each other as women in that 
world.


Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
