
It is celebration time at the UN headquarters in New York. World leaders have 
gathered to sign the newParis climate agreement 
<http://unfccc.int/paris_agreement/items/9511.php> and give grand speeches 
about how to achieve the newly adoptedsustainable development goals 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive>
.

But behind the smiles and handshakes lies a dark reality. The money needed to 
turn theclimate commitments 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/22/climate-change-study-poor-countries-4tn-2030-avert-catastrophe-paris-agreement>
 and global goals into real action is not part of the deal. The summit that was 
supposed to solve this part of the equation ended with adisappointing outcome 
<http://www.eurodad.org/Entries/view/1546466/2015/07/24/Addis-Ababa-summit-falls-short-of-addressing-financing-for-development>
 in Addis Ababa last July, and this week the follow-up negotiations produced a 
new low as governments failed to reach any substantive agreement.

While poverty reduction and climate action remain underfinanced, the Panama 
Papers 
<http://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/03/panama-papers-money-hidden-offshore>
 once again reminded us that there is no lack of money in the world. Sadly, 
since a large number of multinational corporations and wealthy individuals 
continue to exploit a multitude of loopholes to dodge taxes, the money is 
parked in tax havens.

Related: 'A system of privilege and benefits': is a global tax body needed? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/11/system-privilege-benefits-global-tax-body-oecd>

Despite the name, the Panama Papers also show that the problem goes far beyond 
<https://panamapapers.icij.org/graphs/> Panama, through a dark network of tax 
havens across Asia, Africa, the Americas and even inside the EU. It doesn’t 
make sense to talk about failed global tax cooperation when the truth is it 
never existed.

For the past 50 years, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development <http://www.oecd.org/> – also known as the “rich countries’ club” – 
has been writing tax rules in closed meetings, with more than 100 developing 
countries excluded.

After the adoption of the rules, which have failed in many ways to address the 
needs of developing countries, the OECD has repeatedly tried to get all other 
countries to follow the rules through different types of global forums, with 
limited success.

Even some OECD countries have shown strong unwillingness to implement rules on 
sharing information with other countries. Among them is the US – behaviour that 
has earned it the moniker “the new Switzerland 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-01-27/the-world-s-favorite-new-tax-haven-is-the-united-states>
”. On transfer pricing, the rules have proven so unfit for purpose that several 
countries, including Brazil and China, have started running their own homemade 
systems. The result is an international mess full of contradictions and 
loopholes; the Panama Papers will not be the last global tax scandal.


Despite the numerous reasons 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/25/ten-reasons-why-european-governments-should-back-global-tax-body>
 for governments to kickstart real international tax cooperation as a matter of 
urgency, some developed countries, including the US, UK and France, have 
repeatedly rejected the idea of creating aglobal UN tax body  
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/11/system-privilege-benefits-global-tax-body-oecd>
that could make it happen. The sad consequence is that governments around the 
world will keep losing billions of dollars every year in wasted tax income.


And it is not only tax money that isbeing wasted. This week, Argentina 
surrendered and paid up $10bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/20/argentina-turns-page-on-debt-with-first-bond-sale-in-15-years>
 (£7bn) to a group of “vulture funds” that have refused to participate in a 
debt restructuring agreement for the country. The payment was financed by fresh 
loans, which Argentina has been forced to take onwith the risk of ending up in 
a new vicious debt cycle.

This links back to a failure of governments to cooperate. Despite reaching an 
agreement in 2002 on the need to establish a mechanism to resolve government 
debt crises, the US, UK and Germany have refused to participate in a global 
negotiation to develop it.


This is not just bad news for Argentina. Around the world, a number of 
countries are approaching unsustainable debt levels, and approaching the point 
of crisis. It is painful to imagine how much good these lost billions could 
have done financing schools, hospitals and crisis support for those most in 
need.

In a month’s time, leaders will gather at the world humanitarian summit 
<https://www.worldhumanitariansummit.org/> in Istanbul for yet another 
discussion about human suffering and the need to take action. But unless our 
leaders are ready to address the major flaws in the international economic 
system, they will not be able to change the tragic fact that we’re living in a 
very rich world full of poor people.

 * Tove Maria Ryding is tax justice coordinator at the European Network on 
Debt and Development <http://www.eurodad.org/> (Eurodad) and Bodo Ellmers is 
debt justice coordinator at Eurodad
