
Government arguments with Conservative local authorities did not end when 
ministersbacked down over plans to force the conversion of all English state 
schools to academies 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/06/government-backs-down-over-plan-to-make-all-schools-academies>
.

In a fast-developing dispute in Tory Suffolk, the local authority is launching 
a judicial review to challenge Department for Education-approved plans for a 
new middle school by the Bury St Edmunds All-through Free School Trust.

Related: Government drops plan to make all schools in England academies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/06/government-backs-down-over-plan-to-make-all-schools-academies>

Furious local headteachers are wondering why, after the painful process in 
which the county has got rid of middle schools over nine years, suddenly a new 
one should be approved. They have written anopen letter [pdf] 
<http://www.buryschoolspartnership.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2014/07/Letter-to-N-Morgan-19-May-2016.pdf>
 to the education secretary, Nicky Morgan, arguing that the move undermines 
years of change from a three-tier set-up including middle schools to two tiers: 
primary and  secondary.

The free school group has argued 
<http://schoolsweek.co.uk/bury-st-edmunds-denies-technical-academy-is-streaming/>
 that it has had approval to provide schooling for pupils from four to 18 since 
2011, but opponents say the DfE asserted at the time that no new middle schools 
would be set up. This is a dispute to watch.

Foreign languages – or fancy buildings?


Are teaching staff or buildings more important to the modern university? The 
question is being asked by critics of proposals, finalised last week, for 
cutbacks affecting highly praised modern languages and cultural courses at the 
University of Nottingham.

Nottingham’s plans to cut 11.5 teaching posts, in German; Spanish, Portuguese 
and Latin American studies; Russian and Slavonic studies; theology; and 
archaeology have drawn fierce protests.

Sixty British Academy fellows wrote a letter [pdf] 
<http://nottinghammodernlanguagessolidarity.weebly.com/uploads/4/8/0/8/48086357/fba_protest_letter.pdf>
 opposing the cuts, and Nottingham’s academics in German havedescribed [pdf] 
<http://nottinghammodernlanguagessolidarity.weebly.com/uploads/4/8/0/8/48086357/open_letter_from_dept_of_german.pdf>
 them as “savage”.

The academics are linking the teaching cuts to Nottingham’s ambitious and 
costly building plans, a charge denied by the university.

However, we have seen a transcript of a meeting between students and the 
university hierarchy that seems to show a senior member of staff linking 
funding for building work with staff cutbacks.

Nottingham pointed out that the cuts were going through with only the holder 
of 0.5 of a full-time teaching post having to be made compulsorily redundant. 
But the development will fuel fears of a crisis in higher education language 
teaching.

Airport school hopes for a flying new start


What do you do if, as a free school, you have struggled to find a site for 
your buildings and so set up home next to an airport and then you have 
difficulty attracting pupils?

Well, perhaps you rebrand with an “international” curriculum to match the 
“international” nature of air travel, and try to draw in foreign students.

This is the latest twist to the strange tale of Parkfield school, the free 
school in Bournemouth 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jan/26/mid-year-primary-school-reforms-academies>
 that is due to move to permanent premises in a former air traffic control 
centre in September.

Parkfield, currently housed in a town centre office block, had been due to 
open a sixth form last year, offering the international baccalaureate, but the 
plan was put on hold with student numbers seemingly a problem.

Related: Mid-year primary school reforms reverse election promise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jan/26/mid-year-primary-school-reforms-academies>

But now it is back on the agenda, minutes from a Parkfield governors’ meeting 
in February reveal. “Looking to the future, it will be important to sell the 
school to a wider audience … potentially recruiting overseas students who will 
be attracted to the IB diploma.

“In order to facilitate this [the principal, Terry Conaghan] would like the 
governors to approve a change of the school name and rebranding. The principal 
felt this would give the school a clear identity … the school would offer an 
international curriculum next to Bournemouth international airport.”

Conaghan told us the move to the airport provided the “perfect opportunity to 
promote the school to a new audience”, but that decisions on rebranding and 
renaming the school had since been put on hold.

The saga of Parkfield, which last year saw its airport move delayed after a 
bat colony 
<http://www.bournemouthecho.co.uk/NEWS/13360481.Parkfield_free_school___s_move_to_airport_in_doubt___because_of_bats/>
 was discovered on site, may come to symbolise some of the wackier aspects of 
the free schools project.

Harris’s ‘ridiculous’ teacher turnover


An influential parent has complained about the turnover of staff in her 
children’s primary school, which has had a succession of headteachers in four 
years – three “executive” heads and three heads of school, with the possibility 
of that becoming a fourth in September. Yet the school has not been through 
any apparent crisis and is rated “outstanding” by Ofsted. It is part of the 
Harris Federation, often lauded by ministers.

Related: School’s out for Harris academy teachers in turnover that ‘should 
ring alarm bells’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/oct/13/schools-harris-academy-teachers-ofsted>

Erica Rowe, who has two children attending Harris primary free school Peckham, 
south London, which opened in 2012, contacted us after she says she found out 
that the school’s “fantastic” current head, who parents thought was a long-term 
appointment, was having to apply to make the position permanent. Rowe is chair 
of the school’s (Harris-endorsed)parent association 
<http://www.harrisfreeschoolpeckham.org.uk/182/friends-of-hpfsp>.

Rowe also believes teacher turnover at the school has been “ridiculously” 
high. Harris says three teachers are leaving the eight-class, 240-pupil school 
this summer, but offered no further comment on Rowe’s complaints.

We reported last October 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/oct/13/schools-harris-academy-teachers-ofsted>
 on seemingly high teacher turnover rates at Harris schools and wonder quite 
how unsettling all this change must be for young children.
