
You have probably heard that Swedes love a party, be it Midsummer wearing 
flower wreaths and dancing around a pole, or crayfish parties wearing comical 
hats and singing songs.

With the influence of the rest of Europe and the US, however, different 
traditions and behaviours are starting to emerge. A more continental approach 
to socialising is gaining popularity: meeting for afterwork drinks. Wednesdays 
are typically known as “the little Saturday” with bars offering deals and 
discounts to attract patrons.


Related: Eat like a Swede 
<http://www.theguardian.com/holiday-in-sweden/2016/may/03/eat-like-a-swede> 

Sweden is also developing a taste for cocktails and microbreweries. In fact, 
last year Dosa Ivanov, a Gothenburg bartender based at Clarion Hotel Post, was 
named the world’s best bartender. Microbreweries are popping up all over the 
country, such as Dugges and Oceanbryggeriet in Gothenburg. In Skåne, southern 
Sweden, locally produced drinks are thriving, be it wine from Hällåkra vingård, 
spirits from Karlsson’s Vodka, or (no-alcoholic) apple juice from Kiviks 
Musteri.


Since Swedes’ focus on wellbeing is never too far away, many bars offers 
non-alcoholic options. Some bars serve the alcohol on the side, making it 
easier for those who want to avoid overindulging. In Gothenburg, Hagabadets 
offers a completely alcohol-free section in the bar.


Celebrating special occasions

There are a few occasions that seem to instil a special kind of party spirit 
among Swedes, and along with these events a new set of cultural rules apply. 
One example is midsummer (midsommar or midsommarafton in Swedish) holiday, 
celebrating the summer solstice. During this holiday Swedes like to braid 
wreaths out of flowers found in meadows and gardens after which they indulge in 
a smörgåsbord made of pickled herring, meatballs, fresh potatoes, and 
strawberry cake – all while downing shots of snaps preceded by drinking songs 
such as the classicHelan Går <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Helan_G%C3%A5r>. 

At such occasions, it is not only important to partake in the suggested games 
and songs, but to establish eye contact both before and after sipping on your 
drink – whether or not you are having a shot or an alternative drink. This may 
seem like an awkward rule to the uninitiated, but it’s customary for any 
occasion that includes a toast (orskål, as Swedes say), whether you are 
attending a dinner party or casually enjoying a beer with friends after work, 
eye contact is key.


To experience a midsummer celebration perched on the shoreline of West 
Sweden’s Bohuslän archipelago head toSlussens Pensionat 
<http://www.vastsverige.com/en/p/84467/Midsummer-package>.

Enjoying summer Swedish style

Most working Swedes take at least four weeks off in summer, when the coveted 
light offers a perfect antidote to the dark winter months. For Swedes, it is 
the perfect time to let loose and enjoy the warmer temperatures outdoors. Most 
restaurants and bars start to prepare their patio seating in May, and from June 
to September, Swedes love to meet up at these locations (even when the weather 
gets a little chillier than they would like to admit).

Wrapped in blankets with shades on, locals can be spotted sat outside bars 
enjoying the summer evenings together with friends before heading off for 
night-time adventures.

Swedes’ love of summer adventure doesn’t stop after a full night of dancing, 
though. Although clubs in major cities are usually open until the early 
morning, few visitors let their nights end before having a dip in a nearby body 
of water. Ribersborg beach or Västra Hamnen are popular choices for late night 
swimmers in Malmö.


Eating a late night snack by the canal serves as a good alternative for the 
club kids of Gothenburg, who are discouraged from entering the canals of the 
inner city. For those who want a swim, Gothenburg offers plenty of 
alternatives. The archipelago is in easy reach, and in the summer time locals 
and visitors head to Saltholmen from where they catch ferries to nearby islands 
such as Styrsö, Brännö and Vrångö. These islands offer an idyllic countryside 
setting with public beaches as well as wilder swims and sunbathing off the 
granite slabs.

Disclaimer: the best way of avoiding any accidents while partaking in this 
tradition is to avoid deep waters, diving, and to wait until the alcohol has 
left the bloodstream.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjnd%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjnd%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d441abdaed6e62e80455b3e495f53f832c20f77%2F0_321_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Party%20like%20a%20Swede%2C%20Sk%C3%A5l!&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjnd%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Party+like+a+Swede%2C+Sk%C3%A5l%21&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tjnd%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d441abdaed6e62e80455b3e495f53f832c20f77%2F0_321_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Sommarscen in Malmö. Photograph: Werner Nystrand 
Festivals of light

Another favourite way of combining the warm and light summer months with a 
celebration of sorts is to attend one of the many music festivals available. 
Between June and October there are a number of music events throughout the 
whole country.

Way out West is one popular destination. Centrally located in the vast, green 
park Slottsskogen in Gothenburg, the festival attracts national and 
international acts as well as visitors from all over the globe in an idyllic 
setting. This year will be the festival’s 10th anniversary with artists such as 
Jamie XX, PJ Harvey, Yung Lean and Seinabo Seyheadlining the line-up 
<http://www.wayoutwest.se/line-up>. When you’re in Malmö, lovers of house music 
should head forBig Slap <http://bigslap.se/>, a huge outdoor dance party. For a 
more environmental vibe there’sMalmöfestivalen 
<http://malmofestivalen.se/about/in-english> and for a city-wide celebration 
there’sSommarscen Malmö 
<http://malmo.se/Kultur--fritid/Kultur--noje/Festivaler--utomhusnojen/Sommarscen-Malmo/In-English.html>
.


Whether you want to blend in at the dinner party or just let your hair down at 
a music festival, mastering how to party like a Swede is a piece of cake – as 
long as you bring sunglasses, mosquito repellents and do your best to keep up 
with a few simple rules of party etiquette.Skål!

