
Q. I'm coming to London for a weekend of shopping and want to explore the 
vintage shops. Which are the best? And is there anything in particular I should 
be looking for?
Jeanette

A. A celebrity stylist once gave me a good bit of advice: if you find 
something you love in a vintage store, buy it even if it doesn't quite fit. As 
long as you have a good seamstress, fabric can be inserted or the garment taken 
in. The pleasure of vintage shopping is that one of a kind means one of a kind 
- the trick is to see the potential in all your finds. Appleby's vintage store 
is a treasure trove of dresses (www.applebyvintage.com 
<http://www.applebyvintage.com>). Jane, the super-chic owner, has a selection 
of very rare Biba pieces at the moment, everything from an amazing slinky coat 
to beautiful dresses. Her weakness, she explains, is stunning but expensive 
Thirties silk chiffon dresses. But she always has a stash of Fifties and 
Sixties sundresses for less than £100. The sizes tend to be either small or 
large, but she knows tailors who are happy to alter anything to catwalk 
quality, all included in the price. Vintage stores have specialist areas: Cloud 
Cuckoo Land (020 7354 3141) has Fifties printed dresses and handbags. Rellik's 
niche is great T-shirts and designer finds (www.relliklondon.co.uk 
<http://www.relliklondon.co.uk>) - the store's a favourite with Kate Moss. 
Blackout II (www.blackout2.com) has bright and kitsch vintage pieces, including 
amazing sunglasses. And if you are looking for something extra special, then go 
to Selfridges: it has a new vintage boutique run by Italian vintage dealer Elio 
Ferraro (www.selfridges.com <http://www.selfridges.com>). The best pieces 
currently on offer include rare Sixties Hermes gloves and designer archive 
treasures from Lanvin.

· If you have a wardrobe question for Jo Jones, email her at 
ask.jo@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.jo@observer.co.uk>
