
The NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> is showing impressive 
ingenuity in finding ways round the chaos caused by Andrew Lansley’s reforms, 
but some of the solutions risk causing a new set of long-term problems.

From the structure and role of the regulators to the commissioning of primary 
care, the NHS has gradually stitched together a tapestry of organisations and 
processes to do what needs to be done, then backfilled the governance to ensure 
it stays within the law.

The next round of the reforms is dividing the country into 44 sustainability 
and transformation “footprints” 
<https://www.england.nhs.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/stp-footprints-march-2016.pdf>
. NHS England bills them as merelycollective discussion forums 
<https://www.england.nhs.uk/ourwork/futurenhs/deliver-forward-view/stp/>, but 
the truth is that they are now seen as central to delivering theFive Year 
Forward View <https://www.england.nhs.uk/ourwork/futurenhs/> and making the NHS 
financial and clinically sustainable.

Related: GPs are leading the way on NHS transformation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/apr/15/gps-leading-nhs-transformation>

With clinical commissioning groups (CCGs) having largely been unequal to the 
task of driving through the tough decisions needed on restructuring hospital 
services, the sustainability and transformation plans (STPs) due to be 
submitted to NHS England and NHS Improvement in June are intended to force 
answers to difficult local questions.

Each footprint has a leader, almost invariably a major figure in health or 
local government, with the clout to bring all the local players together and 
force discussions to a conclusion.

In an interview with the Health Service Journal, NHS England chief executive 
Simon Stevens spelt out just how far thecentral bodies are likely to push this 
new way of running the NHS 
<http://www.hsj.co.uk/sectors/commissioning/exclusive-stevens-floats-combined-authorities-for-the-nhs/7004897.article>
. Taking an idea from local government, he sees commissioners and providers 
pooling sovereignty to form the health service equivalent of combined 
authorities.

In terms of NHS structure, this is revolutionary. In one go it would lead to a 
massive consolidation of CCGs and greatly accelerate the erosion of the split 
between purchasers and providers of care.

Crucially, Stevens has promised an alliance between STP leaders and the 
national leadership in defeating the “veto power” of individual hospitals in 
restructuring services. This means that when the sustainability plans are 
reviewed in July, a whole series of locally contentious service changes could 
be pushed through simultaneously.

The frustration within the national leadership at the inability of local areas 
to confront festering problems is palpable. In his first few days in the job 
two years ago, Stevens pointed out that many of the hospitals with the worst 
problems for clinical quality and financial viability were exactly the same 
ones that had been in difficulties when he first started as an NHS manager 
almost 30 years earlier.

NHS England and NHS Improvement are right to look for ways to batter through 
the procrastination of decades, but must be wary of the risks.

Related: Can new regulator NHS Improvement save the health service? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/apr/01/can-new-regulator-nhs-improvement-save-health-service>

These plans are being developed to tight timescales and the key decisions are 
being called by the leader for each area. With every week’s delay in 
restructuring, the NHS digs itself further into a financial hole, and these 
leaders could be forgiven for thinking that in those circumstances any decision 
is better than no decision.

But there is a risk that STP leaders end up becoming powerbrokers rather than 
following the evidence of what needs to be done. With muscular foundation 
trusts vying for hegemony over territories and services, it is tempting to 
split the difference and railroad through expedient decisions built on flimsy 
data which give everyone something to take home.

Effective systems leadership means building the trust and evidence to argue 
through to the right conclusion for the local health economy as a whole, not 
trying to reach a compromise. The NHS will only get one go at this between now 
and 2020, so it cannot afford to be distracted by institutional or management 
egos from making the right choices.

The STP process has the potential to break the logjam in reconfiguring 
services. In doing so, great care must be taken not to generate a new set of 
problems that another generation will still be trying to sort out as 2050 
approaches.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
