
While there are good reasons for British voters to either support or oppose the
proposed withdrawal of the UK from the European Union 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>, there is little argument 
at all from an American perspective that Brexit would hurt the US.

Related: Brexit fallout: seven ways the EU referendum could damage US interests
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/20/european-union-referendum-brexit-us-world>

The strongest argument for the UK leaving the EU is that European bureaucrats 
have usurped many of the powers that should be vested in democratically elected 
officials in Westminster. Laws in Brussels are not made by people who can be 
readily held accountable to voters. Instead, a maze of one-size-fits-all 
bureaucracy has slowly and steadily eroded the role of national parliaments and 
other political institutions.

This is a convincing argument for British voters. However, it needn’t matter 
at all to Americans. What may matter to Americans, however, is the economic and 
national security impact of the UK deciding to leave the bloc.

There is consensus among economists that Britain leaving the EU would lead to 
a major economic shock, which would have worldwide impacts. In recent days, 
global markets have followed polls in the UK. The less likely it is that 
Britain leaves the better markets have done, and vice versa. Janet Yellen, the 
chair of the Federal Reserve,warned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/21/janet-yellen-federal-reserve-brexit-eu-referendum>
 on Tuesday that Brexit could have “significant economic repercussions” in the 
US.

Furthermore, from a national security perspective, Brexit would deprive the US 
of a crucial window and important pro-American voice in pan-European meetings.

It also would risk Scottish independence, which would probably require the 
relocation of Britain’s nuclear submarines and weaken the UK’s military at a 
time whenEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> faces a growing 
threat from Russian expansionism.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4mbhm%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4mbhm%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7bd4b53cc64da155fdaf5a3041ebd70fae4e12dd%2F0_0_4480_2689%2F4480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%3A%20from%20an%20American%20perspective%2C%20there%20is%20only%20one%20good%20outcome&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4mbhm%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brexit%3A+from+an+American+perspective%2C+there+is+only+one+good+outcome&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4mbhm%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7bd4b53cc64da155fdaf5a3041ebd70fae4e12dd%2F0_0_4480_2689%2F4480.jpg>
 Nigel Farage launches Ukip’s new EU referendum poster campaign calling for 
voters to opt ‘leave’. Photograph: Rex/Shutterstock 
There is also an argument that the pro-Brexit campaign in the UK has set a 
disturbing trend for western democracies. Those campaigning for Britain to 
leave the EU have not focused on the gaping democratic deficit in European 
institutions. Instead, much of the campaign has focused on inflated 
anti-immigration rhetoric and demagoguery. One pro-Brexit posterunveiled by UK 
Independence party (Ukip) leader Nigel Farage 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/16/nigel-farage-defends-ukip-breaking-point-poster-queue-of-migrants>
 featured a picture of a number of Middle Eastern refugees with the slogan 
“Breaking point: the EU has failed us all.” A win by pro-Brexit forces would be 
yet another signal of the potency of this variety of demagoguery in western 
politics and probably further influence the tone of what is already a 
historically divisive and bitter US presidential election.

British voters will make their decision on Thursday about whether the UK is 
better off within or without theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>. And while the subject can be the topic 
of fair and reasonable debate in the UK, there is only one good outcome from 
the American perspective.
