
Britain is one of the most centralised countries of its size in the developed 
world in terms of the amount of revenue collected and controlled centrally. 
While this has started to change with devolution to Scotland and Wales, it has 
left English local government with the most restricted powers of any equivalent 
internationally.

We now need stronger local political leadership in England – and new metro 
mayors mean we’re about to get it.

UK city mayors are not a new idea. Even people with short memories will 
remember the Labour and coalition governments’ attempts to introduce mayors 
which, with the exception ofLondon <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, 
largely failed. Under Labour, elected mayors were established in England in 
2000, with the Local Government Act 2000 paving the way for more. But of the 38 
local referendums held to see who wanted a mayor, only 13 cities voted yes. The 
coalition government gave the city mayors model another push, but voters in 
nine English cities rejected the idea in referendums in 2012.

So what’s different now? 

Related: The new wave of English mayors: power to the people or fresh 
bureaucracy? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/mar/03/english-mayors-power-bureaucracy-devolution>

The new metro mayors being introduced in May 2017 will have real power. They 
will cover city-regions such as Greater Manchester or large rural areas such as 
Greater Lincolnshire, not single local authorities as was the case with past 
attempts. They’ll offer a single line of accountability for local decision 
making and spending – something that is vital to convincing central politicians 
and civil servants to let go of power. In some areas, including Greater 
Manchester and the West Midlands, the new elected mayor will also take over the 
powers of thepolice and crime commissioner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police-and-crime-commissioners>, as happened 
first in London.

Being directly elected, mayors will be highly visible and accountable. They 
will be able to act as figureheads for their areas, attracting investment and 
working with local partners to reform public services. As in London, they are 
likely to get more power over time. New mayors wielding real power mean that 
both Whitehall and Westminster will need to think carefully about how they deal 
with this new type of local politician.

Mayors are becoming an increasingly attractive proposition for some MPs, 
particularly those who see the role as enabling them to make real change happen 
– more so than being on the back benches or even, in some cases, a shadow 
minister. We’ve already seen big political players giving up their role in 
national politics to become mayors.Sadiq Khan 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/sadiq-khan> was shadow justice secretary 
before becoming mayor of London.Andy Burnham 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/andyburnham>, once in the running for 
Labour leader, is standing to become the Labour candidate for the new mayor for 
Greater Manchester, while shadow ministerLuciana Berger 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/luciana-berger> is standing to become the 
Labour candidate 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/31/luciana-berger-to-stand-for-mayor-of-liverpool-city-region>
 for the Liverpool city region.

We’re seeing resistance from some MPs to the idea of a new powerful mayor 
arriving in their patch. Conservative Liam Fox, for example, has said that 
Conservative-led local authoritiesdon’t want mayors forced upon them 
<http://www.bristolpost.co.uk/Liam-Fox-MP-fundamentally-opposed-metro-mayor/story-29026708-detail/story.html>
, and deals in East Anglia and the West of England are wobbling, in part 
because of local opposition from MPs.

But generally the advent of more powerful mayors means that political career 
trajectories in the UK will become more interesting. Power, currently overly 
concentrated in the House of Commons, will disperse, and we could end up with a 
system more like that of the US, where there are a number of attractive 
political entities including governors, mayors and senators.

Our work at the Institute for Government has found that mayors will also be 
better able towield “soft power” 
<http://www.instituteforgovernment.org.uk/publications/making-most-mayors>, or 
influence. Peter Soulsbysaid at an IfG event 
<http://www.instituteforgovernment.org.uk/blog/10708/mayors-at-a-gallop-the-national-influence-of-local-leaders/>
 that he enjoys far better access to secretaries of state as mayor of Leicester 
than he did as an MP. He is also able to convene local public service leaders 
to sort out problems requiring co-ordination.

To some extent, the importance of mayors will depend on how much they can 
gather soft power and use it against Westminster and Whitehall. London mayors 
have proved very good at this, and others such as George Ferguson in Bristol 
have shown that it is also possible elsewhere.

Jo Casebourne is a programme director at the Institute for Government.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
