
The government’s proposed immigration bill, due to have its first reading in 
the House of Lords this week, will hand “unbelievable control to traffickers” 
and make it harder for people to escape slavery in the UK, campaigners have 
warned.

Anti-slavery NGOs and labour rights activists said a climate of fear around 
immigration would result in trafficking victims being treated as illegal 
workers rather than victims of crime. A key proposal in the bill concerns 
illegal working, which will carry a 12-month sentence and unlimited fine. 
Trafficking experts said this would deter victims from coming forward to report 
abuse.

Related: The UK's new immigration bill creates perfect conditions for slavery 
to thrive | Caroline Robinson 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/28/slavery-uk-immigration-act-2014-hostile-environment-undocumented-migrants-focus-on-labour-exploitation-flex>

Caroline Robinson, policy director at the Focus on Labour Exploitation (Flex) 
<http://www.labourexploitation.org/>, said: “We have serious concerns that the 
immigration bill will make people more vulnerable. The proposed legislation 
hands unbelievable control to traffickers. The purpose of this illegal working 
offence is to find people and get them out of the country and our fear is that 
victims won’t want to come forward because of the immigration consequences.”

Robinson said her organisation had already seen the impact of tougher 
immigration policies, with victims of trafficking too scared to approach 
authorities.

“We worked with a cleaner [who was a victim of trafficking] who doesn’t want 
to come forward because of the gamble that there will be immigration 
repercussions. Even when the Home Office agrees someone is a victim of 
trafficking there is not much support, so, after the 45-day recovery period, 
you are left destitute or forced out of the UK, with a very real risk of 
retrafficking.”

After winning the general election in May, David Cameron promised a clampdown 
on illegal migration 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/pm-speech-on-immigration> across all 
areas of government to “make the UK a less attractive place for illegal 
migrants”. Cameron said this would be done by “rooting out illegal immigrants 
and bolstering deportations”.

Under the proposed bill, banks would be required to establish whether 
customers were in the UK legally and landlords would have to check tenants’ 
documents regularly. If landlords believed a tenant to be in the UK illegally,
they would be able to evict them without a court order 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/aug/03/plan-landlords-evict-illegal-immigrants-violence-calais-migrant-crisis>
.


Chai Patel, legal and policy director for the Joint Council for the Welfare of 
Immigrants <http://www.jcwi.org.uk/>, believes document checks will have a 
negative impact on trafficking victims. “It makes it a lot easier for wages to 
be withheld and the housing provisions will mean people are forced to deal with 
landlords who are criminals,” he said.

 Patel added that the measures in the bill threatened to undo the work of the 
Modern Slavery Act 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2015/30/contents/enacted>, introduced last 
year.


He said: “It’s already a criminal offence to be here unlawfully but now the 
powers will be extensive. They can seize anything you earn, take whatever 
people have. Victims [of trafficking] will be admitting a criminal offence just 
by saying they have been exploited. That is what traffickers rely on and they 
can rightly say you can’t tell anyone because you will be arrested and put in 
prison, and that is what might well happen. It really does contradict 
everything in the modern slavery bill.”
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F25%2Fmodern-day-slavery-abike-trafficked-sexual-slavery-video&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F25%2Fmodern-day-slavery-abike-trafficked-sexual-slavery-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F23%2F1437652593018%2FKP_367647_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Abike's%20story%3A%20trafficked%20into%20sexual%20slavery%20in%20the%20UK%2C%20then%20thrown%20in%20jail%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F25%2Fmodern-day-slavery-abike-trafficked-sexual-slavery-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Abike%27s+story%3A+trafficked+into+sexual+slavery+in+the+UK%2C+then+thrown+in+jail+%E2%80%93+video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F25%2Fmodern-day-slavery-abike-trafficked-sexual-slavery-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F23%2F1437652593018%2FKP_367647_crop_640x360.jpg>
Abike’s story: trafficked into sexual slavery in the UK, then thrown in jail – 
video 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2015/jul/25/modern-day-slavery-abike-trafficked-sexual-slavery-video>
The Home Office has said victims of trafficking will not be affected by the 
new immigration bill and will receive substantial protection from prosecution 
under the ModernSlavery <https://www.theguardian.com/world/slavery> Act. The 
act introduced a new statutory defence for victims who commit crime due to 
their exploitation, and this defence applies to those who are forced to work 
illegally.

Karen Bradley, UK minister for preventing abuse and exploitation, said in a 
statement: “The intent of the offence of illegal working is clear; it is not 
aimed at the victims of modern slavery. Anyone who is a victim of modern 
slavery can at any time report their captors, and last week the home secretary 
announced a specifichelpline <https://modernslavery.co.uk/need-help.html> for 
victims to ring or text for help.”

The national referral mechanism (NRM), the main system for identifying and 
protecting victims of trafficking in the UK, was widened by the slavery bill to 
apply to all victims of modern-day slavery.

But anti-trafficking groups have branded the protection system inadequate. The 
government has also faced criticisms over its record ofpersistently 
criminalising victims of trafficking 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/nov/03/trafficked-women-horrific-stories-came-to-uk-turned-into-prostitute>
.

“If the new immigration legislation is effectively going to strengthen the 
position of traffickers, it is difficult to see how the NRM is going to be an 
adequate response to that,” said Aidan McQuade, director ofAnti-Slavery 
International <http://www.antislavery.org/english/>. 


McQuade complained of an “inbuilt institutional racism” in the NRM system, 
with migrants from EU countries much more likely to be confirmed as trafficking 
victims than those from elsewhere. “You have less than a 20% chance if you’re 
from outside the EU of being positively identified as a victim of trafficking,” 
said McQuade. “It’s hard to see how the current climate around immigration is 
going to do anything to counteract that.”

The most recent data from the National Crime Agency 
<http://www.nationalcrimeagency.gov.uk/publications/national-referral-mechanism-statistics/655-human-trafficking-national-referral-mechanism-statistics-april-to-june-2015/file>
 shows that between April and June 2015, there were 757 referrals to the NRM. 
Of these, 167 people received positive identification as a victim of 
trafficking.

The most common countries of origin among people who received a positive 
identification as a victim of trafficking were the UK, Poland, Romania and 
Slovakia. Those who did not make it through to the final stages of the NRM 
process were typically from Vietnam, Albania, Nigeria and Eritrea.

The standard recovery period for trafficking victims is 45 days. Between 
January 2010 and September of this year, 1,200 recognised victims of 
trafficking applied for asylum. Two-thirds were given some form of leave to 
remain, while a third had to leave the UK.

The Labour MP Fiona Mactaggart said pressure to leave the UK after a positive 
identification as a trafficking victim has stopped people entering the NRM 
process: “If people are trafficked they usually have 45 days after the [Home 
Office] decision [to stay in the UK], then they are dropped like a stone. The 
problem is that someone who has been a victim of trafficking, often for many 
reasons, cannot return to their country of origin, for example because their 
traffickers are threatening them and their families.

“Too often they try to find something to preserve their lives and so they 
might work illegally or they might revert to prostitution, simply because they 
need to eat. Because of hysteria around immigration we allow profoundly 
vulnerable people to drop off the edge and they can’t give evidence against 
cruel, monstrous criminals.”
