
Two New York Times <http://www.theguardian.com/media/new-york-times> employees 
are suing the newspaper, citing “an environment rife with discrimination based 
on age, race, and gender”.

The class action lawsuit comes the same week that Curt Schilling accused ESPN 
of a culture of racism. Schilling was recently fired from his role as a 
commentator at the sports channel after makingtransphobic comments 
<http://www.outsports.com/2016/4/19/11461618/curt-schilling-espn-transgender> 
on Facebook.

Racism in the media is often linked 
<https://books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=7HKk_DLzRDAC&oi=fnd&pg=PP8&dq=racism+lack+of+diversity&ots=lpXOUV1Wyr&sig=FVVYb3KZOIxMiBJi0chm3GGWOWU#v=onepage&q=racism%20lack%20of%20diversity&f=false>
 to a lack of diversity within the industry. And accusations that the workforce 
in US media doesn’t represent the population are nothing new. In 1968, 
analyzing protests about the treatment of racial minorities, the National 
Advisory Commission on Civil Disordersclaimed 
<http://www.cjr.org/analysis/in_the_span_of_two.php> that “the media report and 
write from the standpoint of a white man’s world”, adding “fewer than 5% of the 
people employed by the news business in editorial jobs in the United States 
today are Negroes.”

Related: New York Times boss sued over alleged ageist, racist and sexist 
hiring practices 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/28/new-york-times-ceo-sued-discriminatory-hiring-practices>

That figure has barely changed. In 2015, 4.7% 
<http://asne.org/content.asp?pl=140&sl=147&contentid=147> of newsroom employees 
were African American according to statistics from the American Society of News 
Editors (ASNE). This points to significant under-representation given that13.2% 
<https://www.census.gov/quickfacts/table/PST045215/00> of the US population are 
African American (according to 2014 population estimates from the Census 
Bureau).

ASNE also found that Asian Americans were not well represented – making up 
5.4% of the adult population but just 2.8% of staff in newsrooms. Hispanic 
people meanwhile made up 4% of employees in 2015, compared with 17.4% of the US 
population as a whole.

The problem is not about a lack of qualified candidates according to an 
analysis by Alex T Williams published in theColumbia Journalism Review 
<http://www.cjr.org/analysis/in_the_span_of_two.php>. Minorities made up almost 
a quarter of Americans majoring in journalism or communications between 2000 
and 2009. And around one in five of graduates from those programs are 
minorities.

Instead, Williams points to three obstacles facing minorities who wish to work 
in the media: inexperience on campus newspapers (which tend to be in wealthier 
colleges); the prevalence of unpaid internships; and a lack of social capital 
to get them into hiring networks.

This week’s civil lawsuit against the New York Times also used statistics on 
representation – the suit mentions a 2014 study from the Women’s Media Center 
(WMC) which found that reporters at the paper were 3.5 times more likely to use 
men than women as sources.

In 2015, WMC found for the second year running that the New York Times had the 
largest gender gap in bylines – just 32% of articles were authored by women 
compared to 68% by men. The report did not include the Guardian but a recent
analysis of comments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/12/the-dark-side-of-guardian-comments>
 showed that articles written by men considerably outnumber those written by 
women (although this varies significantly by subject).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tyqe%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tyqe%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b71dbedeacf9db010fc2f8631be2dd6ca8acb3e%2F0_0_2608_1364%2F2608.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20York%20Times%20lawsuit%20a%20symptom%20of%20US%20newsrooms'%20diversity%20problem&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tyqe%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New+York+Times+lawsuit+a+symptom+of+US+newsrooms%27+diversity+problem&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tyqe%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b71dbedeacf9db010fc2f8631be2dd6ca8acb3e%2F0_0_2608_1364%2F2608.jpg>
 Gender split on article bylines Photograph: The Guardian 
Statistics provided by human resources show that six out of 10 Guardian US 
staff are women. Three quarters of employees at Guardian US are white, 11% are 
Asian, 6% are black and 4% are Hispanic. The figures are based on editorial and 
non-editorial staff, but do not include freelancers.
