
Netflix <http://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> and Amazon’s European 
operations will have to guarantee to that at least 20% of video content in 
their catalogue is from Europe, according to a shake-up of broadcasting rules 
unveiled by the European Commission on Wednesday.

European regulators are introducing the new rules to make the new wave of 
digital on-demand and streaming services adhere to the same, or similar, 
commitments that traditional TV broadcasters are forced to follow inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.


Related: BBC gets green light to launch Netflix rival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/16/bbc-netflix-rival-itv-nbc-universal>

“Currently, European TV broadcasters invest around 20% of their revenues in 
original content and on-demand providers less than 1%,” said the European 
Commission. “The Commission wants TV broadcasters to continue to dedicate at 
least half of viewing time to European works and will oblige on-demand 
providers to ensure that at least 20% share of European content in their 
catalogues.”


In addition, platforms such as Netflix and Amazon will have to ensure that 
their services provide “good visibility” and prominence to European content in 
their digital catalogues.


The Commission’s proposal also said member states have the option to make 
on-demand services “contribute financially” to making new European films and TV 
series.


This can be through direct investment in European TV and film productions, 
such as Amazon’s investment in ex-Top Gear host Jeremy Clarkson’s new TV 
series, or as a levy payable into a fund.

Netflix recently premiered its first French language series, the political 
drama Marseilles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jan/02/foreign-tv-drama-bbc-channel4-netflix>
 starring Gérard Depardieu, andBritish period drama The Crown 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/nov/13/netflix-crown-drama-buckingham-palace>
, which will launch later this year.

“Overall, strengthening the promotion of European works for on-demand services 
will lead to a broader and more diverse offer for Europeans,” the Commission 
said. “This will have a positive impact on cultural diversity and bring more 
opportunities for European creators.”


Netflix disagreed with the Commission’s ruling, arguing that a quota system, 
as well as forced investment in European productions, will not necessarily lead 
to quality shows being made.


Related: Mike Leigh's Peterloo massacre drama heading to Amazon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/11/mike-leigh-peterloo-massacre-amazon-the-wall-doug-liman>

Instead, it could lead to operators buying, or investing in, cheap productions 
and “filler” content to hit quotas.


“Our members around the world love European programming, that’s why our 
investment in European programming, including Netflix original titles created 
in Europe, is growing,” said a spokesman for Netflix. “We appreciate the 
Commission’s objective to have European production flourish, however the 
proposed measures won’t actually achieve that.”


Netflix said it has committed “hundreds of millions” of euros to European 
productions so far, as well as having partnerships with broadcasters including 
the BBC,for Watership Down 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/28/bbc-and-netflix-team-up-for-new-watership-down-production>
, and ITV forMarcella, which stars Anna Friel 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/04/netflix-the-bridge-marcella-hans-rosenfeldt-anna-friel-itv>
.


According to a study provided by the European Commission, Netflix and Apple’s 
iTunes already devote 21% of their film catalogue to content from the European 
Union.

The European Commission’s new rules also state that services such as YouTube 
will have to beef up protections for younger users being exposed to harmful 
content such as videos with pornographic or violent content, and “protect all 
citizens from incitement to hatred”.


“Detailed measures include tools for users to report and flag harmful content, 
age verification, or parental control systems,” said the Commission.

The European Commission said it is weeks away from presenting the results of a 
code of conduct on combatting hate speech online that it has been working on 
with major online platforms.

“The way we watch TV or videos may have changed, but our values don’t,” said 
Günther Oettinger, commissioner for the digital economy and society. “With 
these new rules we will uphold media pluralism, the independence of audiovisual 
regulators and will make sure incitement to hatred will have no room on 
video-sharing platforms. We also want to ensure a level-playing field, 
responsible behaviour, trust and fairness in the online platforms environment.”
