
Apparently it's not just stadium seats that are empty at London 2012 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/olympics-2012>. Shop owners and restaurateurs 
have complained that their businesses are suffering 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2012/jul/31/retail-trade-london-slump-olympics>
 as tourists and locals abandon the West End.

Bernard Donoghue, director of the Association of Leading Visitor Attractions 
<http://www.alva.org.uk/>, says visitor numbers at its flagship London venues 
had fallen by 30-35% last week.

But hold on. If London is empty, isn't this the perfect time to get into the 
best restaurants and shows? Martine Ainsworth-Wells fromVisit London 
<http://www.visitlondon.com/> says we should take advantage and "enjoy London's 
world-class restaurants". Perhaps she's right.

Since its opening in January, Dabbous 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2012/may/06/jay-rayner-restaurant-review-dabbous>
 has become the most booked-out restaurant in London. Clearly now is the time 
to sneak in and enjoy the £54-a-head, seven-course tasting menu. Sadly, the 
Olympics doesn't seem to have put gourmets off a trek to Fitzrovia. The 
receptionist says that there is no table until May 2013. A call to the 
three-starred Michelin restaurantGordon Ramsay in Chelsea 
<http://www.gordonramsay.com/royalhospitalroad/> is equally unsuccessful – no 
table until January. Luckily the two Michelin-starred eateriesLe Gavroche 
<http://www.le-gavroche.co.uk/> in Mayfair and The Ledbury 
<http://www.theledbury.com/> in Notting Hill aren't quite as busy. They can 
squeeze me in in October. AtNoma at Claridges 
<http://www.claridges.co.uk/atasteofnoma/>, the pop-up restaurant that chef 
René Redzepi is running during the Olympics, seats sold out months ago, and 
there won't be any cancellations as the £195-a-head tickets are non-refundable 
I'm told, rather firmly.

But just as I am about to give up, Pollen Street Social 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2011/may/14/pollen-street-social-london-review>
, Jason Atherton's venture that opened to great fanfare last year, says it can 
give me something at 7.30pm, whileThe Wolseley <http://www.thewolseley.com/> 
has space at 9pm. Result.

Perhaps I'll take in a West End show beforehand. The hottest ticket in town is 
the musicalMatilda <http://www.matildathemusical.com/>. My hopes are initially 
raised when the sales assistant tells me there are two seats left. But by the 
time I've said I'll take them, they have been sold to someone else. There are 
two tickets left forThe Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time at the 
National <http://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/?lid=69915>, but they're not 
together. "The run is almost entirely sold out," apologises the guy on the 
other end of the phone. "Unfortunately we haven't had many cancellations from 
the Olympics."

Standing-room-only seems to be the most likely option if I want to see Mark 
Rylance inRichard III at the Globe 
<http://www.shakespearesglobe.com/theatre/on-stage/richard-iii-2012> too. But 
Chariots of Fire <http://chariotsoffireonstage.com/>, the ultimate sporting 
choice, has tickets left for the rest of the week. I fear that might be more to 
do with the reviews than the lack of tourists though.

And then at last, unlike much of Team GB, I strike gold. Madame Tussauds 
<http://www.madametussauds.com/London/>, notorious for its year-round, 
hours-long queues, tells me that because the Olympics have "significantly 
impacted normal visitation patterns", it is putting together a two-for-one 
offer until 12 August. With Jessica Ennis as one of the star attractions, it's 
one way to see an Olympian.
