
I’ll never forget the first time I saw a naked woman who wasn’t my mum. I was 
12; she was a grown-up and standing in the showers at our local swimming pool, 
soaping her pubic hair into a lather. I don’t remember anything about her face, 
just her body: sinewy with some wobbly bits, and a big bush down below. At the 
time the sight of women displaying their bodies prompted giggles, embarrassment 
and the odd sneer of derision from me and my school-age friends. For pubescent 
girls, showing any part of your naked body is anathema. It was an unspoken rule 
that you had to undress without anyone catching sight of your body.

Why do we teach young girls to care first about how they look and second about 
their talent?

Female body image, and its associated woes, is one of the biggest contributing 
factors preventing women from being physically active in the first place. A 
recent Sport England report found that 75% of the women they surveyed wanted to 
take part in sport, but were inhibited by fear of being judged on their 
appearance and ability. While the United Nations has suggested thatsport will 
play a leading role 
<http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=50342#.V1VIKzYrKrM> in the 
journey to equal rights for women and girls, cruelly our own messed-up ideas 
about body image are preventing us from doing the one thing that could liberate 
us all.

Unfortunately as a society we are so used to the image-obsessed narrative that 
even sportswomen buy into it. Take 14-year-old baseball sensationMo’ne Davis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/sep/23/mone-davis-baseball-hall-fame-little-league-shutout>
, the first-ever girl to pitch ashutout  
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shutouts_in_baseball>in the Little League World 
Series. In 2014 Mo’ne became an overnight star and knocked Kobe Bryant off the 
front cover ofSports Illustrated. Spike Lee made a moving documentary 
<http://www.popsugar.com/celebrity/Mone-Davis-Throw-Like-Girl-Short-Film-Video-35978809>
 about her. An exchange when the filmmaker asks her how she feels about being 
on the cover – an action shot, ball in hand – leaves a telling reminder of how 
we are teaching our young girls to see themselves.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktpg%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktpg%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F184609e75986dca72c0628ce260b3d21984ea70c%2F0_0_4308_2584%2F4308.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Let's%20get%20physical%3A%20how%20women's%20sport%20can%20conquer%20body%20image&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktpg%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Let%27s+get+physical%3A+how+women%27s+sport+can+conquer+body+image&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktpg%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F184609e75986dca72c0628ce260b3d21984ea70c%2F0_0_4308_2584%2F4308.jpg>
 Strike: in 2014, at the age of 13, Mo’ne Davis was the first girl to pitch a 
shutout in a Little League World Series. Photograph: Gene J Puskar/AP 
“Just to, like, see my face on here is pretty cool, but not the face that I’m 
making…”

Spike interrupts. “You don’t like your face on the cover?” he asks, 
incredulous.

“I mean I look like a blowfish,” says Mo’ne, “but otherwise it’s pretty cool. 
You can see how much power I put into it.”

Mo’ne’s first comment is about how her face doesn’t look good because she is 
puffing out her cheeks with the effort of her throw; her second is about how 
powerful her sporting talent is. Why are we teaching young girls to care first 
about how they look and second about their talent? When Kobe Bryant is on the 
front cover ofSports Illustrated no one’s going: “Eww, you can see Kobe’s 
armpit hair while he’s hitting that slam dunk.”

In a recent poll of Britain’s elite female athletes 
<http://sport.bt.com/women-in-sport/bt-sport-survey-body-image-insecurities-rife-in-womens-sport-S11363867248465>
 by BT Sport, 67% said they feared that the public and the media valued their 
appearance over their sporting achievements. They thought how they looked was 
more important to the public than the medals they won. Meanwhile more than 89% 
said they could relate to British Olympic swimmerRebecca Adlington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rebeccaadlington>’s I’m A Celebrity reality 
TV meltdown over her body-image insecurities, and 76% said the same concerns 
had influenced their diet and training regimes. These are the women who do an 
eye-watering number of abdominal crunches every day and hill runs in the icy, 
wet winds of December. If they feel pressured, what hope is there for the rest 
of us?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktpg%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktpg%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff18e60fbc6e9948fd43d9d9f5418dd88430add84%2F0_5_2825_1694%2F2825.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Let's%20get%20physical%3A%20how%20women's%20sport%20can%20conquer%20body%20image&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktpg%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Let%27s+get+physical%3A+how+women%27s+sport+can+conquer+body+image&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktpg%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff18e60fbc6e9948fd43d9d9f5418dd88430add84%2F0_5_2825_1694%2F2825.jpg>
 Over the top: England’s Louise Hazel competes in the Heptathlon High Jump 
during the Commonwealth Games, 2010. Photograph: Lee Jin-man/AP 
Women <http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> are celebrated when they 
work on their bodies: whether it’s the pre-holiday bikini workout or post-baby 
Bikram yoga sessions. Because exercise = perfection. Doesn’t it? Putting aside 
the fact that this equation is just another version of the worn-out idea that 
women’s bodies have to strive for acceptance, the message that exercise and 
sport creates a particular body shape is propaganda. Small waist, toned arms, 
pert bottom, wobble- free thighs and perky breasts: it is a myth that if only 
we did more exercise we would look this way.

We need to reclaim sport and exercise for women. It needs to become part of 
our world

All bodies are different; all bodies have their own individual way of reacting 
to the work we make them do. As Adlington said when I interviewed her, grabbing 
a roll of flesh: “I don’t have a flat stomach or anything. Mine’s quite podgy. 
I’ve got the bits, the hang, the tyre… It is quite difficult.”

Elite sport, of all sectors, should understand this. But over and again 
sportswomen tell us that they have been subjected to derogatory comments from 
male coaches about their bodies. The latest example is Olympic cyclistJess 
Varnish, who accused British Cycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/26/jess-varnish-complaint-british-cycling-shane-sutton>
’s technical director Shane Sutton of telling her to “move on and get on with 
having a baby”, alongside a litany of insults about her shape and size. Sutton 
has since resigned, albeit protesting his innocence, while double Olympic 
champion Victoria Pendleton has backed Varnish’s claims with her own troubled 
experiences in the sport.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktpg%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktpg%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b801243192aace96bfd4e060a02f7cbb362bc77%2F0_456_1861_1116%2F1861.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Let's%20get%20physical%3A%20how%20women's%20sport%20can%20conquer%20body%20image&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktpg%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Let%27s+get+physical%3A+how+women%27s+sport+can+conquer+body+image&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktpg%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b801243192aace96bfd4e060a02f7cbb362bc77%2F0_456_1861_1116%2F1861.jpg>
 Different strokes: Britain’s Rebecca Adlington reacts as she wins the gold 
medal in the final of the women’s 800m freestyle in Beijing, 2008. Photograph: 
Itsuo Inouye/AP 
The subject of body image in sport first really came to our attention in the 
UK with the bomb-drop thatJessica Ennis-Hill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jessica-ennis>, the face of the London 2012 
Olympic Games, was allegedly called “fat” by a senior figure at British 
Athletics. Promising British triathleteHollie Avil retired from the sport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/17/sportswomen-glamour-deeds-survey>
 just months out from the Olympic Games in 2012, citing an eating disorder, a 
problem she claimed was “rife” in her sport, while heptathleteLouise Hazel 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/09/louise-hazel-four-weeks-get-fit>
 said she had suffered similar criticism to Jess’s from the sport’s governing 
body.

The sportswomen I spoke to in the wake of the Ennis-Hill affair told me that 
women were more likely to experience criticism than their male teammates. Most 
damningly of all, they felt that many male coaches had little or no 
understanding of the diversity of female body types. They were being told that 
to compete in their event they had to look a certain way, meet a certain weight.

In sport, where athletes come in extraordinary shapes and sizes, the mind 
boggles that a coaching set-up could be so conservative and traditionalist. 
Until triple world-record-holder Usain Bolt came along, sports scientists 
didn’t believe tall people could sprint competitively over 100m. The diminutive 
Jessica Ennis-Hill, at 5ft 4in, defies logic in her ability to high-jump the 
British record. So why would we resolutely stick to old-fashioned ideas about 
what a female runner looks like?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktpg%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktpg%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5264d17d3ea6d90fc2386fb9864f9bb9879cb460%2F0_163_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Let's%20get%20physical%3A%20how%20women's%20sport%20can%20conquer%20body%20image&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktpg%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Let%27s+get+physical%3A+how+women%27s+sport+can+conquer+body+image&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktpg%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5264d17d3ea6d90fc2386fb9864f9bb9879cb460%2F0_163_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
 Balancing act: Gabby Douglas performs on the beam. Photograph: Jeff Roberson/AP
While sport can be liberating for women, too often it has been our oppressor, 
from the death penalty imposed in Ancient Greece on any woman caught watching 
the Olympic Games to the ban on women’s Olympic ski jumping because of 
unfounded fears over the damage it could cause to a woman’s reproductive 
organs, revoked in 2014.

One of my favourite stories is of the US marathon runner Roberta Gibb 
<http://nytlive.nytimes.com/womenintheworld/2015/04/20/the-incredible-story-of-bobbi-gibb-the-first-woman-to-run-the-boston-marathon/>
, the first woman to compete in the Boston Marathon, in 1966, when women were 
not allowed. Gibb, an amateur runner who clocked 40 miles in a day, hid in the 
bushes at the start line and then jumped out at the gun to join the men-only 
race. She ran in disguise, a hoodie concealing her face, but supported by the 
male runners around her, she slowly peeled off her layers. Up and down the 
course word spread like wildfire: a woman was running in the pack!

In her book A Run of One’s Own <http://www.runningpast.com/gibb_story.htm>, 
Gibb describes the reaction from the crowd as she passed Boston’s famous 
women’s arts institution, Wellesley College. “They were screaming and crying. 
One woman standing near, with several children, yelled: ‘Ave Maria.’ I felt as 
though I was setting them free.” It would take another six years before women 
were allowed to compete at Boston, in 1972. And it was only in 1984 that the 
Olympic Games finally allowed women to compete in the marathon.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktpg%2Fsfb%23img-6&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktpg%2Fsfb%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcb1685e69ad2123b9f629e4a7a2ba44e7283a81%2F127_197_2301_1380%2F2301.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Let's%20get%20physical%3A%20how%20women's%20sport%20can%20conquer%20body%20image&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktpg%2Fstw%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Let%27s+get+physical%3A+how+women%27s+sport+can+conquer+body+image&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktpg%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcb1685e69ad2123b9f629e4a7a2ba44e7283a81%2F127_197_2301_1380%2F2301.jpg>
 Golden girl: Jessica Ennis-Hill competes in the women’s javelin event during 
the Loughborough International Athletics, May 2016. Photograph: Stephen 
Pond/Getty Images 
Sport – in it’s truest form – is as much about women taking back control of 
their own bodies as any other feminist act. Women are told that being 
physically active is all about hard work, about getting the perfect body. 
Shifting that baby fat. We are not told we might have fun running about, 
chucking a ball, leaping into the air. No wonder we turn young girls off sport. 
And because, from an early age, we routinely categorise girls into “sporty” and 
“non-sporty”, we fail to share with them that the truly wonderful thing about 
sport is that there is no single acceptable body type. Sport showcases the 
amazing diversity of the human body, from pint-sized US gymnastGabby Douglas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/28/olympic-hero-gabby-douglas-out-to-prove-shes-no-one-hit-wonder>
 breaking race barriers to become all-around Olympic champion in 2012 to the 
slip-of-a-frame world and Olympic champion rowerHelen Glover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/nov/15/helen-glover-rowing-olympics-london-2012-games-gold>
 or the power of New Zealand shot-putterValerie Adams 
<http://www.stuff.co.nz/sport/other-sports/79387960/Valerie-Adams-pushing-pain-barrier-in-bid-for-third-Olympic-gold>
.

And when these bodies are in action – powerful, sweaty, determined, strong – 
we see women in a different light, one very rarely depicted in the mainstream 
media. And what is incredible about the experience of viewing these images is 
that they tell a story encapsulating everything I want my daughter to aspire 
to. They show women being inspirational, focused, unstoppable. They show women 
achieving, winning, enjoying themselves, unburdened by social norms and 
unselfconscious.

A recent study published by the British Psychological Society focused on how 
exercise can change the way we view our bodies 
<http://digest.bps.org.uk/2013/02/short-term-exercise-boosts-body-image.html> – 
even before any discernible physical change. Dr Katherine Appleton explored 
participants’ feedback over a two-week period, crucially a short enough period 
that physical benefits would not yet begin to factor. Her conclusion that “a 
focus on body image [and our responses to it]… may be more rewarding for those 
embarking on an exercise programme” is enlightening because it is a rare 
example of the emphasis being placed on how we feel after doing exercise as 
opposed to how we look.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktpg%2Fsfb%23img-7&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktpg%2Fsfb%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa0a2c33fe646b506dc9aba5f54cd859b3483cfa%2F0_117_3893_2337%2F3893.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Let's%20get%20physical%3A%20how%20women's%20sport%20can%20conquer%20body%20image&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktpg%2Fstw%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Let%27s+get+physical%3A+how+women%27s+sport+can+conquer+body+image&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktpg%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa0a2c33fe646b506dc9aba5f54cd859b3483cfa%2F0_117_3893_2337%2F3893.jpg>
 ‘I felt as though I was setting women free’: Roberta Gibb at the 1967 Boston 
Marathon, running unofficially without a bib as women were not allowed to 
compete until 1972. Photograph: Walter Iooss Jr/Sports Illustrated/Getty Images 
Sport is one of our greatest opportunities to escape this constant drip feed 
about what women and girls should look like. Because if we embrace sport and 
exercise for women properly – championing female athlete role models – we won’t 
have this body dysmorphia crisis. There won’t be a “normal” woman’s body, just 
a life-affirming array of every type of female body under the sun – boobs of 
all shapes and sizes, curvy hips, slim hips, broad shoulders, tiny bums, huge 
powerful gluteal asses, wispy legs that travel for miles, hulking great thighs 
that accelerate over 100m, bellies that dance or are neatly stacked in six-pack 
squares.

And once we accept that we needn’t look a certain way, we can start to share 
our euphoria about exercising or playing sport rather than a perfectly poised 
appearance, contrived post-workout pouting, critically staring into our phones. 
Maybe we don’t even need to Instagram every moment of our lives for others to 
judge. Maybe exercise and sport can be something we do for ourselves. For fun! 
For happiness! For clear thinking! Because physical activity should be 
something integral to our being alive. And it is the essential part that really 
concerns us here, not the bit about how many millimetres it might shave off 
your thighs.

We need to reclaim sport and exercise for women. It needs to become part of 
our world, not a borrowed space where we are allowed to intrude. These are the 
real miracles our bodies perform. Not squeezing into that size-10 dress or 
nailing the latest up-do. But finding our muscle, and wielding it. Just a 
little.

Eat Sweat Play: How Sport Can Change Our Lives by Anna Kessel is published by 
Macmillan at £12.99. To buy a copy for £10.39, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/387100/>
