
Imagine finding out that your colleagues earn five times more than you. Not 
only that, but they get all sorts of benefits you’re not eligible for.

They take a month of leave; you get 12 days. Your employer pays for their 
accommodation, health insurance and even their children’s school fees; you 
don’t get any of that.

But you have comparable skills and qualifications. You do the same work. In 
fact, you understand the context of your work better than your higher-paid 
colleagues.

So why are they earning so much more than you? What if you found out it was 
simply because of your nationality?

In the humanitarian aid and development sector, this is the reality. Local 
staff are paid far less and receive fewer benefits than their expatriate 
colleagues, even when they do similar work and have similar qualifications.
 An audio documentary by Anna Strempel on the gap in wages between local and 
expatriate workers in the development and aid sector 
We’ve studied the effects of the wage gap between local and international 
staff working in lower-income countries in an ESRC-funded project calledAddup 
<http://www.massey.ac.nz/massey/learning/departments/school-of-psychology/research/poverty/add-up/add-up_home.cfm>
 (Are Development Discrepancies Undermining Performance?). We call this 
differential treatment the dual salary system.

Expatriates are often quick to dismiss dual salary systems as a non-issue. But 
local workers told us a different story. They said disparities created 
significant feelings of workplace injustice. They felt less valued than their 
expatriate colleagues.

Wage disparities are often a taboo topic, especially when power relations are 
involved. Socially responsive and accountable research such as the Addup 
project can “speak truth to power”. This is especially important because 
differential treatment between international and local aid workers may 
undermine international aid programs.

Related: Secret aid worker: Why do expats earn more than the rest of us? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/mar/29/secret-aid-worker-why-do-expats-earn-more-than-the-rest-of-us>

Ishbel McWha-Hermann, now based at the University of Edinburgh, who is a 
co-author of this article, found that the fall-out from pay disparities can 
damage relationships in the workplace and thereby interfere with aid 
effectiveness. Employees “form work groups and alliancesbased on observed 
differences and similarities 
<http://www.developmentinpractice.org/journals/roles-and-relationships-between-expatriates-volunteers-and-local-development-workers">
”. A likely source of comparison is socioeconomic status linked to salary.

She warns that large pay gaps “may be undermining poverty-reduction initiatives
 <http://www.globalfocus.org.nz/wp-content/uploads/2014/04/Just_Change_18.pdf> 
before they even reach the community”.

The OECD wants wealthy countries to spend 0.7% of their gross national income 
on foreign aid. While the UKmet this target two years ago 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/apr/03/uk-meets-foreign-aid-target>
 and enshrined it in law, Australia’s aid budget has been slashed. The Lowy 
Institute says the former Abbott government’s cuts to foreign aid were the
largest ever <http://www.lowyinstitute.org/issues/australian-foreign-aid> and 
will mean Australia’s aid expenditure falls to just 0.22% of gross national 
income.

With the aid program already under pressure, the negative effects of pay 
disparities may be making it even more difficult for programs to achieve their 
goals.

Causes of the wage gap

The wage and benefits gap cannot be explained by differences in experience or 
skills. Addup compared local and expatriate workers doing similar work with 
equivalent skills and experience. Rather, dual salaries exist because 
expatriates originate from higher-income economies and labour markets.

Appropriately enough perhaps, dual salaries are popularly referred to in some 
Pacific countries as “economic apartheid”. Having this kind of nomenclature in 
the aid sector is ironic considering its poverty-reduction aim.

The dual salary system is a difficult structural inequity that makes it hard 
for many workers in aid and development – both local and international staff 
alike – to work together, support each other and achieve project goals.

How big is the gap?

Our research measured the size of the wage gap and its effects on workers in 
six lower-income countries: India, China,Malawi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malawi>, Uganda, Solomon Islands and Papua 
New Guinea.

We surveyed nearly 1,300 local and expatriate workers from around 200 
organisations. These organisations were drawn from the aid, education, 
government and business sectors of the six countries. Participants worked in a 
range of job roles, from teachers, to engineers, to doctors and managers, with 
expertise in areas such as microfinance, child labour, program administration 
and much more. The organisations draw aid funding from governments and donors 
around the globe.

Across the Addup sample, local staff were paid four times less on average than 
their international counterparts. This was despite having similar education and 
experience. In Papua New Guinea and the Solomon Islands, the average rose to 
nine. In individual cases the difference was far greater. Alarmingly, 80% of 
local workers said that their pay was not sufficient to meet their everyday 
needs.

Disparities are not limited to salaries. They include accommodation 
allowances, vehicles, household staff, school fees, insurance and other 
benefits. These commonly form part of expatriate packages that are not 
available to local staff.

And while Addup is to date perhaps the most detailed study of pay disparities 
in the humanitarian sector, research from the corporate sector has had similar 
findings. Astudy of local and expatriate managers 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/tie.5060380206/abstract> in 
multinational companies in Singapore, for example, found salary disparities 
were causing resentment and dissatisfaction among local managers.

The Singaporean study found that dissatisfaction relating to disparities 
ultimately reduces productivity and encourages high staff turnover.

Local brain drain

Our research also found that dual salary systems were contributing to a brain 
drain because talented local staff often leave their home countries for 
higher-paying jobs overseas.

This may make it hard for the humanitarian sector to achieve its goals of 
building capacity in aid recipient countries and increasing local ownership of 
development initiatives.

So what is the solution? Many NGOs are aware of the issue and concerned about 
it. Together with NGO umbrella organisationCHS Alliance 
<http://chsalliance.org/> (formed by the merger of Hap International and People 
in Aid) andBirches Grou <http://www.birchesgroup.com/>p 
<http://www.birchesgroup.com/>, we are working to develop evidence-informed 
good practice in the domain of sustainable livelihood and living wages for aid 
and humanitarian workers.

This partnership named ProjectFair <http://project-fair.org/> hopes to 
identify wage policy options that align with local workforce aspirations and 
can ensure sustainable human services in the aid and development sector.

The new round of global development goals – the sustainable development goals 
(SDGs) <https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/?menu=1300> – has highlighted the 
importance of decent work, reducing inequality and enabling sustainable 
livelihoods for the eradication of poverty everywhere.

If the SDGs are to avoid the criticisms of their predecessors, the millennium 
development goals <http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/>, we will need to 
vertically integrate global goals with local, everyday workplace practices. 
This project, focused as it is on everyday workplaces and organisational 
policies, is an example of that kind of process, in an area we can all make a 
difference.

Stuart C Carr <http://theconversation.com/profiles/stuart-c-carr-190155> ia a 
lecturer in the industrial and organisational psychology programme atMassey 
University <http://theconversation.com/institutions/massey-university> in New 
Zealand.Ishbel McWha-Hermann 
<http://theconversation.com/profiles/ishbel-mcwha-hermann-191689> is an early 
career fellow in international human resource management at theUniversity of 
Edinburgh <http://theconversation.com/institutions/university-of-edinburgh>

This article was originally published on the Conversation 
<http://theconversation.com/>. Read the original article 
<https://theconversation.com/mind-the-gap-in-local-and-international-aid-workers-salaries-47273>
 here.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
