
More than nine out of 10 refugee and migrant children arriving in Europe 
through Italy this year are travelling alone, the UN children’s agency, Unicef, 
said on Tuesday, warning of the“appalling” risks children face while escaping 
conflict and poverty 
<https://medium.com/photography-and-social-change/danger-every-step-of-the-way-ad0137713195#.63p62t2d3>
.

Related: Safe memories hard to find for children traumatised by escape to 
Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/13/safe-memories-children-traumatised-by-escape-to-europe-ritsona-camp-greece>

In the first five months of this year, more than 7,000 unaccompanied children 
made the crossing from north Africa to Italy, following a route that in recent 
weeks has become the busiest and the deadliest for migrants toEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, Unicef said.

The children rely on human traffickers, often under a “pay as you go system”, 
making them prone to exploitation and abuse including rape, forced labour, 
beatings and death, Unicef said.

It said Italian social workers told the agency some boys and girls were 
sexually assaulted and forced into prostitution in Libya, while some girls 
arriving inItaly <https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> were pregnant as a 
result of rape.

“If you try to run they shoot you and you die. If you stop working, they beat 
you. It was just like the slave trade,” 16-year old Aimamo told Unicef. “Once I 
was just resting for five minutes, and a man beat me with a cane. After 
working, they lock you inside,” he said, describing conditions on the farm in 
Libya where he worked for two months with his brother to pay the smugglers.

The number of unaccompanied children travelling from north Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> to Italy so far this year is more 
than double that of a year earlier, Unicef said, adding that it could not say 
why the numbers had spiked.

Christopher Tidey, a Unicef spokesman, said girls from Nigeria told him they 
fled to Europe to escape early marriage, while a boy from Somalia said his 
family sent him away after al-Shabaab threatened to recruit him.

Related: Experts sound alarm over mental health toll borne by migrants and 
refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/08/experts-sound-alarm-mental-health-toll-migrants-refugees-depression-anxiety-psychosis>

“Extreme poverty is a major motivator as well,” Tidey said. “I met boys from 
countries like Gambia who made the trip basically because their families were 
so poor that the older ones were being sent to Europe effectively to try and 
earn money to send back home.”

As calmer summer weather begins, European officials who struck a deal with 
Turkey to block crossings to Greece have been scrambling for ways to shut down 
flows on the other major sea route into the EU from Libya.


Between 1 January and 5 June, more than 2,800 deaths were recorded in the 
Mediterranean, the vast majority on the dangerous central route from north 
Africa, compared with 3,770 in 2015, said Unicef.

It said 235,000 migrants were in Libya, tens of thousands of them lone 
children.
