
After failing to convince councils to obey a code that was supposed to prevent 
them publishing newspapers in competition with the commercial press, the 
government is going to enforce obedience.

The local audit and accountability bill - as announced in the Queen's speech - 
is aimed at killing off the "town hall Pravdas", the phrase beloved by the 
bumbling communities ministerEric Pickles 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eric-pickles>.

Councils may well see this as something of a sledgehammer to crack a nut 
<http://www.local.gov.uk/c/document_library/get_file?uuid=1c60c7d3-70eb-4629-88d1-1e355c65689c&groupId=10171>
, but the disobedient nuts - such as the London borough of Tower Hamlets paper, 
East End Life - made it inevitable.

They simply ignored the code and went on producing a free weekly paper that, 
over the years, has had a hugely negative impact on the paid-for title, the 
East London Advertiser (published by Archant).

Evidently, the bill will "strengthen the legal status" of code of practice on 
local authority publicity 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/recommended-code-of-practice-for-local-authority-publicity>
 that was introduced in March 2011.

Soon afterwards, several councils stopped publishing papers that were regarded 
by commercial publishers as unfair competition and by editors as little more 
than propaganda sheets.

Some simply ignored the code. For example, another London borough, Greenwich, 
went on publishing its free weekly, Greenwich Time. Like other such papers, its 
editorial content was blatantly unfair by excluding all opposition voices.

Greenwich's case, however, reveals the complexity of the problem. Its area is 
very poorly served by the commercial press. Both the News Shopper (published by 
Newsquest) and the Mercury (published by the Tindle group and formerly known as 
the Greenwich Mercury) are do not cover Greenwich in depth (see here 
<http://853blog.com/2012/02/20/watching-greenwich-council-if-you-dont-do-it-nobody-else-will/>
).

Perhaps the closure of Time will make a difference, but I wouldn't count on 
it. The retreat of local weeklies, accompanied by editorial staff cuts, is part 
of this unfortunate story.

Sources: Newspaper Society 
<http://www.newspapersoc.org.uk/09/may/13/queens-speech-bill-to-enforce-publicity-code-against-council-newspapers>
/Local Government Association 
<http://www.local.gov.uk/c/document_library/get_file?uuid=1c60c7d3-70eb-4629-88d1-1e355c65689c&groupId=10171>
