
The actions of President Joseph Kabila of the Democratic Republic of the Congo 
(DRC) make clear his intention to stay in power beyond his second term. But 
with thepeople set against it 
<http://www.crisisgroup.org/fr/publication-type/statements/drc-protests.aspx>, 
and a strong and unambiguous two-term limit in the constitution, his ambitions 
are leading his country to a dangerous impasse.


Since 2010, Kabila has deployed various tactics to delay the elections, hoping 
that this will allow him to stay on in a transitional arrangement. He has 
already achieved one of his goals: the timetable for presidential elections 
this year is no longer feasible.


This is a hazardous strategy. Riots in January 2015 killed dozens of people 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/26/democratic-republic-congo-protests-joseph-kabila>
. Since then, the government haslocked up leaders of civil society movements 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2016/02/drc-sentencing-of-youth-activists-part-of-growing-crackdown-on-independent-voices/>
 fighting to protect the country’s hard-won constitution. Given the scale of 
the organisational task and the lack of progress, the country will not be able 
to hold elections until well into next year.

Presidents clinging to power can destabilise countries. In neighbouring 
Burundi, breaking a post-civil war promise not to extend a presidential mandate
has quickly undermined the trust, social cohesion and political accord needed 
to avoid conflict 
<http://www.crisisgroup.org/en/regions/africa/central-africa/burundi/b111-burundi-peace-sacrificed.aspx>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkaz%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkaz%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5e88916254f9664952db6428713dc0b6cb0c29e%2F0_278_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Joseph%20Kabila's%20presidential%20ambitions%20could%20push%20Congo%20to%20the%20brink%20%7C%20Richard%20Moncrieff&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkaz%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Joseph+Kabila%27s+presidential+ambitions+could+push+Congo+to+the+brink+%7C+Richard+Moncrieff&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkaz%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5e88916254f9664952db6428713dc0b6cb0c29e%2F0_278_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Joseph Kabila, seen here signing the Paris agreement on climate change, is 
suspected of wanting to change the constitution to allow him to remain in 
power. Photograph: Carlo Allegri/Reuters 
Congo-Brazzaville is plagued by unrest after President Sassou Nguesso changed 
the constitution 
<http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21676946-denis-sassou-nguesso-wants-third-term-he-will-get-it-another-african-president>
 and then went on towin a controversial election 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-35890047> in March. Where governments 
remain highly centralised and institutions weak, the guarantee that power will 
change hands is vital to ensure that grievances are expressed peacefully.


DRC suffers from overly centralised government and a patronage system in the 
hands of the incumbent.The deal that ended the civil war in 2002 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2002/dec/17/congo> shared the spoils of 
peace among former warring parties and other political hopefuls in the form of 
a government of national union, and then through a broad-based governing 
majority.

Related: Democrats v autocrats in Africa: is there a winning formula? – podcast
 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/audio/2016/feb/25/democrats-autocrats-africa-winning-formula-uganda-podcast>

The limit on presidential terms gave a guarantee that power would eventually 
be rotated, even if, at the time, short-term gains were at the forefront of 
most minds. Unless Kabila moves on, prominent and popular politicians, many his 
former allies, could be out in the cold for good. Facing a stubborn regime with 
less and less legitimacy, some may decide that violence is the only way to 
force change.


Activists see term limits as a weathervane of democratic progress. Term limits 
are now in place across southern Africa, although in countries dominated by 
strong liberation parties, the presidency has passed to someone from within the 
ruling party: Tanzania, Namibia and Mozambique. In Nigeria, Zambia and Senegal, 
presidential ambitions to stay on have been thwarted by rival elites or strong 
institutions, such as parliament and civil society. The president of Niger’s 
bid to cling to power wasthwarted by his own army 
<http://www.polity.org.za/article/pre-election-report-niger-2009-10-16>. 

Central Africa has a particularly bad record. Weak institutions and 
centralised power have handed incumbents a huge advantage, not only in winning 
elections, but also in changing constitutions. International partners, 
including some aid donors, have not voiced concern often enough, worried that 
too much democracy could upset fragile stability. Since the democratic advances 
of the early 1990s, Central African Republic is the only state to have had a 
properdemocratic handover of power 
<http://www.crisisgroup.org/fr/regions/afrique/afrique-centrale/republique-centrafricaine/136-central-african-republic-anatomy-of-a-phantom-state.aspx>
, in 1993. That’s a very troubling record.


In DRC, the peace agreements of 2002 that introduced the presidential term 
limit brought welcome stability. But the deal kicked justice issues into the 
long grass and did not address centralised and corrupt governance. Kabila, like 
his counterpart in Burundi, is almost certainly worried that justice for 
violence committed in the civil war may catch up with him if he leaves office.


Trust, stability and the cohesion of the political system therefore lie at the 
heart of the “third term” question. African leaders considering these issues, 
in the African Union (AU) and elsewhere, face complex dilemmas. Some don’t 
believe in the principle of regularly handing over power. Others don’t want to 
interfere in the internal affairs of a neighbour, unless the instability 
threatens their borders.

Related: Why should Africa listen to the hypocritical criticism of its 
three-term leaders? | Eric Joyce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/29/africa-hypocritical-criticism-three-term-leaders-presidents-constitution-african-countries>

Western powers promoting term limits therefore have no common African position 
to rally behind. They have also been frustratingly inconsistent, playing down
Rwandan president Paul Kagame’s machinations to serve another term 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/commentisfree/2016/jan/03/paul-kagame-and-others-damage-africa-lust-to-rule-for-ever>
, while condemning the decision of theBurundian president, Pierre Nkurunziza, 
to run for re-election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/28/barack-obama-africas-presidents-for-life-are-a-risk-to-its-democratic-progress>
.

Pressure needs to be put on those unwilling to leave, but there comes a point 
when leaders are so entrenched that there seems little point in challenging 
their right to hold office. Calling it early is therefore vital. That is what 
the international community failed to do when Kabila removed the second round 
of the presidential elections in 2011 andwent on to win a fraudulent election 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-16114824> in November of that year.

A political system is based on trust that everyone will abide by the rules to 
at least a minimum extent; without that, stability will be short-lived. The 
international community should speak out at the right moment against leaders 
overturning constitutional provisions to suit their own agenda. This is 
especially true when previous conflict means trust is in short supply or faith 
in elections as a means of transferring power has been undermined.

Failure to speak out sends a message to opposition leaders that the only way 
to power is through violence – a conclusion that would spell disaster for DRC 
and other countries in the region.

 * Richard Moncrieff is central Africa project director at International 
Crisis Group <http://www.crisisgroup.org/en/regions/africa/central-africa.aspx>
