
Once in a while the embattled Corbynite world view squares with what’s 
actually happening. Today is such a day – as the House of Lords debates its 
second reading ofDavid Cameron’s trade union bill 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/news/2016/lords-trade-union-bill/>, as 
vindictive and partisan a measure as any the unfettered Tory government is 
likely to produce this side of 2020.

I’ve written about this before 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/aug/24/tube-strike-inconvenient-unions-defend>
. And Monday’s Guardian carriesa critique of the bill written by Bob Kerslake 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/jan/11/trade-union-bill-silence-civil-service-bob-kerslake>
. Who’s he? Head of the home civil service under David Cameron until 2014.

Related: I've had bruising encounters with trade unionists, but condemn 
efforts to silence them 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/jan/11/trade-union-bill-silence-civil-service-bob-kerslake>

Lord Kerslake sports a beard and is probably a suspect lefty in Tory eyes – 
their press pack certainly worked him over. But that does not invalidate his 
experienced testimony on the importance of trade unions, both to the country – 
as an important intermediate institution between individuals and the state – 
and, especially, to theLabour <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> 
party whose chief donors are unions.

All this would be bad enough were it not for the fact that the real scandal in 
the funding of British political parties is not the union cash for Labour – 
it’s all out in the open and they are idealistic enough to spend it on Jeremy 
Corbyn’s project – but the very untransparent way the Tories hoover up cash 
from some pretty debatable characters. That’s my focus today.

First that bill. Patrick Wintour warns in the Guardian 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/10/labour-expecting-6m-loss-in-funding-through-trade-union-bill>
 that the proposed changes to union funding (whereby members must “opt in” to 
paying the political levy rather than opt out) may cost Labour £6m a year.
Wintour and Nicholas Watt provide some background here 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/11/tories-undermining-labours-funding-with-partisan-trade-union-bill>
.Owen Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/02/british-democracy-disenfranchised-voters-boundary-changes>
 weighs in with customary energy on the wider context – boundary redistribution 
and electoral registration – to detect a systemic plot. Read about the 
disappearing votershere <http://www.hopenothate.org.uk/vrdrive/>.

I don’t regard a Conservative government as an organised conspiracy against 
the poor, let alone the majority. That’s too glib; it’s also patronising.

But governments do foolish things (Dave’s does plenty), mostly out of 
ignorance or naive overconfidence. Sometimes they do destructive things, 
wrecking delicate structures and balances, a milder form of the temple-wrecking 
Islamic State’s teenage hotheads do after school. The trade union bill is one 
of those foolish things.

As Kerslake points out, the opt-in change for the political fund is only one 
of four harsh measures, certainly not justified by the current level of strike 
militancy – junior doctors and transport workers – which is a pinprick compared 
to the 60s and 70s. Tory donors do far more harm to society in 2016.

Another is the proposed threshold for turnout and support for strike action, 
far higher than elections for councils, police commissioners or governments 
(SNP included) get. Worse, the use of electronic voting will be expressly 
banned. A third is the power that a minister would acquire to curb union 
officials’ activity in working hours, the fourth a national certification 
officer who can penalise unions. Both centralising impulses support Kerslake’s 
worry about an “authoritarian” strain in Cameron’s make-up. It is his Flashman 
side that wise advisers (not Sir Lynton “Dog Whistle” Crosby obviously, he’s 
merely crafty) should curb, not encourage.

What about the Tories’ money operation? It’s a permanent and sleazy scandal 
which robust papers like the Daily Mail (the Torygraph is more compromised) 
routinely expose alongside liberal papers like the Guardian, Observer and Indy. 
The FT and Channel 4 News get stuck in, too.

Here’s a starting point on party funding 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/partyfunding> from the Guardian, another 
fromthe Indy 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/generalelection/general-election-2015-explained-who-finances-the-parties-who-gets-the-most-and-how-much-does-the-10186008.html>
 and some Channel 4fact-checking 
<http://blogs.channel4.com/factcheck/labour-funding-party-donors-tories-factcheck/13899>
.

The Guardian has also written about other cuts to funding  
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/26/electoral-reform-society-state-funding-opposition-parties>
for opposition parties, which mean a £1m reduction for Labour, a £200,000 cut 
for the SNP and £100,000 less for the Lib Dems. The “Short money 
<http://researchbriefings.parliament.uk/ResearchBriefing/Summary/SN01663>” is 
there to fund opposition parties and is vital to the accountable functioning of 
politics. It’s named after Ted Short, a long dead Labour deputy leader, not 
because they’re meant to be short of cash.

Let’s look at all that money the Tories get from the City and the hedge fund 
operators in Mayfair and elsewhere? Here’s someLSE research 
<http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/politicsandpolicy/just-50-%E2%80%98donor-groups%E2%80%99-have-supplied-over-half-of-the-conservative-party%E2%80%99s-declared-donation-income-in-the-last-decade-a-fact-disguised-by-legal-%E2%80%98fame-avoidance/>
 and here’sconfirmation 
<https://www.rt.com/uk/229631-conservative-party-funding-hedge/>. Still not 
persuaded? Trythis 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/11306cd0-ac94-11e4-beeb-00144feab7de.html#axzz3wvLKvNCr>
 from the bankers’ pink paper. If you can’t get behind the FT paywall, the 
piece is dated 4 February 2015 and called Number of big City backers for Tories 
doubles. You get my drift.

No party has a monopoly on virtue. Labour sometimes gets questionable donors 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-499108/Exclusive-Labour-launch-inquiry-SECOND-donor-scandal.html>
, too, theLib Dems took a fat wodge from a fraudster 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/jun/25/lib-dem-donor-jailed-fleeing> who 
gave them £2.4m before being jailed (the party didn’t give the money back, 
either). By the same token all parties, Tories included, have donors who give 
for noble and disinterested reasons. I sometimes meet them.Assorted Sainsburys 
<http://www.sfct.org.uk> throw their cash at politics and other good causes: 
they don’t need any favours from government.

But donations buy access, via dinners or “research” sessions, and donations 
can be parcelled up between family and friends (if you have that kind of cash) 
in small packages – below £5,000 – to slip under the radar of the Electoral 
Commission’s monitoring. Just read thisDaily Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2946556/Raising-cash-eyebrows-Glittering-1-500-head-Tory-fundraiser-attracts-guests-PM-sex-shop-queen.html 
. Or this 
http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2949175/Cameron-neck-HSBC-tax-row-revelations-string-Tory-donors-held-Swiss-bank-accounts.html>
 account. Or this one from theMirror 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/tax-avoidance-schemes-used-rich-5166327>. 
Head not spinning yet? How aboutthis 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/feb/15/tory-conservative-party-donor-funding>
 then?

Related: Ed Miliband hits back at ‘tax-avoiding’ Boots boss 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/feb/02/ed-miliband-tax-avoiding-boots-boss-stefano-pessina>

Yes, I realise they all do it, but it is the scale of the Tory operation 
coupled with its parallel assault on Labour’s “white wine and sandwiches” 
operation that makes it so scandalous. Throw in the “lobbying act”, which hits 
charities lobbying harder than it does the sleaze balls, and it makes it even 
worse.

A lot of donors are engaged in economic activities that do us harm, either by 
crashing their banks into debts from which the taxpayer has to rescue them or 
by working for institutions that have diddled their customers through assorted 
frauds – interest rates or mis-selling – for which their institutions have been 
heavily fined but no one jailed.

Others engage in financial engineering of real assets, which (sometimes) hurts 
the poor and vulnerable. Do you remember Stefano Pessina? He was that Boots 
executive (you remember sold-off Swiss-relocated Boots?) who attackedEd Miliband
 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/feb/02/ed-miliband-tax-avoiding-boots-boss-stefano-pessina>
. I’m sure he had a point, but do we need to hear from an Italian who lives 
(for the sunshine, I’m sure) in Monaco?

Time to stop. But two further points. Reform of party funding, long sought by 
all sides, is stalled because Labour won’t concede on union cash (Miliband’s 
“reforms” on trade union membership 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/jan/31/ed-miliband-labour-trade-union-reforms>
 of Labour made it more fragile still) when the odds are so heavily stacked 
against it on City money.

You can find the background in an official Commons library research paper 
<http://researchbriefings.parliament.uk/ResearchBriefing/Summary/SN07152> – 
always good stuff.Democratic Audit <http://www.democraticaudit.com/?p=16419> 
offers a wider view, one in which the trend across Europe is towards more state 
funding, in Britain and (far worse) the US to private, often oligarch, 
financing of elections.

Last but not least, it is poignant to note that from 1832 onwards British 
elections got cleaner and the franchise steadily expanded until 1970 (votes at 
18). In the 21st century, it’s starting to shrink as voter lists get smaller 
and fewer bother to vote. Corruption will get bolder, too, unless we make more 
fuss.

Over to you again, unelected peers!
