
Your editorial (Should we be hitching our star so closely to Beijing’s wagon? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/19/the-guardian-view-on-the-chinese-presidents-visit-a-big-gamble>
, 20 October) and Martin Jacques’s article (China is rising as the US falls. 
Britain can’t ignore this reality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/19/china-us-osborne-xi-jinping-visit-economic>
, 20 October) on turning to China to fund the infrastructure we badly need miss 
out a range of other options for Britain’s future. First, much of the 
infrastructure we need is local, for example upgrading local rail and road 
systems, or saving energy through local networks. Here the solutions include 
enabling local government or development corporations to promote sustainable 
growth and regeneration projects, borrowing against the consequent uplift in 
land values. There is more than enough finance looking for a relatively secure 
return before we need to increase our dependence on China.

Second, the pent-up demand for housing would provide the economic boost the UK 
badly needs to rebuild its worn-out economy, and create the greener new 
industries to replace the old declining ones. We should strengthen 
relationships with European cities that offer better models for sustainable 
growth and human wellbeing. Finally, if we want to act on the world stage, why 
not rebuild trade with India, where growth is much higher and the second 
language is English? We sell them less than Belgium does, and yet they have the 
trained engineers and IT specialists that the UK lacks.
Dr Nicholas Falk
Director, URBED (Urbanism Environment and Design) <http://urbed.coop/>

• The chancellor has announced that in June-August unemployment fell by 79,000 
(Osborne hails rising pay and lowest unemployment level in seven years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/14/unemployment-wage-rises-figures-ons-george-osborne>
, 15 October). Readers will know the various reasons these figures only ever 
give part of the story: zero-hours contracts, underemployment, the growth in 
self-employment, DWP compulsory “work-related training” and unpaid “work 
experience”. All take claimants off the register while high levels of activity 
in seeking work are required.

Yet apprentices are rarely mentioned in this context, and seem to be 
universally regarded as a good thing. I imagine, though, that few readers 
realise how badly paid an apprentice usually is. There have been about 500,000 
new apprenticeship starts a year since 2010. In 2013-14, 27% of apprentices 
were under 19, 36% were 19-24 and 37% were over 25.

From 1 October the minimum wage for apprentices under 19 and all in their 
first year of apprenticeship rose to £3.30 an hour; only those over 19and in a 
second or subsequent year – very much in the minority – are eligible for the 
minimum wage for their age band. Who thinks £3.30 an hour is a fair return for 
what, anecdotally, is often simply a rebadged low-paid job? No wonder 
government and some employers are so enthusiastic about what can often, it 
seems, be simply a cheap source of labour, but one keeping unemployment figures 
down.
Delia Koczwara
Prestwich

• How ironic that on the day the Chinese president arrives for a state visit, 
we hear how the Chinese steel industry is swamping the market so much that the 
British steel industry is now looking into the abyss (Cameron urged to show 
some steel with Xi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/oct/19/uk-steel-david-cameron-xi-jinping-dumping>
, 20 October). The visiting dignitaries are being lavished with carriage 
processions, guards of honour, a flag-lined Mall, banquets and general opulence 
– but what about the steelworkers who are losing their jobs? No such treatment 
for them; only an uncertain future with few prospects of re-employment, and 
uncaring treatment from the DWP, which is proactively cutting benefits.

Rather than cosying up to the Chinese government, Cameron and Osborne should 
be spending their time working out what they will do to save this important 
industry; out and about meeting the people and communities that really matter 
and ensuring that we have a welfare system that is fair and supportive.
Anthony Fitzpatrick 
Sheffield

• Chris Hodgkins (Letters 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/18/steel-closures-and-reforging-our-economy>
, 19 October) sets out a plan of action for the future. But this needs to be 
reinforced with some immediate action if the production plants are to be 
prevented from cooling and becoming useless. Could a solution be to continue to 
produce a minimum amount of steel, to keep the workforce in place and the 
plants hot, and create the equivalent of an old-fashioned butter mountain? This 
steel would then be ready for Chris’s “reindustrialisation”. Moreover, as the 
steel would not be sold immediately, it should avoid contravening EU trade 
rules.
Richard Bull
Woodbridge, Suffolk

• Why does Britain need Chinese money to build a new atomic generator (Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/19/chinese-reactor-plan-fuels-british-security-fears>
, 20 October)? The answer is simple: British money that should be invested in 
British industry is lodged with hedge funds – organisations that are no more 
than parasites that add nothing to the wellbeing of the country. Their sole 
purpose is to make money for the already rich by speculation and market 
manipulation, forcing up the price of commodities for the end users.
AB Crews
Beckenham, Kent

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
