
Why don’t children bounce back from divorce? They’re resilient little things, 
yet the research shows <http://slatestarcodex.com/Stuff/divorce_paper.pdf> a 
relentless association between parental break-ups and poor academic 
achievement, stress, ill health and depression in children. Sowith warnings 
last week that couples who stay together for the “sake of the children” 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article-3402583/Couples-stay-sake-children-not-doing-best-thing-youngsters-mental-health.html>
 aren’t necessarily doing the best thing, what’s the least-worst thing parents 
can do?

The solution

The answer to this, as for so many things, may come from Sweden. In the 1980s, 
1% of Swedish parents who divorced had shared residency 
<http://www.familiesandsocieties.eu/wp-content/uploads/2015/04/WP24Turunen.pdf>
– children stayed with each parent half the time (or at least 35% of the time). 
Now the number of shared residencies is close to 50%. In the UK, it is between 
9% and 12%.

Related: Where did happily ever after go – and can you get it back? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/02/where-did-happily-ever-after-go-and-can-you-get-it-back>

Intuitively, this seems like a terrible idea. How can parents who are 
splitting up share their children’s everyday lives? Isn’t it confusing for 
children to repeatedly move between houses? Won’t they be exposed to constant 
rows? There are, handily, more than 40 studies that compare children in shared 
residence arrangements with those living primarily with one parent. The latest,
from Emma Fransson’s team at the esteemed Stockholm University and Karolinska 
Institute <http://sjp.sagepub.com/content/early/2015/11/27/1403494815614463>, 
looked specifically at the psychological wellbeing of 4,684 children. It asked 
if they felt sad, angry, had poor concentration or were tense and nervous.
Unlike other studies, the researchers found the same level of psychological 
complaints <http://jech.bmj.com/content/early/2015/04/09/jech-2014-205058.full> 
in children in shared residency as in those in nuclear families. Children 
living with one parent had higher levels of psychological complaints. The study 
took into account the financial status of the parents, but this did not 
significantly affect the results. The weight of evidence from the other studies,
according to a summary in the Journal of Divorce and Remarriage, 
<http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/10502556.2014.965578> is that 
children do better if parenting is shared, even allowing for the fact that 
couples who share parenting tend to have higher incomes and less conflict.

Shared residency doesn’t work so well if there is conflict (if there is 
violence, then sharing is not an option), if the children are adolescents (less 
keen on two homes), or if the children don’t like one parent. It is easy to 
selectively pick the research to suit your argument –studies are mostly not 
high quality and mix divorced couples and those who have split up after 
cohabiting, <http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/10502556.2014.965578> 
which may be different. Also, children whose parents have more money, a better 
education and stay on friendly terms will often do better, whatever the 
parenting plan. But the research is clear that children benefit from two 
parents being interested in them, and sharing residency encourages this.
