
On Christmas Eve last year, my dad died. He had Lewy body dementia and a 
urinary tract infection. Days earlier, he had been awardedNHS fast track funding
 
<http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/social-care-and-support-guide/pages/nhs-continuing-care.aspx>
 to pay for his care. On the same day, my mum and I finally got a call from the 
local council to say respite care had been sorted out – care we applied for in 
April.

The NHS and local authority’s timing seemed surreal, given our two years of 
stress and worry providing care at home.

Related: I quit a fantastic job as Mum has Alzheimer's. It was an easy decision
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog/2015/jun/10/quit-jo-mum-alzheimers-care-home>

Much of the support Dad received was superb. Without our local GPs and the 
district nursing team, his pain and anxiety would have become intolerable in 
the weeks approaching his death. Without them he would have died in hospital, 
not at home – even though it was not quite in his own bed as that had been 
replaced by a medical model.

But given declining resources and increasing demand one needs to ask: what is 
the simplest way for information on financial support to be communicated by 
health and social care professionals to the relatives of those with long term 
care needs?

It strikes me that there is a way to easily pass on information about 
allowances, reductions and funding. Last year the Guardian carried a story on
John’s Campaign <https://www.theguardian.com/society/series/johns-campaign>, a 
fight to give carers the right to stay in hospital with their loved ones with 
dementia. As a result, many hospitals now offer a carer’s passport to relatives 
of dementia patients. Perhaps as part of this, local authorities and the NHS 
could add a document highlighting the various reductions in council tax 
available, as and when the patient comes home. Some people with dementia or a 
mental impairment are exempt from the tax 
<https://www.alzheimers.org.uk/site/scripts/documents_info.php?documentID=137>, 
and there are possible banding reductions for use of equipment or a wheelchair.

Clear information on respite care, attendance and carer’s allowance 
<https://www.gov.uk/carers-allowance/overview>, and possible grants for home 
modification, would also go some way to making sure carers know what they are 
entitled to. My mum wasn’t made aware of any of this when my dad was discharged 
from numerous hospital admissions. She found out some information from friends, 
and stumbled on other help by chance. It shouldn’t be that way.

Such documentation could also highlight the patient’s right to be assessed for 
NHS continuing healthcare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/nov/09/continuing-healthcare-nhs-qualify-conditions>
, a right that the Alzheimer’s Society campaigns for, even if the chances of it 
being awarded are painfully slim and riddled with complexity.

Related: What is it like to be an unpaid carer? Your stories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2014/jun/13/what-is-it-like-to-be-an-unpaid-carer-your-stories>

Of course, such documentation shouldn’t only be delivered in a hospital 
setting: information packs could also be provided to relatives at memory clinic 
assessments, where dementia is most likely to be initially confirmed, thus 
triggering certain allowances.

Documentation should be plain, simple and printed. There is too much reliance 
on older people using the internet (one might question how many older people 
feedback to the NHS Choices hospital review portal, for instance).

Many “hardworking families” (to use political parlance) fear losing their 
savings and home in financing care. It seems appropriate that as much as 
possible is done to inform and simplify information for them so that their 
taxes will, if only in a small way, help towards the cost of providing care at 
home.

The Social Life Blog 
<http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog> is written by 
people who work in or use social care services. If you’d like to write an 
article for the series, emailsocialcare@theguardian.com 
<mailto:socialcare@theguardian.com> with your ideas.

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
