
One of the distinctive features of campaigning investigative journalism is the 
way in which its practitioners stick with it.

Some of the very best instances - Watergate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/watergate>, thalidomide, phone hacking, 
the Rotherham child sex scandal - involved years of commitment by reporters.

Here’s another example: the lengthy campaign by Irish freelance journalist 
Gemma O’Doherty to expose the truth behind the disappearance in 1977 of a 
six-year-old girl.

Mary Boyle vanished while visiting her grandparents in Ballyshannon, County 
Donegal and is presumed dead. O’Doherty is convinced that the girl was killed 
by someone known to her and that a politically-inspired police cover-up ensued.


Mary Boyle is Ireland’s Madeleine McCann 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/madeleinemccann>. Her case is the country’s 
longest-running missing child investigation. Not that there has been much 
investigation.

There has been no inquest, no commission of inquiry and no debate in the Irish 
parliament despite mounting evidence, supported by the testimony of two former 
police officers, of a cover-up.

It was some 18 months ago that O’Doherty, who is noted for her investigations 
into police corruption, was first contacted on behalf of Mary Boyle’s surviving 
twin sister, Ann Doherty.

She has since worked tirelessly to highlight the case. It has received some 
isolated coverage down the years - herein the Donegal Democrat 
<http://www.donegaldemocrat.ie/news/donegal-news/40074/Mary-Boyle-Mystery---Retired.html>
 and here on the news websitethejournal.ie 
<http://www.thejournal.ie/fresh-appeal-mary-boyle-disappearance-2364294-Oct2015/>
 - and O’Doherty has also written articles for another website, broadsheet.ie 
<http://www.broadsheet.ie/>.

But Ireland’s mainstream media have steadfastly refused to take up the cause. 
That failure prompted O’Doherty to make a documentary about the case, Mary 
Boyle: The untold story, which contains interviews with two retired gardaí, a 
sergeant and a detective inspector.

A trailer on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LtN19gKGY1Y> was posted 
five days ago and has already attracted more than 10,000 viewers.

O’Doherty also helped to engineer a meeting on Tuesday this week between Ann 
Doherty and Micheál Martin, the leader of one of Ireland’s main political 
parties, Fianna Fáil,which was reported by the Irish Times 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/news/crime-and-law/miche%C3%A1l-martin-meets-sister-of-missing-mary-boyle-6-1.2625257>
.

They presented evidence to Martin about a politician having sought to 
intervene in the case. He told her that the appropriate place for such 
allegations was the gardaí.

But, she replied, “we have no faith in the Garda. You wonder what you have to 
do to get justice in this country.”

A similar plea was made in the European parliament 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=youtu.be&v=I7gL6ZWs09A&app=desktop> this 
week by a Sinn Féin MEP, Lynn Boylan, who said: “Mary Boyle has been failed by 
the Irish state.”

The Boyle case has also been taken up by a lawyer, Daragh Mackin of Kevin 
Winters in Belfast, who has called for the convening of an inquest “touching 
upon the death of... Mary Boyle.”

He has supported Ann Doherty’s concern about alleged political interference in 
the original Garda investigation and her request that a commission of 
investigation be convened.

What is certain is that O’Doherty will not let the matter lie. Like the very 
best investigative journalists, she will go on trying to reveal the truth in 
the face of apathy.

What she requires is a powerful media organisation to get behind her. The 
Watergate duo had theWashington Post 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/washington-post>. The thalidomide exposé was 
the result of a united Sunday Times campaign. With phone hacking Nick Davies 
benefited from the Guardian’s belief in his story. And the Times backed Andrew 
Norfolk’s dogged reporting on the Rotherham child sex scandal.

Why is Ireland’s mainstream media ignoring Mary Boyle?

NB: Rightly, it has been pointed out that there has been coverage also in the 
Irish Independent 
<http://www.independent.ie/irish-news/retired-cop-recalls-rumours-of-political-influence-in-missing-mary-boyle-probe-31599476.html>
 and the Sunday World. But the point is that campaigning journalism, if it is 
to have any effect, requires persistent repetition in order to rouse public 
opinion and bring pressure to bear on the authorities. Odd stories do not carry 
the same weight.
