
A one-off tax on Britain’s super-rich is the only feasible way to tackle the 
government’s spending deficit and protect vital public services, according to a 
report backed by the Labour MPDan Jarvis 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/dan-jarvis> and the left-of-centre Fabian 
Society thinktank.

The levy would apply to UK residents with more than £10m in assets, with a 
supplementary charge for those with more than £20m in shares and property.

The Fabian Society said the British tax authority, HMRC, could target the 
richest holders of “passive, unearned wealth” to bring in extra cash, but that 
the rate at which the tax was charged should be left to the government of the 
day.

Difficulties in estimating the extent of assets the super-rich hold also 
prevent supporters of a wealth tax judging how much a levy would raise, it said,
following HMRC’s failure to publish data on the wealth of Britain’s top 1% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/19/plans-to-stop-collecting-data-on-wealthiest-1-in-uk-criticised-by-ifs>
. The report argued a levy would galvanise the tax authorities to crack down on 
those concealing their assets offshore or through complex ownership structures.

Earlier this year the Institute for Fiscal Studies, which has put forward 
proposals of its own for an annual wealth tax, said the chancellor,George 
Osborne, would need to raise more in taxes or cut expenditure further 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/08/ifs-says-osborne-faces-tough-choices-to-meet-deficit-target>
 to meet his fiscal promise of generating a budget surplus by the end of the 
parliament.

Related: World's wealthiest people just got 5.2% wealthier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/07/worlds-wealthiest-people-just-got-52-wealthier-global-rivate-wealth-rep-ort>

Jarvis said any sums raised by a one-off levy would make a significant impact 
on the government’s finances.


“In a country where the top 1,000 have combined wealth of £576bn, the revenue 
makes a sizeable dent in the deficit,” he said. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/apr/26/recession-rich-britains-wealthiest-double-net-worth-since-crisis>

“The threshold is so high that only those who are truly wealthy pay the levy, 
it is one-off so those who pay it aren’t driven away, it exempts many 
difficult-to-value objects such as family heirlooms.”

He said the tax was also needed to make a dent in the growing wealth inequality
 <http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/inequality> that was damaging 
the nation’s cohesion and wellbeing.

“Inequality of wealth soared during the Thatcher years. Extreme inequality 
tempts some in our society to opt out of Britain’s shared institutions: state 
schools, NHS hospitals, even taxes.

“Private schooling turns inequality of outcome into inequality of opportunity 
– as the wealthy buy better outcomes for their children. Private hospitals 
insulated the wealthy from the shared experience of the decline of the NHS 
during the 1980s. But nothing is more corrosive to the body politic than tax 
avoidance.”

Related: Recession rich: Britain's wealthiest double net worth since crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/apr/26/recession-rich-britains-wealthiest-double-net-worth-since-crisis>

He said it “sticks in the craw” of nurses, soldiers and small business people 
that others reduce their taxes “through fictitious film schemes or Swiss bank 
accounts”.

Other European countries apply small annual taxes on wealth to supplement 
taxes on income and VAT, which are the exchequer’s biggest sources of revenue.
Thinktanks <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/thinktanks> and economists have 
favoured wealth taxes that place an annual charge on the value of land or 
property.


At the last election, the Labour party proposed an annual mansion tax <> on 
homes worth more than £2m, to raise around £1.2bn. The proposal, however, came 
under fire after it was revealed that between 70,000 and 100,000 homes were 
likely to be affected.

Jarvis said the prospect of an annual tax that caught professionals along with 
the super-rich was politically unacceptable, leaving a one-off levy on the top 
0.1% of earners asthe only way of forcing the richest in society to make a 
decisive contribution to the UK’s recovery from the financial crash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/apr/26/recession-rich-britains-wealthiest-double-net-worth-since-crisis>
.


The tax would disregard employment and trading income, and focus on unearned 
income from property and shares. It would offer the super-rich a formula by 
which the level of tax was based on declared assets, but HMRC would investigate 
if taxpayers held assets offshore or through a complex web of company holdings.


The report’s author, Nick Donovan, said: “This is a detailed plan for a 
one-off wealth tax on those with more than £10m net wealth. It is non-intrusive 
for those who have clearly played by the rules, but takes a stringent approach 
to calculating the wealth of those who may have underpaid taxes through 
aggressive tax avoidance.”


The Fabian Society’s general secretary, Andrew Harrop, said: “The ‘unique 
contribution’ is a pragmatic measure that can be used to reduce the deficit and 
build up resilience to future economic shocks. But it conveys radical intent by 
taking a share of the huge financial rewards the super-rich are able to 
generate, not from hard work but from returns on their passive wealth.”
