
‘Hello. I am Zlatan,” announces Zlatan Ibrahimovic, Sweden’s greatest 
footballer – and author of the bestselling memoirI Am Zlatan 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/i-am-zlatan-ibrahimovic.html>. Then he sits 
down and finishes the wrap he is eating.

We’re upstairs in the Théâtre Trévise in Paris in early May. Ibrahimovic has 
called the city home since signing for Paris Saint-Germain from AC Milan in 
2012. The next day,he will announce, in typically bombastic style, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/13/zlatan-ibrahimovic-leave-psg> 
that he is leaving the club (“I came like a king, left like a legend”). Huge 
news, really – but today he’s here to talk about a new line of sportswear he 
has designed, light relief from the summer’s non-stop transfer chatter.

Ibrahimovic’s career has taken him to many of the world’s most famous football 
clubs – including Ajax, Juventus, Internazionale, Barcelona, AC Milan and PSG – 
at one point making him the sport’s most expensive player in total transfer 
fees (he has since been pipped to that accolade by former teammateÁngel Di María
 <http://www.mirror.co.uk/sport/row-zed/man-united-flop-angel-di-6185433>). 
Soon,if the reports are correct, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/04/manchester-united-zlatan-ibrahimovic-agrees-personal-terms>
 he will add Manchester United to the list.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kg5d%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kg5d%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F98600ff9f1ec1630f0c39ea650b17eaf70cb921a%2F0_0_5000_3247%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zlatan%20Ibrahimovic%3A%20%E2%80%98Mourinho%20is%20cool%20%E2%80%93%20the%20older%20coaches%20get%2C%20the%20cooler%20they%20get%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kg5d%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zlatan+Ibrahimovic%3A+%E2%80%98Mourinho+is+cool+%E2%80%93+the+older+coaches+get%2C+the+cooler+they+get%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kg5d%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F98600ff9f1ec1630f0c39ea650b17eaf70cb921a%2F0_0_5000_3247%2F5000.jpg>
 After finishing a record-breaking stint at PSG, Ibrahimovic is close to a move 
to Manchester United. Photograph: Franck Fife/AFP/Getty Images 
Having spent so much time in two of Europe’s style capitals, perhaps it’s 
unsurprising that he’s moving into fashion. His range, called A-Z, is tasteful 
and – importantly – cheapish (about €39, or £31, for a top). If you’re thinking 
monochrome tracksuits with “ZLATAN” printed down the leg, think again. The 
collection comprises low-key, hyper-normal sportswear – an edifying concept, 
given the way fashion has doggedly co-opted sportswear in the past few years. 
The idea, he explains, is for it to be affordable in a way that sportswear 
wasn’t when Ibrahimovic was a second-generation immigrant teenager playing 
football in the 90s in Rosengård, a tough, multi-ethnic district of Malmö. “The 
clothes are basic,” he says with a smile. “They are for everyone of every 
background. You know, like mine. I will never forget where I came from, and I 
don’t forget the people I’ve met on the way.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0Egm8jnhKs8&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0Egm8jnhKs8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0Egm8jnhKs8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0Egm8jnhKs8&media=>
 Ibrahimovic’s wondergoal for Ajax against NAC Breda. 
Ibrahimovic grew up in Rosengård with his Bosnian Muslim father and Croatian 
Catholic mother. “The first time I went into the city, I was 17. I didn’t know 
outside the area. I always wore hand-me-downs. It was cool, though; for me, it 
[Rosengård] was paradise, because it was all I knew.” As a teenager, he started 
playing for Malmö, before heading off – in 2001, at the age of 19 – on his 
grand tour of Europe. “When you go back [to Rosengård, now subsumed into a new 
district],” he says, “you still see people in training clothes. There are no 
suits.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kg5d%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kg5d%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c8a8fda259ee04eda1f93347b385bcd15855787%2F0_349_4133_5163%2F4133.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zlatan%20Ibrahimovic%3A%20%E2%80%98Mourinho%20is%20cool%20%E2%80%93%20the%20older%20coaches%20get%2C%20the%20cooler%20they%20get%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kg5d%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zlatan+Ibrahimovic%3A+%E2%80%98Mourinho+is+cool+%E2%80%93+the+older+coaches+get%2C+the+cooler+they+get%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kg5d%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c8a8fda259ee04eda1f93347b385bcd15855787%2F0_349_4133_5163%2F4133.jpg>
 ‘I don’t follow fashion. If I like it, I buy it’ – Ibrahimovic sports a top 
from his new fashion line. Photograph: Daniel Blom 
Now 34, Ibrahimovic’s rags-to-riches story makes this a fairly risk-free 
venture: first, people will buy the range because it’s by Zlatan; second, as he 
says: “Even if I stop playing now, I will have food to eat – and I will have 
food to eat for ever. I don’t do this for the economy.”

Still, footballers and fashion ... it’s a problematic marriage. Consider 
Cristiano Ronaldo and his catastrophicCR7 line 
<https://www.cr7underwear.com/cr7-shirts/>. “When we talk about fashion, the 
only one is Beckham,” he says. “The rest? You leave them. These people, they 
see the doll in the window and they buy the exact clothes of the doll and walk 
out the shop and they think: I am fashion.” He leans forward. “I don’t follow 
fashion. If I like it, I buy it. I don’t think about what shirt goes with 
[what] pants. To me, you are football or you are fashion. Either you do it 100% 
or 200%. Not 10%. You don’t need to pretend to be perfect.”

This is typical Ibrahimovic. He describes his career in quotable hyperbole, 
phrases affectionately known as Zlatanisms 
<http://www.france24.com/en/20160513-football-zlatan-ibrahimovic-best-quotes-psg>
 – “a World Cup without me isn’t worth watching”, things like that. And with 
cause, you could say. The Guardian’s Barney Ronay described him as “a player 
capable of moments of skill and physical dexterity beyond the reach of pretty 
much anyone else on the planet”. He’s a genius and a maniac; random, acrobatic 
and spectacular. Nothing followed by nothing ... then the impossible:dribbling 
around six defenders to score <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0Egm8jnhKs8> (at 
Ajax) orthe famous bicycle kick against England 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RM_5tJncHww> three years ago. When he plays, 
he’s a vision and a villain. In person, however, he’s open and smiling. When 
talking about “fashion”, he’s even a little nervous. “I am absolutely not 
perfect, I will still do mistakes.” I haven’t seen you make mistakes, I say. 
“Listen. Tiger Woods pretended to be perfect. And what happened? We learn from 
mistakes. I am realistic – and I have always said this.” He pauses. “But only I 
decide if it is a mistake.” He bursts out laughing. And he’s back.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRM_5tJncHww&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRM_5tJncHww&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRM_5tJncHww>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRM_5tJncHww&media=>
Thatgoal against England. 
The Zlatanisms are there (he talks about himself in the third person with 
complete sincerity), but it soon becomes clear they are for my benefit – he 
waits to be goaded and delivers them with deep, Swedish irony. He says the 
absurd (everything is 200% or above) and he periodically slips into 
motivational chat: “I want to take over. I want to take the challenge and be No 
1. I don’t give up.” But every Zlatanism is postscripted with his familiar 
grin, sometimes a cackle. He giggles like a drunk fox. It’s infectious.

Does he agree that the most stylish people in football are often the ones not 
on the pitch? “Managers are more elegant,” he says. “That is right for a coach. 
He has responsibility, he has to be a leader.” And who have been his leaders? 
“I like [former PSG boss Carlo] Ancelotti. [José] Mourinho [his old boss at 
Inter, and possibly his new one at Manchester United] is cool. The older they 
get, the cooler they get. The grey hair. The serious expression. I have a good 
relationship with all of them.” All? “Except one.” Pep? “Exactly.” He has 
previously said that, when he was at Barcelona, the then-manager Pep Guardiola 
(soon of Manchester City) made him feel like an “alien”. Today, though, he 
seems more meditative on the subject. He shrugs at his name: “I don’t need 
negative energy.”

***

Next Monday, just before 5pm, Ibrahimovic will lead out his nation for their 
first game ofEuro 2016 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016>, 
against Ireland, and his 114th cap. He hasn’t lived in the country permanently 
since his teens, but he still has a home in Sweden. “I do feel Swedish, even 
though I don’t live there now,” he says. “I still try to represent Sweden.” Is 
he a hero there? “I don’t know,” he shrugs. “I am good at what I do. I guess I 
am the new Sweden, the new generation, because of all these new backgrounds. I 
am proud of what we have done, and the immigrants who are stabilising in 
Sweden.” What is it like, being the face of Swedish multiculturalism? “I 
believe I opened many doors for people in the same situation, and I stand for 
it. It was not easy. I needed to break through many walls to get here.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kg5d%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kg5d%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F45fbf255522a7c2140db7d148aff987163ccfa5c%2F0_1315_4936_2962%2F4936.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zlatan%20Ibrahimovic%3A%20%E2%80%98Mourinho%20is%20cool%20%E2%80%93%20the%20older%20coaches%20get%2C%20the%20cooler%20they%20get%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kg5d%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zlatan+Ibrahimovic%3A+%E2%80%98Mourinho+is+cool+%E2%80%93+the+older+coaches+get%2C+the+cooler+they+get%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kg5d%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F45fbf255522a7c2140db7d148aff987163ccfa5c%2F0_1315_4936_2962%2F4936.jpg>
 Items from Ibrahimovic’s A-Z range. Photograph: Daniel Blom 
He’s reserved when talking about other footballers, except David Beckham. 
“Beckham is a cool guy. I look up to him. It is not easy to be him. He has a 
family, but outside he is a machine.” Ibrahimovic is married to a Swedish 
woman; they have two sons. “I keep them outside of all this. I don’t want them 
to live my life. My boys will not live in my shadow. They will become better 
than me.” Do they play? “They train. But I judge hard. I care about discipline 
and respect. They need to learn the principles.” He breaks character: “I just 
hope they become two ninjas.”

Ibrahimovic’s relationship with his parents has been well documented. They 
divorced, and, while he spent time with his mum and his dad, he spent more time 
with his father. “My father was hard to me. He had to work a lot. He was not 
there every day, taking me training, because he was bringing food to the table. 
That is the Balkan mentality. They came before the war, not as fugitives, but 
the economy was not good. I took myself to school, to sport.” It was an 
instructive start. “I didn’t ask for help. Your confidence grows like this. 
Where I come from, you don’t ask, you take.” He also became a dab hand at 
stealing bicycles as a teenager. “I mean – no one asks for a photo [when he 
returns to Malmö], they just take it. They don’t ask for respect, they just 
take it. It’s rough.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kg5d%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kg5d%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82ca309ca16518431717cfc65e6aba81f0e5b633%2F0_0_3500_2329%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zlatan%20Ibrahimovic%3A%20%E2%80%98Mourinho%20is%20cool%20%E2%80%93%20the%20older%20coaches%20get%2C%20the%20cooler%20they%20get%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kg5d%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zlatan+Ibrahimovic%3A+%E2%80%98Mourinho+is+cool+%E2%80%93+the+older+coaches+get%2C+the+cooler+they+get%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kg5d%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82ca309ca16518431717cfc65e6aba81f0e5b633%2F0_0_3500_2329%2F3500.jpg>
 If he signs for United, the talismanic striker will work under his former 
Inter coach, José Mourinho. Photograph: Giuseppe Cacace/AFP/Getty Images 
He was last there a month ago, so he took the kids. He was shooting a 
commercial, and it wasn’t long before a crowd gathered. “They were loud, 
aggressive. But yes, I wanted them [his sons] to see it. My roots.” Is humility 
important to him? “We are simple as a family.” What about the Scandinavian 
concept ofJantelagen (an ethos that, roughly, means everyone is the same). “No. 
I follow my own law,” he says, bursting out laughing. What is his level of fame 
like? “I try not to be stressed. We, my family, just follow our own rules. We 
are traditional, principled. You have to be like that outside of work. 
Otherwise you argue ...”

It’s clear he has become numb to the trappings of fame. He doesn’t care what 
people think, which means, beneath the real/pseudo hubris, Ibrahimovic is a 
mystery. He reportedly owned a gold Humvee, but he also likes lake fishing: he
posted a photograph on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/ZlatanIbrahimovic/posts/872303002789102> of him 
holding his catch on a little boat emblazoned with a sticker of the punk band 
Black Flag (he has said he prefers reggae). He also says he doesn’t care what 
he looks like – but what about the long hair, which he won’t cut and which he 
likens to Samson’s? He’s a tease. But he’s also warm, witty, grounded and 
engaged; he’s keen to know if the Guardian hacked any phones and appears 
relieved to hear not.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kg5d%2Fsfb%23img-6&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kg5d%2Fsfb%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6eb76b33ecac943cc251ac1ff4971f6f7c347e16%2F0_0_2736_1863%2F2736.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zlatan%20Ibrahimovic%3A%20%E2%80%98Mourinho%20is%20cool%20%E2%80%93%20the%20older%20coaches%20get%2C%20the%20cooler%20they%20get%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kg5d%2Fstw%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zlatan+Ibrahimovic%3A+%E2%80%98Mourinho+is+cool+%E2%80%93+the+older+coaches+get%2C+the+cooler+they+get%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kg5d%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6eb76b33ecac943cc251ac1ff4971f6f7c347e16%2F0_0_2736_1863%2F2736.jpg>
 Local boy: Ibrahimovic started his career at hometown club Malmö. Photograph: 
IBL/Rex 
He’s about to leave Paris. “Paris is cool. They have everything. It’s the 
coolest city. It’s all actors and singers, but everyone leaves me alone.” What 
about Italy? “Italy is easy for a footballer. But Paris is great,” he says 
evasively. Is the fashion good here? “Sure,” he says. England is good for 
fashion, I say; he should think about coming. “For vacation?” he replies, 
mock-rolling his eyes. “OK, what are your wishes for me?” Liverpool, I suggest. 
“OK.” How about Leicester? “Pah, Leicester had their time,” he sighs. “Will it 
happen again? It is not easy.” I explain how a friend failed to put a £20 bet 
on the Midlands club winning the Premier League at the start of the season. 
“How much did she not get?” he asks. She would have won something like 
£100,000. He lurches back with genuine distress, before muttering something 
about the betting odds. How about Arsenal, I say. “Hmm, OK.” Manchester? I tell 
him the fashion is good in Manchester and that in England he can be anonymous. 
Or, at least, as anonymous as Zlatan could be. “Let’s see what happens,” he 
says, flashing a grin.

A-Z launches today. The collection will be revealed live at 5pm via Facebook 
and A-Z.com
