
When should babies start solids? My first child was gobbling up runny baby 
cereal at three months. Two decades later (my child-bearing was spread out), 
the rules had changed to nil by mouth except breast milk until six months. Not 
only that, but solids were increasingly a thing to be afraid of. Wheat, 
egg, peanut, shellfish (does anyone actually feed their child lobster?) 
were all on the scary list of foods that can cause allergic reactions 
and should be avoided for as long as possible. Cow’s milk, soy, sesame and nuts 
from trees such as almonds, cashews and chestnuts are also potentially allergic 
for some babies. An estimated 5% of children have food allergies, so the 
problem is real, and allergic reactions to food are terrifying. So advice about 
when to start your infant on solids, an emotive subject at the best of times, 
has become complicated by concerns that getting it wrong could give your child 
a food allergy.

The solution

The Canadian Medical Journal this week wades into the debate 
<http://www.cmaj.ca/content/early/2015/10/19/cmaj.150364> with a review of the 
evidence. Dr Elissa Abrams, from the University of Manitoba, argues that giving 
babies solids from four months – including some of these scary foods – may be 
protective. Shecites evidence from the LEAP study published in the New England 
Journal of Medicine <http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa1414850> 
earlier this year. This study showed that giving a puffed peanut snack (not 
peanuts themselves) to children from four to 11 months who were known to be at 
high risk from peanut allergy actually reduced the likelihood of them being 
allergic to the nuts at the age of five. High-risk babies include those with 
severe eczema and allergy to eggs, and Abrams includes those who have siblings 
with peanut allergies. If there is any doubt about food allergies in your 
family, you should ask your doctor.

Abrams is adamant that parents shouldn’t throw caution to the wind. With 
healthy babies,The American Academy of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology  
<https://www.aaaai.org/Aaaai/media/MediaLibrary/PDF%20Documents/Libraries/Preventing-Allergies-15.pdf>
suggests introducing new foods that are age-appropriate and won’t cause choking 
every three to five days. Foods should be introduced alongside breastfeeding if 
possible. Start with mashed vegetables and fruit such as cooked carrots, 
sweet potato and bananas. Introduce potentially allergic foods (unless there is 
a family history of allergy, or your infant has severe eczema, in which case 
you should ask your doctor) between four to six months in small amounts and at 
home, so you can keep a watchful eye. Gluten, according to current evidence, 
may best be introduced between four and six months.
