
As a weekend destination, Brisbane hasn’t been on my radar. Melbourne’s the 
place to shop and eat, Sydney has great beaches and Queensland’s coastline is 
spoilt for sunshine, sea and nature.

But Brisbane? What does it have to offer that you can’t get in other 
Australian cities?

Quite a lot, it turns out. Brisbane feels as though it has taken Melbourne’s 
mantle of a place emerging. Things feel fresh and exciting here and, if you’re 
visiting, it’s the perfect place to spend a weekend – balmy and relaxed, with 
great food served on terraced restaurants overlooking the river, unusual 
independent boutiques filled with the work of interesting local designers, and 
quirky neighbourhoods with cafes in old Queenslanders. Plus, there’s that great 
subtropical weather which means outdoor events like food markets can be enjoyed 
almost all year round.

So here’s what I did on my 48 hours in Brisbane.

Friday 


4pm, Next Hotel

I check into my hotel for the weekend – the just-opened Next Hotel 
<http://www.silverneedlehotels.com/next/brisbane> that overlooks the 
city-centre mall.

After a $15m refurbishment last year, it has a number of appealing features: 
you can check in and out without speaking to anyone, the minibar is free, you 
can use your phone as a room key, there are sleep pods for international 
travellers who get off early flights and need somewhere to crash before their 
rooms are ready, and they give you an iPhone to use (not to keep) while in town.

Lennons Restaurant and Bar on level one and the hotel’s rooftop bar – with a 
pool – are great places to eat and drink but I opt for a coffee in a nearby 
laneway, atFelix Espresso 
<http://www.urbanspoon.com/r/337/1817477/restaurant/Brisbane-CBD/Felix-Espresso-and-WineBar-Brisbane>
. It also sells salads and sandwiches, with a focus on vegan food.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F484fb%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F484fb%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F839843a98cca24caa56bd609e112c4ac07fe528a%2F0_0_2448_2448%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Forty-eight%20hours%20in%20Brisbane%3A%20what%20to%20do%20and%20where%20to%20go&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F484fb%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Forty-eight+hours+in+Brisbane%3A+what+to+do+and+where+to+go&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F484fb%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F839843a98cca24caa56bd609e112c4ac07fe528a%2F0_0_2448_2448%2F2448.jpg>
 The rooftop pool and bar at Next Hotel. 
4.30pm, a Segway ride and Goma


To the first-time visitor, the arts precinct down by the river is a confusing, 
interconnected set of buildings. Am I in the library or the art gallery? The 
modern art gallery or the traditional? And what is this walkway that has whale 
noises being piped through it? WHAT DOES IT MEAN?

But once you get your bearings you could easily spend a whole day down at 
South Bank.

Along the river there’s a good smattering of cafes and bars with outdoor 
seating and activities such as Segway hire.

I’ve never been on one before. I don’t even have a driver’s licence but the 
guy at X-wing on the promenade doesn’t seem to mind. He hands me a helmet (he 
really should be handing them out to the pedestrians I’m going to knock over) 
and shows me how it’s done. You stand on it, tilt forward and then it zooms 
along the boardwalk at the speed of a motorised scooter. It’s fun. I don’t want 
to get off. But I must because Segways are not allowed inGoma 
<http://www.qagoma.qld.gov.au/>, the modern art museum in the South Bank 
precinct.

The first person I see in Goma is Kevin Rudd. I try to make eye contact as I 
walk past him but he doesn’t look my way.

I’m here to see the Future of Beauty exhibition. There’s a real Japanese vibe 
to modern Brisbane. Japanese-inspired boutiques, Japanese/mod Oz fusion 
restaurants and, right now, the Future of Beauty exhibition at Goma which 
features the designs of Comme des Garçons, Rei Kawakubo and Yohji Yamamoto. The 
clothes – extraordinary works of art – are displayed on dummies and well-lit, 
allowing close inspection from all angles. The craftsmanship! The bravery! The 
art of it all!

The Future of Beauty exhibition has now closed but in keeping with the 
gallery’s edgy vibe, a collection of David Lynch prints, paintings and 
photography is now showing.


6pm, Charming Squire


For a pre-dinner drink, I head to the Charming Squire 
<http://www.jamessquire.com.au/agegate> near Goma.

The big, wood-panelled space at that opens out on the street has tables for 
large groups and sells James Squire beers and pork sliders, if you feel like a 
snack. On Friday night it’s full of office workers unwinding – including quite 
a few ABC types, whose office is across the road.

7pm, Madame Wu

Madame Wu <http://www.madamewu.com.au/> – with views across Brisbane river 
towards the lit-up Story Bridge – is very much in the same vein as Chin Chin 
and Supernormal in Melbourne – think lots of big-flavoured, Asian-inspired 
dishes to share and a lot of effort put into a sleek interior. It’s relatively 
new and already hugely popular.

I recommend the beef cheeks braised in rock sugar and soy, black bean and 
chilli sauce ($35) and the Moreton Bay bug dumplings with XO and lime ($18).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F484fb%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F484fb%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27c09128e697e63be9a2e3b81f5560d23555a1ad%2F5_405_2443_2553%2F2443.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Forty-eight%20hours%20in%20Brisbane%3A%20what%20to%20do%20and%20where%20to%20go&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F484fb%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Forty-eight+hours+in+Brisbane%3A+what+to+do+and+where+to+go&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F484fb%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27c09128e697e63be9a2e3b81f5560d23555a1ad%2F5_405_2443_2553%2F2443.jpg>
 Dumplings to die for at Madame Wu. 
9pm, Up Late


We grab a cab back to South Bank, where Goma is hosting an “Up Late” event for 
the Future of Beauty exhibition.

Four-piece Broken Doll, known for their energetic performances and awesome 
Harajuku-style fashion, are playing, there’s a bar and the crowd is buzzing 
around the exhibits. Many guests are wearing their own Japanese-inspired 
clothes: I see a woman in a stunning Akira silk top and lots of black, sharp, 
architectural shapes.

The night is warm but not too muggy – just right for the 20-minute walk back 
to my hotel.

Saturday

8am, kayaking

“How were the beaches?” asked one friend when I returned from Brisbane. There 
is this idea of Queensland as being beachy but – apart from a fake beach at 
South Bank (which looks just like the fake beach in Darwin … ie wrong!) – it’s 
all about the river in Brisbane and the best way to explore it is by kayak.

It’s early morning and there’s not much traffic on the river, which is wide 
and brown. You have to stick close to shore, but not so close that you’d get 
caught in the mangrove swamps. The River Cat and smaller ferries go past but 
there’s plenty of room to move about. I think, if I lived in Brisbane, this 
would be a fine way of getting to work.

Kayaks can be rented by the hour from $20 along the river at Riverlife 
<http://www.riverlife.com.au/>.

11am, city tour

Back on land, I go on a guided city tour with Brisbane Greeters 
<https://www.visitbrisbane.com.au/brisbane-greeters> – part of a worldwide 
network of city tour guides. The idea is that visitors are matched with locals 
and get an insider’s view of the city. All greeters are volunteers.

My guide, Anna, advises that the best walk in Brisbane is the city to New Farm 
walk, via the Botanic Gardens and the Queensland University of Technology. She 
also recommends walking over the Goodwill Bridge.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F484fb%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F484fb%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb264832f4b8ab58decd120640d241e14d571f187%2F0_0_917_914%2F917.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Forty-eight%20hours%20in%20Brisbane%3A%20what%20to%20do%20and%20where%20to%20go&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F484fb%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Forty-eight+hours+in+Brisbane%3A+what+to+do+and+where+to+go&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F484fb%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb264832f4b8ab58decd120640d241e14d571f187%2F0_0_917_914%2F917.jpg>
 Forget beaches ... it’s all about the river in Brisbane and kayak is the best 
way to see it. 
Anna is a Brisbane enthusiast and one of 200 volunteers greeters. She says 
visitors should book online at least three days ahead.

I purchase an all-purpose travel Go Card and Anna and I board a River Cat 
towards New Farm and the Brisbane Powerhouse. The trip along the river is 
pleasant, passing the lovely, large Moreton Bay figs and poinsiettas that line 
the banks and Brisbane’s waterfront properties – all new-looking and gleaming 
glass in the sunlight. To find some of the old weatherboard-on-stilts 
Queenslanders, head to the posh suburb of Ascot or see the smaller worker 
cottage versions in Paddington (though just because they’re smaller doesn’t 
make them cheap).


Midday, Powerhouse

If there’s a second arts hub in Brisbane, it’s here at the Powerhouse 
<http://brisbanepowerhouse.org/> in New Farm, about 3km from the city centre. 
The former power station has been transformed into a cool events space with a 
bar and restaurant attached.

I lunch at Bar Alto, an Italian restaurant overlooking the river. 

My Brisbane pals tell me the Powerhouse is “a bit corporate and for visitors, 
like the Opera Bar at the Sydney Opera House”, but it’s one of my favourite 
venues in Brisbane.

I return later for a poetry readings and, long after the performance is over, 
the bar area zings with energy. During the day the vast, industrial concretey 
space is a good lunch spot.

I’m dining alone but rather than being shoved at a little table down the back, 
I’m given a nice spacious table overlooking the water and lots of magazines to 
read, lest I become gloomy with existential angst after an hour in my own 
company.

The wine list is very good and I recommend the set lunch menu for $37 that 
offers two courses plus a glass of wine.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F484fb%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F484fb%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7ef70f37554d0865d29bc89db87f5592a743622%2F0_125_2340_1404%2F2340.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Forty-eight%20hours%20in%20Brisbane%3A%20what%20to%20do%20and%20where%20to%20go&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F484fb%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Forty-eight+hours+in+Brisbane%3A+what+to+do+and+where+to+go&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F484fb%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7ef70f37554d0865d29bc89db87f5592a743622%2F0_125_2340_1404%2F2340.jpg>
 Broken Doll, known for their Harajuku-style fashion, playing at a bar at Goma 
at South Bank. 
2.30pm, shopping in James Street


It’s a short cab ride from the Powerhouse to James Street in Fortitude Valley.

This lovely tree-lined, shady street is Brisbane’s coolest shopping area – the 
city’s premier designer, Easton Pearson, has a flash flagship shop here.

The precinct features a mix of more than 130 specialty shops – with a cluster 
of independent boutiques homewares stores and the very cuteScrumptious Reads 
<http://scrumptiousreads.com.au/>, which stocks independent magazines from 
around the world and cute journals (I buy two).

Around the corner is Gail Sorronda, one of the city’s most original designers. 
Chanel’s Karl Lagerfeld named Sorronda “one to watch” and her original designs 
including dresses and jewellery can be bought online. I recommend popping into 
her store if you’re in Brisbane.

4pm, night markets


It’s back to the hotel for a quick dip in the rooftop pool then drinks on the 
deck before heading out to theEat Street Markets 
<http://www.eatstreetmarkets.com/>. 

Catch a City Cat to the Hamilton Wharf where there are night food markets 
every Friday, Saturday and Sunday. It’s a bit of a hike from the centre of town 
(it’s out near the airport) but when you get there it’s as though a portable 
city has sprung up.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F484fb%2Fsfb%23img-6&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F484fb%2Fsfb%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15e89dbcc6477f4815ad84ce4362b736d492db0f%2F0_0_2100_2100%2F2100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Forty-eight%20hours%20in%20Brisbane%3A%20what%20to%20do%20and%20where%20to%20go&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F484fb%2Fstw%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Forty-eight+hours+in+Brisbane%3A+what+to+do+and+where+to+go&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F484fb%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15e89dbcc6477f4815ad84ce4362b736d492db0f%2F0_0_2100_2100%2F2100.jpg>
 South Bank via segway. 
There’s about 60 shipping containers converted into mini-restaurants, serving 
up international cuisine, with stalls and live performers. Fairy lights are 
strung up between the stalls and the atmosphere is like one of those German 
Christmas markets – but it’s lovely and warm, and instead of drinking gluhwein 
we knock back cold beers.

8pm, drinks in the Valley


We take a cab to Fortitude Valley where there’s a good range of bars within 
walking distance.

First up its Kwan Brothers, where you can snack on “Asian street food” while 
your eyes adjust to the busy decor including novelty toys, disco balls and 
massive Chinese lanterns.

It’s pretty rowdy, with lots of big groups enjoying huge bowls of Korean fried 
chicken. My pals and I are about 10 years older than a lot of the people in the 
bar. We sit in the quieter back area where the cocktails are great but the 
decibel level lower.

From there it’s a short stumble to Alfred and Constance streets, and Limes, in 
a converted church, orAt Sixes and Sevens 
<http://www.mustdobrisbane.com/eat-drink-bars-inner-city-fortitude-valley/sixes-sevens-fortitude-valley>
, a gastropub in a heritage-listed weatherboard cottage dating from 1878.

My pal, a Brisbane musician (and Guardian Australia’s Queensland 
correspondent, Josh Robertson) recommends heading tothe Triffid 
<http://thetriffid.com.au/> if you fancy some late-night live music. It’s one 
of Brisbane’s newer music venues and is run by the former bassist of 
Powderfinger.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F484fb%2Fsfb%23img-7&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F484fb%2Fsfb%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d8b5d65acbf5977d9d53401fb4e3cfe242968b5%2F0_454_2448_2192%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Forty-eight%20hours%20in%20Brisbane%3A%20what%20to%20do%20and%20where%20to%20go&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F484fb%2Fstw%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Forty-eight+hours+in+Brisbane%3A+what+to+do+and+where+to+go&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F484fb%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d8b5d65acbf5977d9d53401fb4e3cfe242968b5%2F0_454_2448_2192%2F2448.jpg>
 Felix espresso bar: salads and sandwiches, with a focus on vegan food. 
Photograph: Brigid Delaney for the Guardian 
Sunday


10am, brunch

It’s a time for a sleep-in, then brunch. I head to Kettle and Tin 
<http://kettleandtin.com.au/> in Paddington, another charming old workers’ 
cottage that has resisted the spit and polish and sparkle of so many Sydney 
eateries.

There’s a bit of a queue but it moves quickly. The bacon and eggs are good, 
and the coffee is amazing. My only gripe? They were a bit snooty when I asked 
if they had a copy of the Courier-Mail. I was given the Australian instead, 
which was a bit of a let-down, as nothing quite captures the flavour of a new 
city like a read of its local paper.

Midday, shopping


I stick around Paddington and do a final bit of shopping. Several of the 
cottages nearby house independent boutiques includingDogstar 
<http://www.dogstar.com.au/> which – once again – stocks Japanese-inspired 
designs. It’s the brainchild of the Brisbane-based Japanese designer Masayo 
Yasuki.

There’s an American visitor in the shop who is buying everything she tries on, 
explaining to her friend: “They don’t have any of this kind of stuff in LA!”
