
As you’re probably aware, there are two reliable ways to avoid queueing at the 
airport. One is to travel business class or be a celebrity – but business class 
is pricey, and becoming a celebrity takes years of work, or luck. The other is 
to deliberately show up very late and get escorted to the front of the line. 
This requires only that you’re a self-centred jerk who thinks the rules don’t 
apply to you – and you’ll be rewarded, every time, by the discovery that indeed 
they don’t. The airport queueing system, in short, isan Asshole Filter 
<http://siderea.livejournal.com/1230660.html>, a splendid term I’m borrowing 
from the US bloggerSiderea <http://siderea.livejournal.com/>. If you feel as if 
everyone you encounter is insufferable – as I suspect some airport staff do – 
it might not be because humans in general are terrible. You may simply, and 
inadvertently, have an Asshole Filter set up.

The example Siderea gives concerns Fred, a hypothetical boss who politely asks 
clients to email his staff, instead of himself, with certain queries. 
Respectful, rule-following types will do as he requests. Who won’t? People who 
don’t care about transgressing boundaries. Being an affable chap, Fred will 
still respond to those who email directly, thereby vindicating their 
rule-breaking. Fred’s done nothing unreasonable, yet he has tilted the playing 
field: now, he’ll end up dealing disproportionately with rude people. The 
effect isn’t confined to the workplace, of course. If you’re seeking a new 
relationship, but don’t proactively ask people you like, your dating life will 
soon be dominated by obliviously persistent wazzocks.

It gets worse. An additional problem with Asshole Filters is that people who 
do follow the rules grow resentful. “Well, screw Fred,” Siderea imagines them 
thinking. “Here I am trying to be obliging, and I’m getting treated second 
class.” They conclude that rule-breaking is the only way to succeed. If you’ve 
ever had the sense that a customer service “helpline” wasn’t designed to help 
you, but to keep complainants at bay, you’ll sympathise with my friend Dan, 
whose battle to solve a broadband problem ended with him negotiating directly 
with the office of TalkTalk’s chief executive. It’s not what you’re supposed to 
do, but it’s what works. The problem got solved.

Related: Is our destiny in our own hands? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/08/oliver-burkeman-is-destiny-in-our-own-hands>

Increasingly, it feels as if the culture as a whole is a giant Asshole Filter, 
encouraging us to become obnoxious if we wish to succeed. Late last year, an 
app calledJust Not Sorry 
<http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2015/12/29/new_chrome_app_helps_women_stop_saying_just_and_sorry_in_emails.html>
 made headlines with its promise to screen women’s emails for disempowering 
language such as “sorry” and “just” and “I’m no expert”. But as the Oxford 
University linguistDeborah Cameron pointed out 
<https://debuk.wordpress.com/2015/12/30/crap-apps-and-female-email/>, this 
assumes women overuse such terms, when you could just as easily claim that men
underuse them. Maybe life would go better if we all apologised more for our 
claims on others’ attention. Advice on becoming “confident” or “assertive” is 
often the same: it assumes brashness is the ideal, and that it’s the non-brash 
who need help. This might be necessary survival advice in an individualistic 
world. But it may also be turning us, despite our best intentions, into 
assholes.

• oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com <mailto:oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com>
