
Experienced mentors can be invaluable for a small business. They can share 
their expertise, help you to make vital contacts and even open up opportunities 
for new business or funding.

The Guardian Small Business competition to win a mentor, supported by 
Barclaycard, is offering three small businesses in the retail, professional 
services or hospitality industries the chance to benefit from the expertise of 
one of three experienced entrepreneurs: Sarah Willingham (Dragons’ Den star and 
serial investor); Lopo Champalimaud (founder of Treatwell) or Andre Blais 
(founder of Bodean’s).

The mentor will offer tailored advice to the small business owner based on 
their competition entry.

The prize package will include:


 * A profiling call with a mentor to discuss your ambition for your business 
and how they can help you achieve it.

 * A one-hour meeting with your mentor over lunch to go through their 
suggestions on how you can reach your goals. 
 * One or two 30-minute follow-up telephone conversations to continue working 
on the business plan. 
The mentors

Sarah Willingham 

Willingham, a serial entrepreneur and investor, has been a star on the BBC Two 
television show, The Dragons’ Den since 2015.


In 2003, Willingham raised finance to buy the Bombay Bicycle Club chain and 
went on to turn it into one of the largest Indian restaurant businesses in the 
UK. A few years later she sold it for a seven-figure sum.

While running the chain, she also sat on the board of two large UK companies 
and successfully floated a nutraceutical business on the London Stock Exchange.

In 2007, she appeared as a judge on BBC Two show The Restaurant. She 
co-founded and invested in the London Cocktail Club and Craft Cocktail Company 
with the winners of series three.

Willingham runs her business portfolio from her home office with her husband 
Michael Toxvaerd, who is also an entrepreneur. They jointly invest in and 
support a range of business ventures from startups to established brands. These 
span a number of industries including food and drink, consumer finance, 
healthfood, banking, mining, technology and entertainment.

Lopo Champalimaud

Champalimaud is founder and CEO of online hair and beauty appointment bookings 
service Treatwell (formerly Wahanda), which is based in London. There are over 
25,000 spas and salons using Treatwell’s service.

Champalimaud briefly worked in banking and private equity before founding two 
successful data and customer relationship management (CRM) startups in New 
York. In 2001 he moved to the UK and became managing director of lifestyle at 
Lastminute.com.

Champalimaud saw an opportunity for disruption in the health and beauty 
industry by offering cloud-management software for spas and salons that is 
connected to a convenient consumer marketplace. In 2008 he realised this 
ambition by founding Wahanda. In the past 12 months the company has gone 
through a major European expansion and rebrand – it now operates in 10 
countries. .

Andre Blais
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yve8%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yve8%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4ec5dd660e847f71a2c90ab16b8a5082228ead2%2F1658_0_2330_2912%2F2330.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Enter%20the%20Guardian%20Small%20Business%20competition%20to%20win%20a%20mentor&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yve8%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Enter+the+Guardian+Small+Business+competition+to+win+a+mentor&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yve8%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4ec5dd660e847f71a2c90ab16b8a5082228ead2%2F1658_0_2330_2912%2F2330.jpg>
Andre Blais, who is French-Canadian, moved to the UK in 1991 to join his 
brother Denis and his brother’s business partner Andre Plisnier, who were 
working to create the restaurant chain Belgo. Blais worked his way up at Belgo 
to become director. In this role he looked after the operations of the group 
and assisted in opening further locations in London and overseas.

On leaving Belgo in 2001, Andre decided to open up his own restaurant. 
Bodean’s Soho was launched in 2002. Bodean’s was one of the first BBQ 
restaurants to open in London and is still going strong today. There are now 
seven branches in central and south London.

How to enter

To enter all you need to do is answer the following questions in under 150 
words.

What is your biggest ambition for your business, and how could a mentor help 
you achieve this?

Perhaps your business is performing well and you are planning to scale up in 
the near future, and would like advice on sourcing investment. Maybe you would 
like to start exporting in the next year and need an experienced entrepreneur 
to look over your plan. Or perhaps you have ambitions to rebrand your business 
but need some guidance on how you can minimise potential risks.

Whatever your ambition, or your reasons for seeking a mentor, we’d like to 
hear about them. Complete the form below to enter.

* You must complete all of these fields to enter and must be working in a 
business within the retail, hospitality or professional services industries.

Entrants will be judged on the following criteria:

 * The ambition demonstrated by the business. 
 * The company’s future plans and potential for growth. 
 * How the business challenges could be overcome and plans achieved with the 
help of a mentor. 
A panel of judges will choose three winners. The competition is now open and 
will close at 23.59 on 22 July, 2016.

Terms and conditions are available here 
<http://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/jun/15/terms-and-conditions-guardian-small-business-competition-win-a-mentor>

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.



