
Girls as young as 13 are more likely to have a positive attitude towards going 
to university than their male classmates, according to new research published 
by education charity theSutton Trust <http://www.suttontrust.com/>. The study 
by Oxford University found that by year 9 at secondary school, when children 
are 13 or 14, almost 65% of girls thought it was “very important” to go to 
university, compared with just 58% of boys.

At the other end of the scale, while just one in 10 girls attached no 
importance to going to university and getting a degree, 15% of boys did not see 
the point in continuing into higher education, according to the report 
published on Friday.

The research comes at a time of growing concern about a gender gap in 
education –girls are outperforming boys  
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/oct/13/boys-trail-girls-literacy-numeracy-when-starting-school>
at school, andmore of them are now going into higher education 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/12/university-gender-gap-scandal-thinktank-men>
 than their male peers. Statistics for 2015 show that women are now 35% more 
likely to go to university than men, withwhite men from poorer backgrounds the 
least likely group to go 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/01/white-working-class-boys-university-debt-higher-education>
 – only 8.9% choose to continue their studies.

The Sutton Trust report, called Believing in Better, is based on data from 
more than 3,000 pupils who were tracked from the age of three, and examines 
whether aspirations and attitudes towards university affect academic outcomes 
after GCSE. Results suggest that students’ aspirations – measured in the survey 
by the importance they attach to going to university and getting a degree – are 
shaped at an early age by their background.

Related: Universities get creative to even out subject gender imbalance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/03/universities-subject-gender-imbalance-maths-physics-engineering-science>

The study suggests, however, that educational factors can help to shape 
pupils’ aspirations and academic self-belief, including attending an 
academically successful primary school or well-resourced secondary school, and 
being encouraged to spend time on homework.

Researchers found that students who believed university was a likely goal for 
them were more likely to carry on with academic study afterGCSEs 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/gcses>. More than 60% of students who 
believed it was very likely that they would go to university went on to take 
three or more A-levels; three-quarters of those who felt they were not likely 
to go to university gave up their studies.

Students from ethnic minority backgrounds typically had higher levels of 
aspiration than their white peers, and students from neighbourhoods with higher 
levels of unemployment were five times more likely to consider a university 
degree as very important than those from areas with lower unemployment.

Disadvantaged students were, however, less likely to think they would go on to 
university than their more advantaged peers, with only 27% believing it was 
likely they themselves would continue into higher education and get a degree, 
compared with 39% of their better-off peers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k5z6%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k5z6%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d3eefa73ec6a939f9b8def02aefe4288c16b73f%2F88_771_4362_2617%2F4362.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Girls%20more%20positive%20about%20university%20than%20boys%2C%20new%20study%20finds&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k5z6%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Girls+more+positive+about+university+than+boys%2C+new+study+finds&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k5z6%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d3eefa73ec6a939f9b8def02aefe4288c16b73f%2F88_771_4362_2617%2F4362.jpg>
 More than 60% of students who believed it was very likely that they would go 
to university went on to take three or more A-levels. Photograph: Alamy 
Professor Pam Sammons 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2012/mar/29/homework-linked-better-school-results>
, the report’s lead author, said: “Our research shows that students’ belief in 
themselves and their aspirations are shaped by their background. However, 
positive beliefs and high aspirations play an additional and significant role 
in predicting better A-level outcomes.


“These findings point to the practical importance for schools and teachers of 
promoting both self-belief and attainment as mutually reinforcing outcomes.”

Co-author Professor Kathy Sylva 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2008/jul/08/academicexperts.highereducation>
 added: “The higher aspirations of girls in comparison to boys may be linked to 
their greater A-level success and gaining admission to university.”

The Sutton Trust, which campaigns to improve social mobility through 
education, is calling for more support to raise the aspirations and attainment 
of students from poorer homes, including opportunities for them to attend the 
best-performing schools and pre-schools in order to “help level the playing 
field”.


Sir Peter Lampl <http://www.theguardian.com/profile/peter-lampl>, chair of the 
Sutton Trust, said: “Today’s report shows us how important it is to raise the 
aspirations and self-belief of pupils from poorer homes, particularly boys. We 
need to offer more support to disadvantaged young people throughout their 
education so that they are in a position to fulfil their potential after GCSE.”
