
Plans to tighten rules allowing offenders to receive reduced sentences in 
return for early guilty pleas must be delayed in case they lead to a surge in 
the prison population, MPs have said.

Related: Defendants told to plead guilty earlier to receive lower sentences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/feb/11/regulations-around-sentence-reduction-after-guilty-plea-to-be-tightened>

Up to 4,000 additional places for inmates may be needed if proposals from the 
Sentencing <http://www.theguardian.com/law/sentencing> Council go ahead, 
according to the justice select committee. The justice secretary, Michael Gove, 
has also signalled his concern at the revised scheme.

 Introducing stricter guidelines designed to persuade defendants to plead 
guilty earlier 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/feb/11/regulations-around-sentence-reduction-after-guilty-plea-to-be-tightened>
 in the court process could have a perverse impact and encourage more to go to 
full trial, the committee’s report suggests.

 The changes, currently out to consultation, may also adversely affect those 
with mental health problems and the increasing number of unrepresented 
defendants going through the criminal justice system, MPs fear.

Defendants often delay their plea for as long as possible until they can see 
the strength of the prosecution evidence. Announcing the proposals in February, 
Lord Justice Treacy, the chairman of the Sentencing Council, said: “We want 
those who have committed crimes to admit their guilt as early as possible … It 
also means that the police and Crown Prosecution Service can use their 
resources more efficiently to investigate and prosecute other cases.”

 However, in its report, the justice select committee warns that the 
well-intentioned aim could cost up to £120m extra in funding additional prison 
places.

 “We recommend that the Sentencing Council delay the finalisation and 
implementation of the new guideline until it has undertaken and published 
further research into the factors that influence a defendant’s decision about 
whether and when to plead guilty, both in the magistrates’ court and the crown 
court,” the report concludes.

Bob Neill MP, the Conservative chair of the committee, said: “There has not 
been enough research to assess the possible impact on prisons and other aspects 
of the criminal justice system. The Sentencing Council should conduct further 
research into the factors that influence a defendant’s decision to plead 
guilty, to inform a more comprehensive and robust reassessment of the draft 
guideline, taking into account costs and savings to all aspects of the criminal 
justice system, especially the prison population.”

Under the Sentencing Council’s proposals, to qualify for the maximum reduction 
of one-third off their punishment, offenders would have to acknowledge guilt 
the first time that they are asked for their plea in court.


For those who plead guilty after the first stage, the maximum reduction for 
which they are eligible would drop to one-fifth, compared with one-quarter 
under the current process. A Sentencing Council resource assessment 
acknowledged the uncertainty as to how defendants would respond to a changed 
guideline.


“Some defendants, having missed the full one-third discount, may opt to go to 
trial and, if found guilty, could serve longer prison terms by losing credit 
for an early plea,” the MPs suggest.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yvh7%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yvh7%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb8d7f40e759f5be819babab48f8d329b2d548a6%2F1430_858_1261_1576%2F1261.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Early%20guilty%20plea%20scheme%20could%20increase%20prison%20population%2C%20say%20MPs&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yvh7%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Early+guilty+plea+scheme+could+increase+prison+population%2C+say+MPs&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yvh7%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb8d7f40e759f5be819babab48f8d329b2d548a6%2F1430_858_1261_1576%2F1261.jpg>
 Michael Gove has raised concerns over the revised scheme. Photograph: Getty 
“On this assumption, the resource assessment estimates up to 4,000 additional 
prison places may be needed. Even if more offenders do plead guilty at the 
first stage of proceedings, the assessment estimates that 1,000 additional 
prison places would be required; this is because the new guideline is designed 
to ensure that sentence reductions are applied more consistently than under the 
current guideline.”

A significant minority of respondents to the Sentencing Council’s consultation 
have predicted that, by reducing from 25% to 20% the discount for a later 
guilty plea, the guideline will give defendants insufficient incentive to plead 
guilty.

The justice committee report adds: “We are aware that the secretary of state 
for justice, the Rt Hon Michael Gove MP, has written to the chairman of the 
Sentencing Council requesting that the impact of these initiatives be reviewed 
before deciding how to proceed with the guideline.

“He has also suggested that the government’s behavioural insights team be 
given time to test the impact of a proposed new model for providing information 
about early guilty pleas to defendants at the police station.

“The potentially serious impact of the new guideline on the prison population 
is a matter of some concern to us; that population now stands at around 84,500 
and prisons are widely perceived as being under intense strain.”

A spokesman for the Sentencing Council said: “[We are] grateful for the 
justice select committee’s careful consideration of our proposals. Over the 
next few months we will be looking at the committee’s recommendations alongside 
the views received in nearly 180 responses to our consultation. All responses 
receive detailed consideration and we frequently make changes to our drafts as 
a result of the insights we receive from respondents.”
