
Ljubljana, the capital of Slovenia, holds the coveted title of European Green 
Capital 2016 <http://www.greenljubljana.com/>, so this year it’s hosting many 
activities promoting sustainable development. More than 650 investment 
projects, both large and small, have been implemented so far, each aimed 
towards improving the quality of life of Ljubljana residents. One example, the
BicikeLj bike-sharing scheme 
<http://www.ljubljana.si/en/green-capital/green-news/90666/detail.html>, has 
registered more than 1.6m journeys – close to the total number of inhabitants 
in Slovenia.


Tucked between Italy, Austria, Croatia and Hungary, Slovenia 
<http://www.slovenia.info/en/Home.htm?home=0&lng=2>, a small EU country, has 
many reasons to develop circular business models. Most of its companies are 
suppliers, and as such, they are sensitive to new trends. A spirit of 
innovation and a large number of SMEs and startups looking for new 
opportunities represent the strong driving force of Slovenian entrepreneurship. 
Fostering collaboration and empowering cooperation between businesses, emerging 
innovators and the regions are crucial for the development of this new economic 
model.


Aquafil, Iskraemeco and Štore Steel are just three of the circular economy 
frontrunners based in Slovenia.

Waste fishing nets

Aquafil <http://www.aquafil.com/where-we-are/slovenia/> Group is a leading 
international player in the production of fibres and polymers, primarily Nylon 
6, Dryarn and XLA, but also, more recently, it is the inventor and only 
producer of ECONYL, a polyamide made from 100% recycled raw materials. These 
materials include post-consumer fishing nets, carpets, clothing, rugs, and 
rigid textiles, as well as pre-consumer waste like oligomers and scraps 
generated by the production of Nylon 6.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m5cx%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m5cx%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8901c7d43d1fde368dbb7e01f53e6a1a3316fe91%2F0_14_800_480%2F800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20100%25%20recycled%20steel%20to%20eco-nylon%2C%20meet%20Slovenia's%20circular%20changemakers&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m5cx%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From+100%25+recycled+steel+to+eco-nylon%2C+meet+Slovenia%27s+circular+changemakers&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m5cx%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8901c7d43d1fde368dbb7e01f53e6a1a3316fe91%2F0_14_800_480%2F800.jpg>
 Post-consumer fishing nets. Photograph: Aquafil 
ECONYL 
<http://www.mediachange.info/en/Circular_Economy/how-aquafil-is-closing-the-loop-with-econyl/>
 is already used in garments by brands like La Perla and Adidas, which is a 
great step forward in the textile sector, given that 20% of global waste comes 
from the textile and apparel sectors. “The demand for ecological nylon is now 
higher than the quantity we can produce. From the very beginning it has been 
highly respected by our customers and recognised as a premium material,” 
proudly explains Edi Kraus, CEO of Aquafil Slovenia.

Related: Six Spanish circular economy companies to watch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/apr/29/six-spanish-circular-economy-companies-to-watch>

The circular smart meter

The Slovenian company Iskraemeco 
<http://www.iskraemeco.com/en/news/iskraemeco-will-transform-dutch-electricity-landscape-within-235-eur-million-smart-metering-contract/>
 is playing a visible role in the most circular environment so far –the 
Netherlands 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/apr/27/the-netherlands-puts-itself-on-the-map-as-a-circular-economy-hotspot>
. The initiative started in 2013 with the signing of aGreen Deal Fair Meter 
<https://waag.org/sites/waag/files/public/media/publicaties/mh-c158-green-deal-fair-meter-en.pdf>
 between the social enterprise Waag, the companies Liander and Stedin, and the 
Dutch government. Following new EU regulations, all households in the 
Netherlands will be offered a smart meter before 2020. The Green Deal ensures 
that these meters will not only be smart but fair, and that with every 
subsequent (cost-based) product development of the smart meter in the chain, 
the design principles of circularity will be adhered to. The aim is that by 
2020 every new smart meter produced will be made from more than 98% used 
resources and/or materials designed for reuse.

After a 12-month tender process, Iskraemeco was chosen as one of the Fair 
Meter developers and suppliers. They will deploy up to 2.5m smart meters within 
the five-year rollout period.


“For some months now we have been analysing all the materials and components 
in our smart meters. We are finding replacements for all those we identify that 
might not be gained or produced in a transparent, sustainable, circular and 
fair way, for instance if they exploit child labour or come from mines in war 
zones in Africa ,” explained Mojca Markizeti, Fair Meter project manager at 
Iskraemeco. Together with their partners in the project, they will also develop 
a supply chain transparency tool to enable other manufacturers to go more 
quickly and easily down the same path.

100% circular steel industry

The most circular sector in Slovenia, well above the global average, is the 
steel industry. Globally, only about 29% of steel is recycled, even though 
steel is 100% recyclable without loss of quality and has a potentially endless 
lifecycle.


“In Slovenia, every bit of around 600,000 tonnes produced per year is made 
from recycled (scrap) steel, which comes mainly from waste streams in 
Slovenia,” explained Marjan Mačkošek, president of the Chamber of Commerce and 
Industry of Slovenia and CEO at Štore Steel. He admits that going circular is 
more expensive at first but believes that in the long run the shift is 
inevitable. “If we take Slovenia as a very good example, we don’t have any 
natural resources except wood, so we have already been forced for many years to 
use and reuse resources very rationally and to innovate as much as possible. 
These are our only key opportunities,” he emphasised.

Engaging circular changemakers
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m5cx%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m5cx%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52bbedd3d3aebf5d7e0875f0c0dd7ae3ac4410ec%2F0_0_3960_2376%2F3960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20100%25%20recycled%20steel%20to%20eco-nylon%2C%20meet%20Slovenia's%20circular%20changemakers&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m5cx%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From+100%25+recycled+steel+to+eco-nylon%2C+meet+Slovenia%27s+circular+changemakers&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m5cx%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52bbedd3d3aebf5d7e0875f0c0dd7ae3ac4410ec%2F0_0_3960_2376%2F3960.jpg>
 Dr Janez Potocnik, Dr Maja Makovec Brencic, Ladeja Godina Kosir and Casper 
Jorna at the Circular Change Conference. Photograph: Matjaz Tavcar 
On 6 May, an international conference, Embracing the Circular Change 
<http://www.circularchange.com/>, took place in Ljubljana. Dr Janez Potočnik, 
<http://www.circularchange.com/janez-potocnik/> former EU commissioner for the 
environment and one of the champions of the circular economy, was the main 
speaker and one of the panelists. The event was organised byCircular Change 
<http://www.circularchange.com/about/> - a newly established stakeholder 
engagement platform focusing on the circular economy, with the ambition of 
informing, educating, recognising leaders, interpreting best practice and 
co-creating pioneering case studies in the transition from a linear to a 
circular business model. This conference was an invitation to circular 
changemakers to contribute to the creation of good business in the near future.

Content on this page is paid for and provided by Philips, sponsor of the 
circular economy hub 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/series/circular-economy>
