
There are those who may feel they have heard enough from free school pioneer 
and writerToby Young over the past few days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/09/toby-young-u-turn-free-schools-nicky-morgan-education-policies>
 – his announcement that he is stepping down as chief executive of his schools, 
the lessons he has learned since he entered the fraught world of education and 
his subsequent complaints in a Spectatorcolumn 
<http://blogs.spectator.co.uk/2016/05/yesterday-was-one-of-the-worst-day-of-my-life/>
 (“Yesterday was one of the worst days of my life”) about the way these two 
elements have been reported.

But in what has been a tumultuous few weeks for teachers, parents, pupils and 
politicians, with the education white paper’s plans to force all schools to 
become academies, the backlash and U-turn that followed, plus a string of 
embarrassing blunders and protests around primary school testing, Young has 
some interesting and unexpected insights into education policy and practice 
that go beyond the small media storm he triggered last week.

Related: Free schools aren't empty, it's just bad press 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/teacher-blog/2014/apr/27/free-schools-empty-places-gove-education-policy>

We meet at one of his primary free schools on a wet morning – he has a heavy 
cold and is coughing. We sit in the interim headteacher’s office, Young 
choosing his words carefully as he tries to unpick the flurry of coverage and 
comment that followed a recent profile inSchools Week 
<http://schoolsweek.co.uk/toby-young-free-school-chief-executive/>.

The interest focused on his regrets since embarking on his educational odyssey 
– the tone is almost apologetic and rather unexpected given his bumptious 
public profile. Young admits that at the beginning he hadn’t grasped how 
difficult it was to bring about system-wide improvement, and how with the 
benefit of hindsight he would have been less critical of schools.

In the reporting that followed, his comments were directly linked with his 
decision to step down as CEO at the end of this academic year. “In all the 
pieces that ran, the gist of it was that I had imagined that running schools 
was far easier than it had turned out to be and that’s why I was stepping down 
as CEO.” Indeed, in theMirror 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/toby-young-admits-running-school-7911002> 
it was “Toby Young admits ‘running a school was harder than I thought’ in 
extraordinary free schools climbdown”, while the Times headlined the story, 
“Poster boy of free schools quits”.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fnov%2F12%2Ffree-schools-middle-classes-video-debate&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fnov%2F12%2Ffree-schools-middle-classes-video-debate&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2013%2F11%2F11%2F1384192656379%2FBoris-Johnson-Attends-The-016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Do%20free%20schools%20favour%20the%20middle%20classes%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20debate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fnov%2F12%2Ffree-schools-middle-classes-video-debate>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Do+free+schools+favour+the+middle+classes%3F+%E2%80%93+video+debate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fnov%2F12%2Ffree-schools-middle-classes-video-debate&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2013%2F11%2F11%2F1384192656379%2FBoris-Johnson-Attends-The-016.jpg>
Melissa Benn and Toby Young discuss whether 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2013/nov/12/free-schools-middle-classes-video-debate>
free schools favour the middle classes – video (2013) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2013/nov/12/free-schools-middle-classes-video-debate>
Young wants to make clear that though he is stepping down, there is no “free 
schools climbdown” and he remains as passionately committed to free schools as 
ever. He’s proud of the schools he has helped set up and would like to see the 
free school policy extended to other parts of the UK. But the West London Free 
School Academy Trust that he founded has become too big a job for a part-time 
CEO – Young does it in three days a week – and with plans to expand from four 
schools to up to 20 over the next decade, they need a full-time professional.

His regrets are worth revisiting briefly, as they reveal the way in which the 
experience of setting up a free school has been an education for him. He talks 
about his naivety in thinking if you get the ethos and the curriculum of a 
school right, then everything else will fall into place. “I had not realised at 
the time that’s really just the tip of the iceberg,” he says. “I had not 
grasped just how many different things you have to get right, just how many 
details you have to stay across, and just how easily things can go wrong.”

He’s sorry he was dismissive about teacher workload and says he has a 
new-found respect for the profession. “I now realise that teaching is 
incredibly hard work and not something I could do myself,” he says, adding: “We 
do expect them to do far too much.”

Related: How the Tories picked free schools: chaotic, inconsistent and 
incompetent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/15/legal-battle-why-free-schools-succeed-and-fail>

Young also admits to being disappointed with the way the government’s free 
schools policy is playing out. While parents were at the centre of the original 
free school vision, it has become progressively more difficult for parent 
groups to set up schools. In the last wave of openings announced by the 
government in February, only one out of 22 schools was being set up by parents.

“It’s still possible for parent groups to set up free schools,” insists Young. 
“I’m in touch with a number of them. It’s perhaps more difficult now than it 
was in 2010. The problem is that for parents’ groups to successfully set up 
schools they need a tremendous amount of support. That’s expensive. In the 
current financial climate it’s very difficult for the Department for Education 
to justify spending a lot of money on putting various forms of support in place 
for parent groups.”

He’s also cautious about David Cameron’s promise of 500 additional free 
schools by the end of this parliament, describing it as “an ambitious target 
not just because setting up schools is really hard, but because finding 
suitable sites is really difficult, particularly in London”.

Young does not want to appear too critical of the government. He is supportive 
of the Sats regime, which has been widely criticised, particularly after papers 
were leaked online, and he has no sympathy with parents who took their children 
out of school in protest at the tests: “I don’t buy that children find them 
stressful. If a test is administered properly children should not find them
stressful 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/03/morgan-sats-test-children-primary-school-pupils>
.” His own son was sitting Sats last week. “I was trying to get him to revise 
last night, he point-blank refused.”

He also plays down the government’s U-turn 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/09/nicky-morgan-chaotic-mess-academies-u-turn>
 over forced academisation. “I’m not sure how much of a climbdown it is. There 
are still lots of mechanisms in place which will ensure that more and more 
schools convert to academy status.” Later he describes it as “a political 
miscalculation”, adding: “We will get there anyway but we will perhaps not get 
there quite as quickly. They had not done enough tilling of the soil. It came 
as a bit of a shock to many backbench MPs.”

But it is on the “enormous powers” – his words – at the disposal of the 
education secretary that he is at his most interesting and critical. With the 
erosion of local authority responsibility for education, more power has been 
handed to Nicky Morgan and her department.

Related: A Toby Young U-turn on free schools? Don’t believe the hype | Lola 
Okolosie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/09/toby-young-u-turn-free-schools-nicky-morgan-education-policies>

In the absence of an intermediate tier between schools and the DfE, Young 
proposes schools should have the right of appeal to the privy council over some 
decisions. His concern is focused on some imagined future education secretary 
under a Labour government, who will inherit these powers and might use them to 
claw back some of the freedoms his schools enjoy. But he says that schools 
today should have that same right of appeal.

“If a school is being forced to close or if it is being forced to join a 
multi-academy trust it doesn’t want to join – a couple of free schools have 
been forced to close – it would have been nice for them to have a right of 
appeal to the privy council,” he says.

Although Young is stepping down as CEO he will remain involved at the schools 
he founded as a director. This year will see the first cohort sit their GCSEs 
and he is confident results will be well above the national average. 
Nevertheless, the past six years have been quite an education for him.

“It’s been easily the most difficult thing I’ve tried to do in my life. I 
co-produced a Hollywood movie – I thought that was difficult. That was a walk 
in the park compared to setting up schools.”
