
Herds of hungry diners fall in line at the four London branches of Dishoom 
<http://www.dishoom.com/> most evenings and weekend brunch times. Maybe they 
are hankering after a table of fragrant small plates or a bacon naan roll (a 
brunch best-seller), or perhaps it’s the exotic colonial decor that has them 
hooked.

The restaurant business has carefully carved a distinct brand, from the 
nostalgic interiors (oversized fans, ornate light fittings and wicker lounging 
chairs at the bar) to its limited reservations policy (any size of party can 
book a table for before 5.45pm, but bookings are limited to groups of six or 
more after that).


According to Adarsh Radia, one of the chain’s four co-founders, this focus on 
aesthetics came from a deeper ambition to bring authentic Indian food to UK 
diners. “The British public have a love affair with Indian food. But the 
proposition offered to them was the tired stereotype of a curry house and 
lager,” says Radia.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ydg7%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ydg7%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a96285b0040e0cd086a14d01978127d28fbff06%2F0_18_5618_3371%2F5618.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dishoom's%20co-founder%20on%20our%20love%20affair%20with%20Indian%20food&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ydg7%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dishoom%27s+co-founder+on+our+love+affair+with+Indian+food&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ydg7%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a96285b0040e0cd086a14d01978127d28fbff06%2F0_18_5618_3371%2F5618.jpg>
 The King’s Cross branch of Dishoom. Photograph: Alecsandra Raluca Dragoi for 
the Guardian 
Dishoom was founded by Shamil and Kavi Thakrar, who are cousins, and Adarsh 
and his brother Amar. They spent three years deciding how it would look, but 
the driving force was their shared experience of home-made Indian food. The 
Radia brothers grew up in an Indian family in Kenya, while the Thakrars lived 
in the UK but enjoyed regular trips to India as children.


Before launching the business in 2010, a group trip to Mumbai cemented the 
idea for how Dishoom would stand out in the crowded restaurant industry. “We 
fell in love with the idea of the Irani cafes of [early 1900s] Bombay [now 
Mumbai]. They were formed by the Parsi community who were very western in their 
thinking. They were trying to recreate the Parisian brasseries and the grand 
cafes of Vienna. These spaces ended up being community hubs in Bombay – and for 
us that was amazing. There was a story there.”


If you visit a branch of Dishoom, you’ll notice the close attention to detail, 
from the burning incense to the retro rule signs, such as: “All Chai is coming 
strictly without opium”.


The reservations policy was also rooted in the Irani cafe model, explains 
Adarsh. “They were democratic; they weren’t exclusive.” While India in the 
early 1900s was divided by class, caste and religion, Irani cafeswere a place 
of inclusion 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/may/10/mumbai-parsi-cafes-indian-food> 
– anyone could enter and the food was reasonably priced. “Being able to reserve 
is kind of [exclusive],” adds Radia. “You should be able to just rock up. But 
if you’re in a group of six or more we appreciate that you need to plan ahead.”


Dishoom’s success has been humbling, he says. It was voted the UK’s best place 
to eat in 2016 in alist  
<https://biz.yelp.co.uk/blog/the-yelp-top-100-uk-eateries>compiled by Yelp, 
which was created by analysing data from users of the site. Its turnover for 
2014 (the latest figure filed to Companies House) was £10.2m. It’s also been 
suggested that aManchester branch 
<http://www.manchestereveningnews.co.uk/business/business-news/dishoom-looks-sites-manchester-gets-10776065>
 could be in the works.

Adarsh enjoyed using his creativity with Dishoom, something that was stifled 
while running his first business (also with his brother) – a franchise of 
Subway sandwiches.


This move into entrepreneurship came after a stint in banking. “Coming from an 
entrepreneurial family I realised that [banking] just wasn’t my calling. I was 
quite disillusioned about two years in, so I decided I would leave and do 
something on my own. At the same time I [sounded out] the idea with my brother 
and he was equally disillusioned as an accountant. So we decided to go into 
business together.” Over three and a half years, the brothers grew the Subway 
franchise to 29 sites before selling the business.

“You’re unable to innovate much in a structured environment like that. The 
reason they’re successful is because they stick to their formula. That doesn’t 
resonate well with someone that is bubbling with ideas. I guess for me it was 
like being trapped.” Asked what he would do differently, he returns to the 
sandwich franchise. “I don’t regret Subway. But I expended a lot of energy on 
that business. It’s important not to get attracted by an opportunity without 
seeing if it overlaps with you and your values.”


After the Radias sold off their Subway interests, they moved into telecoms. 
Telenomics is a franchise partner of O2. “We manage about 150,000 customers,” 
says Adarsh. “It has introduced me to my business partner, [aside from] my 
brother, Asad Hamir.”

With Telenomics and Dishoom going strong, Hamir approached the Radia brothers 
with another business proposition – eye wear. Hamir comes from a family line of 
29 optometrists and saw room for innovation in the industry.


“He gave us a history around eye wear, an industry that is really stuck in the 
past. There is a lack of innovation because there are just a few companies that 
control all the design, all the manufacture and all the distribution.”


The resulting startup, Kite, produces glasses and sunglasses which are sold to 
customers for £150, whatever their prescription. Some of them (all handcrafted 
in Italy) come with futuristic frames. This is a taste of what the co-founders 
are planning for future products – to install the technology you find in a 
smartwatch or smartphone (or in Google Glass) in stylish frames.


A smartphone can record all types of information, but is not always on your 
person, explains Radia. “With my glasses on [and installed with smartphone 
tech], I could potentially recall back what I’ve said to you. You see these 
motorcyclists wearing GoPro cameras to record their vision in case they’re in 
an accident: glasses are well placed for this type of technology.”


With Kite growing, Radia is less involved in the day-to-day running of 
Dishoom, although he still sits on the board. But he isn’t content with running 
just one startup – and 18 months ago he began working on Widerpool, a business 
in which he and co-founder Ignacio Macias are connecting innovative tech 
companies with big corporates. Widerpool provides the tech businesses with 
investment, support, and a ready-made network of business people, and in turn 
takes a stake in those businesses.


Widerpool sent out an initial call for innovative tech companies at the end of 
March 2015. They attracted 87 growing ventures, which then went through a 
rigorous screening and judging process by Widerpool’s board. The type of 
companies involved are not in their startup phase, but are generating revenue, 
have proven their concept and have a solid team that’s able to deliver products 
to meet the need of big corporates.


The entrants were whittled down to three and each of them was awarded $250k 
(£176k) of investment. This is taken from Widerpool’s fund, which is made up of 
angel investment. The investors hold a stake in the Widerpool fund, which in 
turn has a stake in the tech businesses.


The idea is that Widerpool helps these tech companies scale by integrating 
them into relevant corporates around the world, and corporates use Widerpool as 
a source of verified tech companies that they can work with to create more 
innovation in their global business.


With such a range of successful ventures, which is Adarsh Radia proudest of? 
“It’s like choosing between your children. I’m [most] proud of who I am now 
compared to who I was years ago. In the sense that I am constantly learning. I 
feel that I’m much wiser.”


Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
