
In his PMQs debut, the chancellor, George Osborne 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne>, said the UK is home to 1% 
of the world’s population, has 4% of world GDP, but has 7% of global welfare 
spend.

As my colleague Andrew Sparrow pointed out 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2015/jun/17/labour-deputy-leadership-nominations-close-at-noon-politics-live#block-558163e4e4b05c5f91d258b5>
, the quote is most probably the British version of one of German chancellor 
Angela Merkel’s favourite sayings, which goes: “Europe has 7% of the world’s 
population, 25% of its wealth, 50% of its welfare spending.”

Is it true? 

The first two claims are simple to verify – the UK is in fact home to nearly 
1% of the world’s population and comprises just under 4% of global GDP.

As with Merkel’s claim, verifying Osborne’s welfare spending figure is more 
complicated.

Last year the excellent FullFact checked the German chancellor’s claim 
<https://fullfact.org/factchecks/europe_half_world_welfare_spending-29324>. So, 
assuming the UK Treasury has simply adapted those same numbers, based on them, 
theUK’s social protection spending is 7.4% of the world’s total 
<http://fullfact.org/sites/fullfact.org/files/SPspending_Data_20140116.xlsx>, 
according to World Bank data.

Is that the whole story? 

As FullFact notes, the “world total” in the World Bank report is comprised of 
96 countries, and does not include several large economies, such as Canada and 
Mexico (wheresocial expenditure accounts for about 17% and 8% of each country’s 
GDP <https://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=SOCX_AGG>).

It is therefore likely that a true world total would lower Britain’s 
proportion – albeit not enough to make Osborne’s claim false – and probably 
explains the chancellor’s rounding down to 7%.

It is also worth noting that the UK’s global share is in line with comparable 
economies, such as Germany (12.56% of world total), France (9.92%) and Italy 
(6.84%). Even as a percentage of GDP,Britain’s social spending is on a par with 
the OECD average 
<http://ftalphaville.ft.com/2014/11/27/2053392/welfare-spending-across-the-oecd/>
 and other advanced economies.

A second area of possible confusion when looking at all this is how welfare 
spending is actually defined, and then compared between countries.

Total social protection spending 
<http://unstats.un.org/unsd/cr/registry/regcst.asp?Cl=4&Lg=1> (which is the 
definition used in the World Bank report) in the UK amounts to about £250bn a 
year (36% of its public spending),according to FullFact 
<https://fullfact.org/economy/welfare_budget_public_spending-29886>. It 
includes what is paid out in benefits, pensions and tax credits, but also the 
cost to administer all these and the cost of personal social services, such as 
social care for the elderly.

A narrower definition of welfare, say, the amount paid out for benefits and 
pensions, amounts to £183bn (26% of public spending). On top of that, £30bn is 
paid out in tax credits each year by HMRC.

