
There is much to appreciate about the announcement of a link between the 
Dublin-based Irish Times and the Belfast-based websiteThe Detail 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/search/search-7.1213540?tag_organisation=The%20Detail&article=true>
.

It brings together old and new media. It crosses the Irish border. It 
underlines the importance of investigative journalism. And it reminds us of the 
growing value of data journalism.

The Detail is a not-for-profit outlet, founded in 2011, to investigate issues 
of public interest. Some of its biggest projects, such as the religious makeup 
of schools inNorthern Ireland <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> 
and the impact of the abortion laws on both sides of the border, have been 
published by the Irish Times.

Now the paper is planning in the coming months to work with The Detail  
<http://www.irishtimes.com/news/politics/belfast-news-website-the-detail-to-expand-operations-1.2619999>
on investigations into health care, the criminal justice system and the 
problems faced by children across the island.

News of the deal coincides with The Detail’s decision to recruit more 
journalists <http://www.thedetail.tv/articles/new-journalism-jobs-at-the-detail>
 to join a team that has won recognition for its data journalism with awards 
from from the Royal Statistical Society, the Online Media Awards and the 
Northern Ireland Media Awards.

Funding comes from philanthropic, public and private sources, with investment 
from its parent company, Below The Radar, the Big Lottery in NorthernIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>, Atlantic Philanthropies and the 
Community Relations Council.

Steven McCaffery, The Detail’s editor, said: “We are looking forward to 
working with theIrish Times <http://www.theguardian.com/media/irish-times> on 
projects that will cover issues that are vitally important to the lives of 
people, north and south.”

And Kevin O’Sullivan, editor of the Irish Times, spoke of his paper’s delight 
at “deepening our relationship with The Detail... especially data-driven 
stories and investigations that are relevant in an all-Ireland context.”

If you are interested in joining The Detail, then you’ll need to have worked 
as a journalist for a minimum of three years. Applicants need togo here for 
more details and application form. 
<http://www.thedetail.tv/articles/new-journalism-jobs-at-the-detail>
