
The new advertising chief at the Mail titles, Mel Scott, appears to be 
ruffling feathers at media agencies while causing a flap in her own department.

According to an interview with her in Campaign 
<http://www.campaignlive.co.uk/article/mel-scott-rocks-boat-ad-shake-up-daily-mail/1374299>
, she has demanded minimum spend from media agencies and axed staff who 
previously handled individual advertisers. Five of the seven leading media 
agencies have evidently agreed to her new terms.

Scott was promoted in July to be the first chief revenue officer of Mail 
Brands from her previous position selling ads forMail Online 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/mail-online>.

Her brief was to combine print and digital into a £250m-a-year unified sales 
team for the Daily Mail,Mail on Sunday 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/mailonsunday> and Mail Online.


But, reports Gideon Spanier, the ad industry has been taken aback by the 
sweeping changes Scott has introduced.


At the start of November, she introduced “fixed-price” deals that guarantee a 
minimum amount of revenue to reflect the Mail’s increased share of the 
newspaper market (about 23%).

In her own department, she cut some 30 jobs by removing sales staff who looked 
after individual advertisers. The result, she admitted, was “a lot of combative 
conversations”.

Some agencies were unhappy at losing their individual contacts. “Not having 
the previous client team does not take our focus away from servicing clients,” 
she said, revealing that the chairman, Lord Rothermere, had met clients in 
recent weeks.

She also said that the editors of the Daily Mail and Mail on Sunday, Paul 
Dacre andGeordie Greig <http://www.theguardian.com/media/geordie-greig> 
respectively, “are massively supportive.”

The interview was conducted before the release of annual results by the Daily 
Mail & General Trust, which showed Mail Onlinehad missed its target of making 
£80m in revenue in the 12 months up to September 2015. 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/nov/25/mail-online-misses-80m-revenue-target>

Source: Campaign 
<http://www.campaignlive.co.uk/article/mel-scott-rocks-boat-ad-shake-up-daily-mail/1374299>
