
Injuries happen to all runners regardless of age, ability or experience. 
Aquajogging, otherwise known as deepwater running, is a great way of staying 
fit while injured.

The double Olympic champion Kelly Holmes was an early proponent. In 2000, 
Holmes suffered a calf injury and could only resume track training six weeks 
before the Sydney Olympics, where she won the bronze medal. This remarkable 
achievement was made possible by her use of aquajogging to maintain an 
extremely high level of fitness as the injury healed.

So, if you have been sidelined by injury, fear not: it is possible to stay in 
shape. Even if you are not injured, aquajogging can be used to supplement your 
normal running programme and give your endurance a boost without giving your 
legs a pounding.

What is it?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tygf%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tygf%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc51df6bc25b6a378abbc8ff6a8783424ba19ab9c%2F0_336_3328_4160%2F3328.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aquajogging%3A%20how%2C%20when%20and%20why%20to%20try%20it&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tygf%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aquajogging%3A+how%2C+when+and+why+to+try+it&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tygf%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc51df6bc25b6a378abbc8ff6a8783424ba19ab9c%2F0_336_3328_4160%2F3328.jpg>
 Aquajogging with a flotation belt. Photograph: Tracy Frankel/Getty Images 
Aquajogging involves wearing a flotation device around your middle and then 
moving your arms and legs in a running motion in the deep end of the pool. Your 
feet should not touch the floor of the pool and you should make slow forward 
progress. It is probably the most common form of cross training among elite 
athletes.


Aquajogging belts can be purchased cheaply online. Having the belt clipped on 
around your midriff allows you to stay afloat, so that your technique is 
focused on replicating a good running action, rather than keeping your head 
above water.

When performed right, with the correct upright posture, aquajogging is a great 
form of resistance training. Almost every muscle that you use when running can 
be exercised, and it is particularly beneficial for the hip flexors. Driving 
the knees up against the resistance of the water allows the hip flexors to be 
strengthened in a full range of motion. Hip flexors are chronically weak and 
tight in most runners who work desk jobs and spend most of the day sitting 
down. This weakness contributes to many running injuries; most commonly 
runner’s knee complaints. You may find that you have a better and more 
resilient running form back on dry land once you introduce aquajogging to your 
training programme.


Technique tips

 * Ensure that the water in which you train is deep enough so your feet won’t 
hit the bottom when you run. 
 * Maintain an upright posture with shoulders directly above hips. The main 
conclusion from watching people aquajogging on an underwater camera is that, no 
matter how much you think you’re leaning back, you’re still leaning forward. 
This is probably because the belts give you more buoyancy at the back than 
front. 
 * Clench your hands in a fist so that you won’t “cheat” by swimming with your 
hands for forward propulsion. 
 * Imagine you are stepping over a barrel and rolling it behind you – ie 
exaggerate the knee drive over the imaginary barrel, and also push it back 
fully with the trail leg. 
 * Find a training partner. Without the distractions of the world passing you 
by, aquajogging alone can be quite dull. 
 * Always do intervals, always take short recoveries. Given that aquajogging 
is non-weight-bearing, the intensity will not be as high as with normal 
running. This should be countered by breaking each session up into intervals of 
hard effort with short recovery. 
 * Dorsiflex your feet – this is another thing you do while running on land 
without realising it, but you need to actively think about it when aquajogging 
– it means to pull your toes up towards your shins. 
 * Choose the slowest lane possible. Aquajogging is not intended to make you 
move fast through the water, so you will be going slower than everyone else in 
the pool. 
 * While the technical advice above is important to consider, the main thing 
to focus on is that you are working hard and getting your heart rate and 
breathing rate elevated. 
There are of course many other forms of cross training, including swimming, 
cycling, elliptical and rowing machines. Aquajogging has the advantage of being 
zero-impact. This is particularly useful for runners who have suffered bad 
ankle or foot injuries, and for whom cycling and using an elliptical machine 
are thus not possible. Aquajogging has the benefits over swimming of not 
requiring any previous training and of working a more similar set of muscles to 
running.

Related: Rachel Holmes puts aqua running to the test 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2008/aug/26/fitness> 

Sessions

Below are some ideas for sessions that you can carry out in the pool, although 
replicating any of the training that you do in your normal running programme 
(with slightly reduced recoveries) will also work well.


Pool Session 1 (30min total, 14min hard)


 * 8min easy warmup 
 * 8 x 1min hard (30sec recovery) 
 * 12 x 30sec hard (20sec recovery) 
 * 8min easy warmdown 
Pool Session 2 (52min total, 22min hard)


 * 10min warmup 
 * 3 x 3min hard (90sec recovery) 
 * 2min easy 
 * 4 x 2min hard (60sec recovery) 
 * 2min easy 
 * 5 x 1min hard (30sec recovery) 
 * 10min warmdown 
Follow Jake on Twitter at @jakegshelley <https://twitter.com/jakegshelley>. He 
blogs atjakegshelley.wordpress.com <https://jakegshelley.wordpress.com>.
Online coaching bigbeartc.org/coaching-packages 
<https://www.bigbeartc.org/coaching-packages>.
