
George Osborne has told voters that by choosing to leave the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> they would be embracing Ukip’s “mean, 
divisive” vision of Britain.

The chancellor used a television interview with the BBC’s Andrew Neil to draw 
the battle lines for the final two weeks of what he called a fight for “the 
soul of our country”.
Brexit explained: current polling 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/05/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=current_polling#>
While not attacking his close friend and cabinet colleague Michael Gove, or 
potential leadership rival Boris Johnson directly, the chancellor claimed the 
campaign to leave had been hijacked by the anti-immigration agenda of Nigel 
Farage, Ukip’s leader. “Nigel Farage and his vision of Britain 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/07/farage-calls-migrant-sex-attack-comments-tiddly-issue-in-eu-referendum-campaign>
 has taken over the leave campaign,” he said.

He said warnings about the risk of Cologne-style sex attacks by migrants 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/05/nigel-farage-migrant-sex-attacks-to-be-nuclear-bomb-of-eu-referendum>
, or “bodies washing up on British beaches” – both fears voiced by Farage in 
recent days – spoke for a Britain he couldn’t endorse. “I don’t want Nigel 
Farage’s vision of Britain. It is mean, it’s divisive, it is not what we want 
for our country,” he said.

By tarring Vote Leave, which includes cabinet ministers Priti Patel and Chris 
Grayling 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/03/boris-johnson-post-brexit-cabinet-the-possible-lineup>
 as well as Gove and Johnson, with the same brush as Farage, the Stronger In 
campaign, which has been rattled by a series of close opinion polls, hopes to 
win over waverers.

In a speech on Wednesday, Gove focused on the issue of Turkey’s proposed 
membership of the European Union, accusing the government of appeasing Ankara 
over its crackdown on free speech in exchange for cooperation over the migrant 
crisis.

“There are particular times when the assertion of our liberalism needs to be 
especially muscular. Nowhere more so than when the essential freedom – freedom 
of speech – is threatened. Which brings me to the case of Turkey. That 
country’s democratic development has been put into reverse under President 
Erdoğan,” Gove said.

“We and the European Union should be protesting in the clearest and loudest 
possible manner at this erosion of fundamental democratic freedoms. But instead 
we and the European Union are making concession after concession to Erdoğan.”

However, Osborne insisted the threat of Turkey joining – which Vote Leave has 
made central to a poster campaign 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/21/vote-leave-prejudice-turkey-eu-security-threat?subid=12600464&CMP=EMCNEWEML6619I2>
 – is unlikely to be realised in his lifetime.

The chancellor also doubled down on the strategy of warning the public about 
the economic risks of Brexit, dubbed “Project Fear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/07/george-osbornes-project-fear-help-keep-us-europe>
” by his critics, saying: “There is a lot to be scared about: it is vital that 
people know what is at stake here.”

He claimed leaving the EU would mean losing control over Britain’s economy, 
comparing it to the shock that followed the 2007-8 financial crisis and plunged 
the UK into a deep recession.

The chancellor brandished a small part from an Airbus plane wing, manufactured 
in a factory in Keighley, saying that it could be made elsewhere – turning 
workers out of jobs – if Britain no longer had free access to the European 
single market.


His blunt approach was a sign that Britain Stronger in Europe is seeking to 
hone and simplify its economic message in the final days of the campaign. It 
unveiled a poster on Wednesday that is going to be used on billboards across 
the country, which simply states “out ofEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, out of work” on top of an 
image of shutters.

The image represents a final push to get across an economic message, with 
reference to aTreasury estimate that 3m jobs are dependent on EU trade 
<http://www.theguardian.com/news/reality-check/2014/apr/01/nick-clegg-v-nigel-farage-debate>
.

The Labour MP Yvette Cooper <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/yvette-cooper>
 said: “Boris Johnson and Michael Gove are more concerned with their own jobs 
than the risk that leaving the EU poses to other peoples. For them this is a 
game but the consequences of Brexit are real.”
