
Name: Labrador.

Age: Exactly 100, if we go by when the breed club was formed in the UK, 
although they are at least a century older than that.

Appearance: Barrel chest, floppy ears, pleading eyes. Typically black, yellow 
or chocolate-coloured. Like to hunt, swim and play with toilet rolls.

Misnomer: Labradors don’t come from the Canadian province of Labrador. They 
come from the Canadian island of Newfoundland – part of the same province – and 
are derived from the St John’s water dog.

Related: Owners must take the lead on canine obesity | Brief letters 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/04/owners-must-take-the-lead-on-canine-obesity>

Most popular dogs in the world, aren’t they? They are indeed. More than twice 
as popular as any other breed in the UK and the US 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Labrador_Retriever>.

And the cleverest? Depends how you look at it. Stanley Coren’s 1994 book The 
Intelligence of Dogs 
<http://www.amazon.com/The-Intelligence-Dogs-Thoughts-Companions/dp/0553374524/ref=cm_cr_arp_d_product_top?ie=UTF8>
 ranked them seventh – border collies were top – andnew research suggests their 
intelligence and trainability as assistance dogs are mainly the result of their 
love of food <https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2016/05/160503130342.htm>.

Don’t all dogs love food? Maybe, but a team of scientists at the University of 
Cambridge has shown that many labradors aregenetically incapable of stopping 
themselves eating 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/may/03/labradors-could-be-genetically-hard-wired-for-greed>
. Those most disposed to eat are also the ones that learn to perform tasks 
fastest, because food is used as an incentive.

Your grasp of the science seems a bit vague. It’s something to do with a bit 
of the POMC gene having been deleted.

Why did the POMC gene get deleted? Possibly because among St John’s water dogs 
– which were used to retrieve nets, ropes and fish from the sea – eating 
enormous amounts conferred a genetic advantage. Survival of the fattest.

So, obesity is good for you? Only if you spend your life retrieving nets in 
freezing seas.

Three famous labradors: Injured serviceman Allen Parton’s assistance dog Endal 
<http://houndsforheroes.com/what-we-do/meet-the-team/allen-parton/>, whose 
party trick was to operate a cash machine.David Blunkett 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidblunkett>’s guide dog Lucy, whose 
political astuteness was so great she oncethrew up in the House of Commons 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/295087.stm> during a speech by David 
Willetts.Omar Riviera’s guide dog Dorado 
<http://www.moggies.co.uk/articles/wtc_hero.html>, who was with his owner on 
the 71st floor of the north tower at the World Trade Center on 9/11. He stayed 
calm among the chaos and led Riviera to safety.

Most likely to say: “Woof, woof.”

Least likely to say: “I think I’ll pass on the second helpings.”
