
Brian and Rose Connolly cared for their daughter Lynnie, who has Down’s 
syndrome, until she was 35. But 10 years ago, Lynnie, who’d seen her brother 
and sister leave home, decided she’d like to be more independent. After being 
assessed by experts from Oxfordshire county council, the Connollys’ local 
authority, Lynnie moved into supported living accommodation.


It’s worked out well, says Brian: “She has grown and blossomed and considers 
herself to be very independent.” Last year, however, they became concerned when 
they were told the contract to provide Lynnie’s care would be going out to 
tender. “It’s quite scary,” says Brian, “because her comfort and equilibrium 
can be disturbed by having the wrong people looking after her.” So when the 
Connollys were invited to take part in choosing a new provider, they leapt at 
the chance.

We think the best people to know what makes good care are the people who 
receive it
Kate Evans, My Life My Choice 
Oxfordshire county council provides supported living accommodation for 220 
adults with learning disabilities. The previous provider, Southern Health, was 
the subject of adamning report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/dec/09/southern-health-nhs-trust-failed-investigate-patient-deaths-inquiry>
 by the audit firm Mazars after 18-year-oldConnor Sparrowhawk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/mar/19/connor-sparrowhawk-death-nhs-care-unit-slade-house-learning-disabilities>
 died in one of its specialist units. Last year, the council and the 
Oxfordshire clinical commissioning group published a newlearning disability 
strategy 
<https://consultations.oxfordshire.gov.uk/consult.ti/bigplanLD/consultationHome?utm_source=FURL-1&utm_medium=bigplan&utm_term=nil&utm_content=&utm_campaign=bigplan>
 that recognised that some people with learning disabilities had been failed in 
the past, and made a commitment to give them “more choice and control over 
their lives”.


The end of the Southern Health contract to provide supported living services 
in December 2015 gave the council the opportunity to put this commitment into 
practice. In September, it wrote to service users and their families and asked 
whether they would like to be involved in choosing new providers. Of the 60 who 
responded positively roughly a third were service users, and two-thirds family 
members. All 58 potential providers were asked to provide easy-read versions so 
that service users could understand them.


The decision to consult with service users takes place in a difficult 
financial context: Oxfordshire has beenhard hit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/10/david-cameron-cuts-oxfordshire-severely-ill-disabled-people>
 by cuts to the adult social care budget. But Kate Evans, campaigns and 
communications coordinator at advocacy groupMy Life My Choice 
<http://mylifemychoice.org.uk/> says that despite the cuts, the council has 
continued to be supportive of the organisation, providing it with a 
self-advocacy grant and helping it to set up a radio show. Evans welcomes the 
consultation: “We think the best people to know what makes good care are the 
people who receive it.”

Nine panels were held at which service users or family members sat with 
council officers to discuss and rate the answers given to a set of standard 
questions by potential providers, the names of which were kept from the panel. 
Kate Terroni, deputy director, joint commissioning at Oxfordshire, says: “In 
every instance the service user or family representative had a larger number of 
votes than council officers, so we’re placing the emphasis on the importance of 
the service user and their family in making this decision.”

Mindful that not all service users would have the confidence to express their 
views in a panel meeting, the council held 15 meetings with smaller groups of 
service users, where they were able to give their views more informally, and 
these were fed back into the formal process.


At the panel attended by the Connollys, each member was asked to score the 
answers given by four providers bidding for the bundle that included Lynnie’s 
care. The panel then discussed the answers and the scores. “Before it was set 
in stone, anybody could go back and change their mark, because every single 
point was argued out,” says Rose.


She and Brian felt that some of the providers put too much emphasis on making 
cost savings, and therefore gave the highest rating to the provider that, she 
says, “sounded as if they cared more for the needs of the people they looked 
after”. The provider they helped choose, Affinity, took over one of five 
three-year contracts, worth a total of £15m, in April.


Related: The role of service users in social care leadership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/mar/09/the-role-of-service-users-in-social-care-leadership>

So, was it worth doing? Toby Staveley, the manager of Yellow Submarine 
<http://www.yellowsubmarine.org.uk/>, an Oxfordshire charity for people with 
learning disabilities, believes the principle of consultation with service 
users is “excellent”, but is disappointed that none of the providers chosen are 
local. “Local providers typically understand their audience better than a 
national provider,” he says. “By and large they will have trustees and staff 
who are local. They’ll bump into the same people they’re supporting in the 
supermarket, they’ll know their families, they’ll know their schools, and I 
think that’s lost with a national provider.”


From the council’s point of view, it has, says Terroni, been a 
“time-intensive” process but also “a really meaningful way of engaging service 
users from the word go to the final decision”. She says the response from 
service users and their families has been positive. It has certainly been a 
worthwhile experience for the Connollys. “Our peace of mind is dependent on 
Lynnie being in a secure environment,” says Brian. “Knowing that she is being 
cared for and looked after properly allows us to continue with our life in a 
fuller way, so being able to influence what’s going to happen was very 
cathartic for us.”

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
