
Sorry, I don’t take much notice of trending, not since I quit. You didn’t 
hear? On its10th birthday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/21/twitter-10th-birthday-love-hate>
? Well I can’t remember what I tweeted exactly, something like, “It’s true, my 
friends, I’m leaving & I won’t be back. And to the trolls out there – it feels 
more FABULOUS than you saddos will ever know #RIP.” I thought it struck the 
right balance between release and regret, as much as you can say anything 
serious in 140 characters. Now I’m off it, I can’t believe how much time I 
wasted cutting really great jokes according to some random person’s random 
instruction.

There were some brilliant ones, mind – I’ve got a 10,000-word essay on my 
blog, if you missed it, all about how magical Twitter was in the early days. 
You’d join for the lolcats, alone, and the banter, before the thought police 
ruined it and the nonentities and self-publicists arrived, and don’t even talk 
to me about the the heart button. You remember when real life just felt like 
this really boring thing stopping you going onTwitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter>? I’ll never forget some of 
those photographs of Stephen Fry’s lunch. It’s all in my post: “Gloriously 
witty. Invariably serendipitous. Occasionally magnificent”.

Right, I did quit in 2012, yes, and twice in 2013, no that libel thing came to 
nothing, but character assassination was just part of the fun in those days, 
like drunk-tweeting Louise Mensch during Newsnight, not like now, with all the 
hate. The turning point came after Strasbourg. I just tweeted a little thing 
about Brexit. No need to go into what. Suddenly, this voice inside was going, 
Alex, you’re brilliant, you’re averaging what, 70,000 tweets per year, all you 
get back is a shitload of grief, and yes, OK, quite a lot of love – but is this 
truly how you want to live? Anyway quitting’s a major thing now, Twitter is 
over, everyone’s tweeting about it.

Related: Modern tribes: the helicopter parent 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/02/modern-tribe-universities-students-helicopter-parent>

Of course I started a new profile, had to. People need to know that something 
so innocent has become a vicious, glib, slimy, intolerant, ignorant sink of 
putrefying, self-promoting rottenness – as well as how to find me on Instagram.
