
Don’t stay silent

As teachers, you know that your students express themselves in different ways. 
Talking about their mental health is no different, so don’t ignore any comments 
a young person makes, however brief, even if something seems like a bit of 
classroom banter. Everyone has different sensitivity levels, and what you might 
disregard as a throwaway comment could be the tiniest hint of a much bigger 
issue.

Don’t keep quiet about it, either. Open up a dialogue with the young person 
about the comment they made. A small, sympathetic action like this might 
encourage them to speak up about something that goes much deeper.

Related: Why should teachers talk about mental health with students and 
colleagues? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2014/dec/03/teachers-talk-mental-health-students-colleagues>

Be open

It’s obviously important that your students respect you and that you maintain 
a professional relationship. However, when talking about stress and mental 
health, it helps to remember that we’re all human. Interact with students as 
you would anyone else – not as young people who are poles apart from you. Avoid 
being patronising or condescending by being as open and honest as possible.

 What was most beneficial to me during exam season was to hear honest – and 
sometimes exposing – examples of stressful situations and mental health 
struggles, both from my peers and from the adults I looked up to. It helped me 
to know that I wasn’t alone.

Don’t put too much pressure on us

I went to a school renowned for its academic reputation. Despite proving my 
aptitude by getting into the school, throughout my time there I felt constant 
pressure to exceed the expectations of my parents and teachers, and to live up 
to the successes of my peers. Students care about their future and want to do 
well at school and beyond. They put enough pressure on themselves, without 
anyone else adding to it.

Related: Five ways to tackle the mental health taboo in your classroom 
<http://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2014/dec/02/mental-health-taboo-classroom>

Offer practical support

It’s important to acknowledge the emotional strain a young person might be 
feeling in the run-up to exams, but practical support is just as significant. 
When I was dealing with exam stress, the hardest thing for me was discovering 
everyday strategies to help me cope with the pressure. The tactics I found most 
useful were:

 * Planning a realistic revision timetable – not just one that reflected the 
amount of revision I felt I ought to be doing.

 * Learning to have confidence in my own abilities and targeting my revision 
towards the areas I struggled with. This may sound obvious, but it can be 
difficult to accept the things you’re bad at and even harder to put time and 
effort into getting better at them. 
 * Not wasting time on the “ought tos” and “shoulds”. When I finally ignored 
what my friends were doing and used my revision time to focus on myself, I 
improved faster and my stress levels decreased. But as a young person, it’s not 
uncommon to be sucked in to the world of your peers, especially with the 24/7 
nature of social media. Having someone to support you with realising your own 
priorities can be incredibly helpful. 
Encourage young people to reach out 

Many of my peers, myself included, took a long time to ask for any support. In 
my case, this made me retreat further from the outside world, leaving me 
feeling more isolated and stressed.

While a lot of young people feel increased levels of stress in the run-up to 
exams, some individuals also have to cope with special educational needs or 
mental health conditions during this time.

You might not be the only person able to offer support to your students: 
parents, friends and mental health professionals may also be on hand. If you 
see a student is struggling, maybe you could be the person who gently pushes 
them to seek the help they need.

These are just some practical tips that worked for me. I’m not saying they 
will work for everyone, but many of my friends found that similar ideas helped 
them revise in a more productive way and cope better with exam-related stress.

Helpful resources from Young Minds

For teachers: The Academic Resilience section 
<http://www.youngminds.org.uk/training_services/academic_resilience> of our 
website has plenty of free, practical resources to help everyone in your school 
community support students’ academic resilience.


For students: YoungMinds VS created a school stress pack 
<http://www.youngmindsvs.org.uk/school_stress>, including revision tips, 
playlists and activists’ stories.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
