
Could your weekend lie-in kill you? asked the Daily Mail last week 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article-3353299/Could-weekend-lie-KILL-Social-jet-lag-increases-risk-diabetes-heart-disease.html>
. It cited a study in this month’s Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and 
Metabolism (JCEM) <http://press.endocrine.org/doi/abs/10.1210/jc.2015-2923> 
that links sleeping more at weekends with an increased risk of diabetes and 
heart disease. Since most of us change our sleep schedule depending on whether 
it’s a work or non-work day, it’s an interesting question. Is lying-in really 
so dangerous? Researchers say that changing sleep patterns causes social jet 
lag. Is that even a thing?

Shifting our sleeping hours by a few hours has the effect of crossing a time 
zone – it throws out our circadian rhythms and makes us sleepy during the day. 
It also – according to JCEM’s study, of 447 people who were monitored with a 
wrist accelerometer for a week – increases levels of triglycerides and lowers 
levels of the “good” type of cholesterol. People who shifted their sleep 
patterns were also more likely to gain weight during the study. Those with an 
evening chronotype – meaning their biological clock is more suited to going to 
bed and waking later – were more at risk of these changesthan earlier sleepers 
and risers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/20/early-six-myths-sleep-workplace-school-college>
. So should you set your alarm at the weekends?

The solution


Related: Six myths about sleep: if you got up early to read this, you’re in 
trouble | Paul Kelley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/20/early-six-myths-sleep-workplace-school-college>

This study shows an association between shifting sleep patterns and changes in 
some blood results. It does not show that anyone developed heart disease or 
diabetes because they had lie-ins. It also does not show a relationship between 
dose and response – so it is unclear how much of a sleep shift you would need 
in order to cause the changes seen in the blood-test results. The concept of 
social jet lag is likely to feed our anxiety about sleep and how we do not get 
enough of it.Emeritus professor Jim Horne 
<http://www.lboro.ac.uk/departments/ssehs/staff/professor-jim-horne-.html>, of 
the Sleep Research Centre at Loughborough University, says we should really 
stop worrying so much. Worry is bad for sleep and we naturally compensate for 
not getting enough rest in the week by lying-in at weekends, so we shouldn’t 
stop doing it.

Home says studies show that if you accumulate a five-hour sleep debt during 
the week (a typical amount), then you only need one and a half hours of extra 
sleep on your days off to make up for it. It would be a shame to be scared of a 
lie-in. Studies of sleep and risk factors for heart disease and diabetes can 
struggle to differentiate between poor sleep causing stress and stress 
disrupting sleep. Work stress can cause both a rise in blood pressure and 
changes in sleep patterns. Sleep is the litmus test for the state of one’s 
health, and the most important thing that happens when you don’t get enough of 
it is that you feel sleepy –which could be more of an immediate health hazard 
<http://viewer.gutools.co.uk/proxy/preview/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/15/why-we-all-need-sleep>
 than a raised triglyceride level.

This article was amended on 15 December 2015 to correct the spelling of Jim 
Horne’s name
