
I am really not a cruising kind of person. My dream holidays involve 
independent hotels, food, alt-culture and self-catering houses with owners who 
understand the appeal of a mid-century Danish chair. So I’ve always dismissed 
cruising – with its gaudy decor and ra-ra entertainment – as tacky and 
unimaginative at best, socially shameful and environmentally reprehensible at 
worst.

But one day, the editor of a glossy magazine asked if I would test out a 
cruise. A Disney cruise. To Norway. With aFrozen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/frozen> theme. My friends cackled with 
laughter. But bearing in mind that my Anna-loving six-year-old would never 
forgive me for putting my snooty reservations above her pleasure, I went – 
leaving my views on children’s gender roles, food ethics and aggressive 
marketing techniques at home.

For one week, I tried to find my inner child. And it was liberating and fun 
and joy-filled and surprisingly enlightening.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h2vk%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h2vk%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7a38096fde2af2d75d9fc326482749161ba7a5f%2F0_135_2700_1618%2F2700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Disneyland-on-Sea%3A%20a%20Frozen%20cruise%20to%20Norway&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h2vk%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Disneyland-on-Sea%3A+a+Frozen+cruise+to+Norway&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h2vk%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7a38096fde2af2d75d9fc326482749161ba7a5f%2F0_135_2700_1618%2F2700.jpg>
The ship was the Disney Magic, a floating behemoth with pools, water slides, 
theatres, magic shows, bars and gyms and spas over all 10 decks. There are four 
of these ships traversing the world’s oceans; it’s like Disneyland-on-Sea, 
except there are no queues and less parental involvement. Our route took us 
from Copenhagen, my favourite city, up the Norwegian coast, passing Bergen and 
then Gerainger, the village that inspired Frozen’s fictional Arendelle.

But this is a coastline whose mystique goes way beyond cine-tourism; it’s a 
place of looming purple mountains topped with snow and grey-tinged landscapes 
hiding Viking burial grounds, rugged cod fishing communities and legends of 
trolls. I spent hours, nursing crap cups of coffee, just gawping. It’s so rare 
and uplifting to see the world from the water that it didn’t take long for me 
to concede that these cruise fans might be on to something.

As ships go, the Disney Magic is not the chicest. It’s a bit plasticky and, 
from towels to lights to pudding, there are Mickey ears on everything. Every 
time the boat docked, When You Wish Upon a Star honked out loudly across the 
harbour, which made me cringe, and then laugh, too. There’s no getting over 
middle-aged adults huddled in excitement at the prospect of a hug from Belle.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h2vk%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h2vk%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a3083fefdc12cc772b9ca2c16777dbb5e1e1797%2F0_0_2700_1801%2F2700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Disneyland-on-Sea%3A%20a%20Frozen%20cruise%20to%20Norway&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h2vk%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Disneyland-on-Sea%3A+a+Frozen+cruise+to+Norway&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h2vk%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a3083fefdc12cc772b9ca2c16777dbb5e1e1797%2F0_0_2700_1801%2F2700.jpg>
Yet I found myself swept up in the ridiculous illusion of it all. The magic of 
limitless ice-cream. The magic of reading awhole book in one sitting because I 
couldn’t tear my child away from the kids’ club (“Cinderella is coming later 
and we’re going to play bingo with Donald”). The magic of not having to make 
decisions about dinner (guests are on a rotating schedule of restaurants; the 
food is unexciting but competently cooked). The fantastic staff who keep 
telling us they’re just there to make the magic happen. But mostly the magic of 
my daughter’s joy at comparing ear length with Goofy, meeting Elsa (spoiler: 
“it’s not the real one, she’s wearing a wig”) and dancing along at a 
high-energy deck party, while I necked alcoholic blue-and-pink slush puppies. 
There’s something refreshing about casting off the shackles of propriety and 
embracing an experience so unashamedly geared at children (and adults who wish 
they still were). As an affordable, grown-up, sophisticated holiday, it 
completely fails. But as an entertaining family experience, it ticks almost 
every box.

• The trip was provided by Disney Cruise Line (0800 171 2317, 
disneycruiseline.co.uk 
<https://disneycruise.disney.go.com/cruises-destinations/list/#june-2016,august-2016,europe,barcelona-spain,copenhagen-denmark>
), whose seven-day all-inclusive cruise from Copenhagen to Norway on the Disney 
Magic, departing 29 June, costs from £1,243.50pp, excluding flights. A similar 
Mediterranean cruise departs Barcelona from £1,139pp (price based on 27 August 
departure)
