
At dusk, it gets noisy. The kebab sellers start grinding lamb, potatoes are 
dunked in boiling hot oil and sheets of rice noodles are shaken out, ready to 
be cut into tubes. Metal carts bump over pavements and wooden mallets strike 
what looks like nougat, again and again. These are the sounds of the Muslim 
food market in Xian, in China’s north-western Shaanxi province.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tzj3%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tzj3%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00f10e58603ab3868674b80c88ec1c22431cbf1d%2F0_140_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20different%20kind%20of%20Chinese%20takeaway%20%E2%80%A6%20in%20Xian%E2%80%99s%20Muslim%20food%20market&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tzj3%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A+different+kind+of+Chinese+takeaway+%E2%80%A6+in+Xian%E2%80%99s+Muslim+food+market&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tzj3%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00f10e58603ab3868674b80c88ec1c22431cbf1d%2F0_140_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
 Front of house … an outdoor restaurant in Xian’s Muslim food market. 
Photograph: Cathy Adams 
The former imperial capital is home to a small community of Muslim Hui people, 
many of whom live around the Bell Tower and off West Street, close to the Great 
Mosque. And it’s here that the city’s best nighttime entertainment takes place: 
eating. All the dishes served from stalls and shopfronts are indigenous to the 
north-western provinces: it’s a heady cuisine of Chinese-style cooking and 
Middle Eastern spices.
 A dumpling vendor in the Muslim Quarter Photograph: Christian Kober/Getty 
Images/AWL Images RM 
I took a 100 renminbi note (£10) and decided to see how much I could buy. For 
starters: a chalky slab of fried tofu covered in red and green chillies and 
cumin (there’s always cumin), and a paper cup of fried baby potatoes dripping 
in chilli oil and seasoned with spring onions, chilli and more cumin. Next came 
a bowl ofliangpi, a Shaanxi staple: thick ribbons of rice noodle tossed with 
sesame paste, chilli oil and shreds of cucumber. Another stall had them in cold 
satay sauce. Locals eat the noodles in one hand and in the otherroujiamo – a 
muffin filled with chopped lamb and slicked with chilli oil. It’s the Hui 
equivalent of a burger.

For dessert I had a slice of glutinous rice cake with plum sauce.

Full, for under £8.

