
After months of consideration following the Leveson report 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-report>, the editors’ code of 
practice has finally been revised. The changes to the previous code are, 
however, minimal.

A press release issued by the code committee notes the following amendments:

 * The clause on accuracy now includes a specific reference to headlines. 
Newspapers and magazines “must take care not to publish... headlines not 
supported by the text.” 
 * A new clause has been inserted on the reporting of suicide. It states: 
“When reporting suicide, to prevent simulative acts care should be taken to 
avoid excessive detail of the method used, while taking into account the 
media’s right to report legal proceedings.” 
 *  The clause on discrimination has been amended to include the need to avoid 
prejudicial or pejorative reference to an individual’s gender identity. 
 * The preamble to the code now states that it is “the duty of editors... to 
resolve complaints swiftly” and to co-operate with the Independent Press 
Standards Organisation (Ipso). Its adds that “a publication subject to an 
adverse adjudication must publish it in full and with due prominence, as 
required by Ipso.” 
 * The code’s definition of the public interest has been substantially updated 
in order to comply with the laws of defamation and data protection along with 
guidance issued by the Crown Prosecution Service.

The new code, which comes into effect on 1 January 2016, is anything but a 
root-and-branch revision. It should be seen instead as another stage in the 
code’s evolution since it was first drafted in 1990.

The code committee’s chairman, the Mail group’s editor-in-chief, Paul Dacre 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/pauldacre> said: “I am convinced these 
changes strengthen the code and will ensure it remains the universally accepted 
standard for journalistic practice in the post-Leveson era.”

Ipso’s chairman, Sir Alan Moses 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/sir-alan-moses>, said: “It is important to 
acknowledge publicly and to welcome the significant degree of co-operation and 
accord which all those at the editors’ code committee have achieved.

“As Ipso <http://www.theguardian.com/media/ipso> gains authority through 
experience, we look forward to continuing and improving our contribution to the 
work of the committee in the next round of discussion and consultation in 2016.”

But critics of Ipso, and of the code committee, are unimpressed, both by the 
process that led to the revision and the changes themselves. Hacked Off, the 
organisation that represents victims of press misbehaviour, was swift to 
condemn the code committee’s decision.

Its joint executive director, Evan Harris, issued a statement calling the 
changes “merely cosmetic” and arguing that “they water down the code in a 
number of important areas.”

He said “an initial analysis of the changes by Hacked Off indicated that there 
are two substantive improvements in the code and eight weakenings.”

For example, nothing has been done to address the concerns of minority groups 
who have argued that they can be abused with impunity, which was a concern 
raised in the report by Sir Brian Leveson.

Hacked Off also complain that the code committee “is dominated by editors who 
have no interest in effective independent regulation.”

By contrast, the Independent welcomed the changes. Though small, it said, they 
are significant. It thought the addition of “gender identity” in the clause 
which protects individuals against discrimination was overdue and would help in 
tackling negative stereotypes.

The Independent - like the Guardian and the Financial Times 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/financialtimes> - has not signed up to Ipso, 
though journalists at all three titles work to the editors’ code.

According to the Indy’s editorial, the closing of the gender identity loophole 
“shows the benefit of involving non-editors.”

The code committee’s press release did point out that it has fulfilled 
Leveson’s recommendation by recruiting independent lay members. They are: 
Christine Elliott, chief executive of theInstitute for Turnaround 
<http://www.instituteforturnaround.com/>; David Jessel, the former TV 
investigative journalist; and Kate Stone, founder ofNovalia 
<http://www.novalia.co.uk/>, a digital technology company.

Ipso’s chairman, Moses, and its chief executive, Matt Tee, are also full 
members of the committee.

The new code can be found here 
<http://www.editorscode.org.uk/the_code_NEW_----2015.php>. And the code is also 
available for the first timein a mobile phone friendly format 
<http://editorscode.org.uk/mini-code/> to enable journalists to consult it 
easily.

Full disclosure: I was one of the editors in 1990-91 responsible for drawing 
up the original code prior to the formation of thePress Complaints Commission 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/pcc> (PCC) which was replaced by Ipso.
