
Ministers arguing over the role of mandarins in the run-up to the EU referendum
 <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> have been warned by the 
leading civil servants’ union that this could cause lasting damage to 
relationships across Whitehall.


Dave Penman, the general secretary of the the FDA (the main union that 
represents senior civil servants) said government splits over access to 
documents may have long-term repercussions for the way in which ministers and 
their officials interact. In the short term, it could stop government 
functioning properly, he said.


His words follow criticism from pro-Brexit ministers angered after Sir Jeremy 
Heywood, the cabinet secretary, issued guidelines last weekpreventing civil 
servants preparing new research 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/28/eu-referendum-stop-personal-attacks-on-anti-eu-tories-duncan-smith-tells-cameron>
 for anti-EU cabinet ministers that could be used in the EU referendum campaign.

Related: Is the civil service orchestrating an EU referendum cover-up? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/29/q-and-a-row-ministerial-access-to-eu-papers-brexit>

Downing Street has dismissed claims by the employment minister 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/29/priti-patel-attacks-civil-service-chief-brexit-minister-jeremy-heywood>
, Priti Patel, that Heywood behaved “unconstitutionally” and that civil 
servants’ independence has been compromised by the proposals.

Penman told the Guardian that civil servants were expected to support 
government policy, which in this case was to remain in the EU. “Government 
departments are not the playthings of individual ministers and their own 
particular conscience with regard to the EU referendum,” he said.

“Civil servants are there to support the government of the day and that 
government’s policies, which in this case is to remain part of the
reformed EU.

“Politicians’ continued wrangling over this issue will only serve to impact 
upon the smooth running of government and damage the essential relationship 
between civil servants and ministers.”

He appeared to dismiss criticism from pro-Brexit ministers, who claimed that 
Heywood’s edict would leave civil servants facing a conflict of interest.

“The FDA welcomes the clear guidance issued by Sir
Jeremy Heywood, which clarifies the responsibilities of ministers
and civil servants,” Penman added. 

Related: Grayling: let pro-Brexit ministers see all EU papers 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/29/chris-grayling-let-pro-brexit-ministers-see-all-eu-papers>

In a statement issued by the Vote Leave campaign group on Monday, Patel said: 
“It is important that the civil service maintains impartiality during the EU 
referendum. Jeremy Heywood’s unconstitutional act threatens the reputation of 
the civil service.

“Secretaries of state are responsible for their departments. For an unelected 
official to prevent them being aware of the information they need for their 
duties is wrong.”

Downing Street said the ruling was justified as ministers who were campaigning 
to leave were opposing official government policy.


“The role of the civil service is to support the government’s policies and 
positions of the day. Ministers who choose to take a different view are 
opposing that government position,” the prime minister’s official spokeswoman 
said.
