
Named the Emerald Sentinel, this evergreen Juniperus virginiana 'Corcorcor' 
introduces a slender vertical to contrast with the billowing deciduous trees 
beyond

The south-west facing slope has allowed the tender maroon grass Muhlenbergia 
capillaris unexpectedly to survive five winters, but such a transient plant 
ensures the garden is always changing

Autumn colour is important in such an expansive landscape. Forest trees 
including Nyssa sylvatica are among those that make the fall in New England 
famous

The scale of these chairs emphasises the perspective, making the surrounding 
trees and rolling slopes appear enormous

This grassy slope is covered in thousands of colchicum bulbs in early autumn, 
transforming the view before the onset of autumn colour. C. 'The Giant' is 
perfect for naturalising in grass

The majestic trees and rolling lawns of Chanticleer gardens in Wayne, 
Pennsylvania, US, are a 20th-century creation, although they owe much to the 
concept of the European gardens of Capability Brown in the 18th century, when 
meandering paths presented visitors with cleverly contrived and often big 
dramatic views. But since the gardens were opened to the public in 1993, the 
focus has shifted to the minutiae of modern-day landscape gardening, bringing 
with it an intensive maintenance and replanting regime.

The 35-acre garden's plant inventory (see chanticleergarden.org 
<http://www.chanticleergarden.org> for a full list) reads like that of a 
botanical garden and includes tens of thousands of bulbs and perennials, which 
would have been of little interest to the historical landscape designers who 
painted in much broader brush strokes. The views of majestic trees and 
contoured hills have been improved by the introduction of containers, plant 
combinations, courtyards, texture and colour. The grand schemes haven't been 
abandoned altogether: in 1999, a three-roomed ruin garden was constructed on 
the site of the owner's former home, featuring a "library" with carved stone 
books. More theatre comes in the form of a sofa and chairs with a built-in TV 
remote, constructed using stone saved from the razed house.
