
Everyone has moments of self-doubt. For some, these thoughts are fleeting and 
quickly pass. But, as Shakespeare puts it, others find that their “doubts are 
traitors” which hold them back from fulfilling their potential.Elite athletes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2003/nov/20/rugbyworldcup2003.rugbyunion> 
have long known the importance of apre-performance routine 
<http://www.innerdrive.co.uk/Release_Your_Inner_Drive/what-to-think-about-before-a-match/>
. It allows them to focus on what’s important, helping them concentrate on the 
task at hand and execute their skills to the best of their abilities.

Could the same concepts work for students before an exam? With the scrapping 
of modular exams, more than ever students have to be able to perform under 
pressure. Unfortunately,more and more of them are reporting that they feel 
unable to cope <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-35940084>, let alone thrive.

I have previously written about some of the best ways to maximise learning 
during revision time 
<http://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/apr/19/students-revise-exams-revision-science>
 and how tominimise revision stress 
<http://www.innerdrive.co.uk/Release_Your_Inner_Drive/9-ways-to-manage-revision-stress/>
. But what simple tips can students follow on the morning of or lunch time 
before the exam to ensure those crucial final hours are used to their best 
effect?

Related: How to help your students manage their mental health during exam time 
<http://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/apr/17/help-students-manage-mental-health-exams>

Eat breakfast

Breakfast is the most important meal of the day; the gap between dinner and 
breakfast is the longest your body goes without refuelling. Studies have shown 
that eating a typical breakfast of cereal, made up of complex carbohydrates,
helps improve memory and concentration over the course of the morning 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0195666303001314>.

Furthermore, researchers have found that those who eat a cereal breakfast 
regularly are“less emotionally distressed and have lower levels of perceived 
stress” <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10367010> compared with those who 
do not.

Arrive at school with plenty of time

Exams <http://www.theguardian.com/education/exams> are stressful enough 
without the added worry of running late. Lateness tends to magnify everything; 
if people are a bit stressed or nervous, when running late they become more so. 
Follow the old maxim “if you are not early, you’re late” and you’ll be on the 
right path to starting your exams calmly and confidently.

Avoid people who stress you out

When it comes to school, the old maxim “you are the average of the five people 
you spend the most time with” seems to ring true. Research suggests teachers’ 
positive commentsdirectly affect how students feel about themselves 
<http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/0266736990150308>.

On the morning of your exam, think about who makes you feel calm and confident 
and actively seek them out. Avoid spending the time before your exam surrounded 
by people (friends or otherwise) who are particularly negative or who stress 
you out.

Remind yourself of all your hard work and preparation

This can be a great way to boost your confidence going into the exam. Taking a 
moment to reflect on all the hours of hard work you have put in will reassure 
you. This technique is oftenused by athletes in the build-up to pressurised 
competitions 
<http://www.humankinetics.com/acucustom/sitename/Documents/DocumentItem/3986.pdf>
 to help them perform. Also using this time toreflect on your previous successes
 
<http://www.innerdrive.co.uk/Release_Your_Inner_Drive/confidence-use-the-past-present-future/>
 should help boost your confidence.

Pause for a minute and take some deep breaths

When people are under pressure, they often underestimate how much time they 
have. This leads to them rushing and making sloppy mistakes that cost marks.

Focusing on taking a few deep breaths can act as a prompt to slow you down. 
Physiologically, this helps to lower your heart-rate and reduce tension. By 
slowing down or pausing for a moment, you allow yourself time to fully assess 
the situation, come up with a plan and decide the best course of action.

Related: The science of revision: nine ways pupils can revise for exams more 
effectively 
<http://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/apr/19/students-revise-exams-revision-science>

Remind yourself of your exam strategy

Legendary American football coach Bill Walsh wrote a great book, The Score 
Takes Care of Itself 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/score-takes-care-of-itself.html>, in which he 
details his leadership philosophy. His approach was to focus on executing a 
game strategy and not worry about the goal tally. If you do this, he says, the 
result will often take care of itself.

The same is true during exams. Focus less on what grade you might get, and 
more on executing your exam strategy. This might mean the amount of time you 
should spend per question, reading each question first, writing five minutes of 
rough notes before answering the long question or any other technique. If in 
doubt what your exam tactic should be, ask your teacher; they will almost 
certainly have some helpful advice for you.

Final thought

When you have spent so much time working and revising for exams, it is a 
mistake to leave the last hour or two to chance. Nothing can ever guarantee 
success, but by executing the tips above, you give yourself the best chance of 
demonstrating your knowledge when it really matters.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
