
It is mid-afternoon on the central La Paz street, Mariscal Santa Cruz, but 
there is no traffic. Spread across the street are people wearing nothing but 
nappies. Behind them, three rows of police have built a wall of riot shields 
that stretches from one side of the road to the other.

Scrawled on their chests in black marker are the words “Renta mensual 500BS” 
(monthly benefit 500Bs). These are Bolivia’s disability rights campaigners, and 
their core demand is a monthly government benefit of 500 bolivianos (about 
£50). They say this would help people with severe disabilities to live with 
dignity and independence. InBolivia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bolivia>
, 500Bs per month is enough to rent a flat.

Behind us, a Mini is blaring out a protest song with the words “El pueblo 
unido jamás será vencido” (The people, united, will never be defeated). 
Occasionally, it is drowned out by shouts of “Qué queremos? Renta mensual! 
Cuándo queremos? Ahora!” (What do we want? Monthly benefits! When do we want 
them? Now!)


Bolivia’s disability rights campaigners have been camped out in La Paz since 
late April. Just to the north-east of Plaza Murillo, where Bolivia’s 
legislative assembly is based, they have set up a tent village in the streets. 
Police have erected high metal fences around the plaza to prevent the 
protesters from entering.

The campaign stretches back months. In March, disabled activists took to the 
streets in the central Bolivian city of Cochabamba in objection to the 
government’s failure to enforce basic equality legislation. To highlight the 
issue,they suspended themselves in wheelchairs hung from a highway bridge 
<http://www.reuters.com/video/2016/03/09/disabled-bolivians-hang-from-a-bridge-in?videoId=367674655>
.

After we fall out of our wheelchairs, we can’t get back up. But still, they 
kept shooting us with jets
Rosemery Guarita 
One of the activists to hang from the bridge was Rosemary Guarita, who has 
been heavily involved in the campaign since its inception. Tubercular 
meningitis left her in a wheelchair in 1992. She was not afraid to suspend 
herself from the bridge, except when the chain moved. “I was afraid it would 
come undone,” she says.

When the protests failed to prompt a favourable response from the government, 
a group of activistsmarched 380km from Cochabamba to La Paz 
<http://www.caravanalapaz.org/fundraisers/caravana/>, a journey of over a month.

In La Paz, regular demonstrations have been organised. The police response has 
been heavy-handed and involvedwater cannon 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/violeta-ayala/water-canons-used-on-disa_b_10171054.html>
 andtear gas 
<http://in.reuters.com/video/2016/06/03/tear-gas-and-anguish-for-disabled-protes?videoId=368770077>
. “They plastered us with water,” Guarita says. “After we fall out of our 
wheelchairs, we can’t get back up. But still, they kept shooting us with jets, 
savagely, vindictively. It was as if they wanted to drown people.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kjh7%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kjh7%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff212137fd7ce15e88c2e821d882e2a89b956d210%2F0_0_3500_2395%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20is%20the%20Bolivian%20government%20turning%20water%20cannon%20on%20disabled%20protesters%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kjh7%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why+is+the+Bolivian+government+turning+water+cannon+on+disabled+protesters%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kjh7%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff212137fd7ce15e88c2e821d882e2a89b956d210%2F0_0_3500_2395%2F3500.jpg>
 Demonstrators stand in front a riot police barricade during a protest in La 
Paz.
 Photograph: David Mercado/Reuters 
The finance minister, Luis Arce, said during an April press conference that the
government would not grant the benefit 
<http://www.erbol.com.bo/noticia/economia/25042016/arce_afirma_que_no_habra_bono_para_discapacitados>
, arguing that the country could not afford it. Alfredo Rada, the government’s 
vice-minister of coordination with social movements, echoed Arce’s comments
during an interview with state radio station 
<http://www.abi.bo/abi/index.php?i=352180&k> this month.

Related: The moment I felt excluded because of my disability – share your 
stories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jun/08/the-moment-i-felt-excluded-because-of-my-disability-share-your-stories>

Current legislation allows those classed as being severely or very severely 
disabled to claim 1,000Bs per year in benefits. This is 2.70Bs per day – less 
than a return bus fare. In addition to regular living costs, people with 
disabilities often have to pay for essential items for their quality of life 
such as medicines and wheelchairs.

One of the protesters in nappies was Vladimir Tobias Vedia Flores. Since 
birth, he has suffered from seizures. He also has venous ulcers in his legs. 
“An ultrasound of my legs costs 700Bs,” he says. “I can’t afford that because I 
live in the streets. I can’t even buy medicine.”

Disabled people need a special identification card to claim benefits, and the 
process for obtaining this is often prohibitively expensive. Requirements such 
as a neurological examination can cost 500Bs. “Families often don’t know how to 
deal with the application process,” says Horacio Marengo, coordinator for 
disabilities at Cochabamba children’s disability support centre Casa de los 
Niños.

As part of the assessment process, people receive a percentage indicating how 
severe their disability is. Only those with 50% or more are entitled to the 
1,000Bs annual benefit. Many disabled people say this system does not 
accurately reflect a person’s disabilities.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kjh7%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kjh7%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb42a00de43e5d671817b0bdeaba8c5c0b321cd6a%2F0_0_3500_2466%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20is%20the%20Bolivian%20government%20turning%20water%20cannon%20on%20disabled%20protesters%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kjh7%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why+is+the+Bolivian+government+turning+water+cannon+on+disabled+protesters%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kjh7%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb42a00de43e5d671817b0bdeaba8c5c0b321cd6a%2F0_0_3500_2466%2F3500.jpg>
 A demonstrator with a physical disability tries to pass a riot police 
barricade in El Alto, Bolivia. Photograph: David Mercado/Reuters 
Marengo believes a 500Bs monthly benefit would help Bolivia’s disabled, but to 
transform lives, fundamental changes are needed in fields ranging from 
healthcare to awareness training in schools. “Often, therapy is more important 
than 500Bs,” he says.

Related: We need to stop treating people with disabilities as less than human 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jun/20/we-need-to-stop-treating-people-with-disabilities-as-less-than-human>

While the demand for 500Bs per month has not been met yet, activists say the 
campaign has brought the issue of disability rights into focus in Bolivia. “The 
really big achievement is, they’ve woken up Bolivian society,” says one of the 
marchers, Leon Galindo Stenutz, whose daughter has spina bifida. “It’s 
generating a debate. You hear people talking about it on the bus.”

Guarita says that meeting other disabled people through activism has helped 
her to accept her disability. “Before that, I felt useless, because I thought I 
was the only one,” she says.

Politicians including health minister Ariana Campero, Arce and Rada, have all 
said that the monthly payment is not viable, and the demand is not under 
negotiation.

Nonetheless, the activists are determined to keep on demonstrating until the 
government agrees to discuss their demand for monthly benefits. On 6 June, 
industrial relations group Central Obrera Boliviana announced that it would 
attempt to mediate discussions between the protesters and the government. On 9 
June, tragicallytwo protestors were killed by a drunk driver 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/the_americas/bolivia-2-disabled-protesters-killed-in-a-demonstration/2016/06/09/8dd6a19c-2e6f-11e6-b9d5-3c3063f8332c_story.html>
.

Related: 'Being classified as a terrorist threat makes me feel excluded' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jun/20/disability-travel-flights-international-exluded>

Guarita had to sell everything she owned to pay her hospital bills, but if she 
had not received treatment, she would have been left in a persistent vegetative 
state. Now, she is determined to keep demanding her rights. “God gave me a 
chance at life,” she says. “If I can still fight for my brothers who can’t, 
that is my fight.”

This week we’re focussing on the issue of disability rights around the world. 
Please get in touch with your experiences, comments and stories – email us at 
globaldevpros@theguardian.com, putting disability rights in the subject line, 
or add your experienceshere 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jun/08/the-moment-i-felt-excluded-because-of-my-disability-share-your-stories>
.


Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter. Join the conversation with the 
hashtag#DisabilityRights 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23DisabilityRights&src=typd>
