
There’s a lot of information out there for women who can’t orgasm, but very 
little for men. I’m in my 20s and have been with my fiancee for seven years 
now, but still struggle to reach orgasm. I’m concerned that not only is it 
damaging my sex drive and self-esteem, but also hers.

Your partner may well be worried about this although, in my clinical 
experience, men have tended to take anorgasmia more personally. Perhaps this is 
because women, especially, enjoy the longer coital time. But I suggest you stop 
worrying about your partner and address this as your own issue. Are you easily 
distracted? Do you find it difficult to maintain focus long enough to achieve 
orgasm? Do you become so anxious that fear of failure becomes a self-fulfilling 
prophecy?

Very often, men who are unable to climax with partners are those who have 
developed a certain masturbation style – perhaps particularly rough or strong – 
that is not conducive to partner sex. If this is the case for you, it is 
possible to gradually change your preferred style until your own touch is 
closer to the vaginal coital experience (if this is too challenging, seek 
clinical help from a sex therapist). Most importantly, try to lessen your 
self-imposed pressure. Paradoxically, unless there is actually a medical reason 
for your anorgasmia (check it out), such an anxiety-reducing, erotically 
enhancing approach should make orgasm far less elusive.

• Pamela Stephenson Connolly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/pamela-stephenson-connolly> is a US-based 
psychotherapist specialising in sexual disorders.

• If you would like advice from Pamela Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, 
send us a brief description of your concerns toprivate.lives@theguardian.com <> 
(please don’t send attachments). Each week, Pamela chooses one problem to 
answer, which will be published online and in print. She regrets that she 
cannot enter into personal correspondence.
