
When I walk past a school nowadays I tend to feel a bit queasy, remembering my 
years at the chalkface and how hard I found it: the huge classes, mountains of 
marking, hours of preparation, pugnacious parents, and on top of all that, the 
stultifying blanket of national-curriculum gobbledygook. But that was a breeze 
compared to nowadays, when the horror is peaking.

I don’t like to catastrophise, but it looks to me as if our education system 
is going right down the pan. The preparation, planning, note-taking, sudden 
irrational initiatives, testing and obligatory arse-covering are at 
teacher-crushing levels, the whole farrago ruled over by thetroubled 
<http://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/nov/11/shambles-teachers-left-in-dark-exam-specs-ofqual>
Ofqual <https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofqual>, pitiless Ofsted 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jun/10/ofsted-should-not-become-the-plaything-of-government>
, ever more desperate and ferocious parents, and plundered by academies. And 
now, chosen by Nicky “teacher baiter” Morgan, to be Ofsted’s chief inspector,
here comes Amanda Spielman, ex-head of Ofqual 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jun/10/amanda-spielman-next-ofsted-chief-inspector-ark-academies-ofqual>
. Has she ever taught, or been a headteacher? No. Has she had practical 
day-to-day experience of running schools? No. Has she beeneducated at a private 
boarding school <http://schoolsweek.co.uk/amanda-spielman/> with only 12 pupils 
in her year? Yes. Does she know all about merchant banking, mergers and 
acquisitions and strategy consulting? Yes. Anddid she help to set up the  
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-36500257>Ark “top academy chain” 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2011/jul/04/profit-making-academies>? Yes.

“Will she be impartial?” asks Fielding, hopelessly. “Does she know about 
linguistics? She should.” Let’s just hope against hope. Because she needs to 
sort out fellows such asMike Dwan 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jun/12/academy-schools-cash-cow-business>
, multi-millionaire, who established Bright Tribe Multi-Academy Trust and is 
doing frightfully well “providing services to his own … academies”. Will she 
thoroughly investigate academy finances? Will she stop forced academisation? 
Will she fight for smaller classes in all schools, fewer targets, less testing? 
Will she listen to anything teachers say?Even if they justifiably strike this 
summer 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/26/national-union-of-teachers-backs-ballot-on-strike-action-brighton>
?

I suspect not. Governments have been making more and more of a hash of our 
education system for decades, and nothing and no one seems able to stop them. 
Spielman looks like more of the same. And education is our future. But the big 
greedies seem to have it sewn up, like the rest of the world. Fielding has 
turned to the philosophy of poetJohn Cooper Clarke 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/11/john-cooper-clarke-impotent-rage-is-my-default-setting>
. “Impotent rage is my default setting.” Same here.

• This article was corrected on 13 June 2016 to correct the spelling of John 
Cooper Clarke’s name.
