
The hospital where Dr Olga Milinchuk works has no sign outside and no waiting 
rooms. The address is a closely guarded secret, as are the identities of her 
patients. With a team of 18 specialists, she spends every day repairing the 
shattered lives and minds of victims of Ukraine’s longest-running crisis – 
endemic human trafficking.

When Milinchuk opened this rehabilitation centre in 2002, under the auspices 
of the International Organisation of Migration (IOM), it was dealing almost 
exclusively with young women who had returned home after escaping sex 
trafficking. Today, her patients are men and women of all ages who crossed a 
border on the promise of a job, but found themselves on a journey into forced 
labour, abuse and debt bondage.

Milinchuk, who has treated about 2,000 people at the centre, estimates that 
95% of her patients are victims of labour trafficking. They come with gastric 
and intestinal diseases from malnourishment, sexually transmitted diseases, and 
psychiatric problems such as post-traumatic stress disorder.

“The youngest was three years old, trafficked to Poland for work begging with 
her mother and five-year-old sister,” she says.

Forced labour is difficult to detect. Traffickers deceive victims into 
travelling without valid visas, keep workers trapped in debt bondage and 
reliant on their employers for food and accommodation, or stop unpaid workers 
from leaving through violence and intimidation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fxa4%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fxa4%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48e424e1457f4ff9704fa95ae7dd69277c79c8cd%2F0_0_3706_2286%2F3706.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sex%2C%20lies%20and%20psychological%20scars%3A%20inside%20Ukraine's%20human%20trafficking%20crisis%20%7C%20Maxim%20Tucker&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fxa4%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sex%2C+lies+and+psychological+scars%3A+inside+Ukraine%27s+human+trafficking+crisis+%7C+Maxim+Tucker&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fxa4%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48e424e1457f4ff9704fa95ae7dd69277c79c8cd%2F0_0_3706_2286%2F3706.jpg>
 Dr Olga Milinchuk Photograph: IOM mission in Ukraine 
“They take a mother with two children, then lock one child away so that when 
the mother is out begging, the traffickers know she will return for the other,” 
she says. “The mother had been promised a job in agriculture and was told to 
bring the children for kindergarten.”

Trapped in conflict with Russia and weakened by decades of government 
mismanagement, Ukraine is suffering a deepening economic malaise. It is the
second poorest country in Europe by GDP 
<http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.CD>; only its tiny neighbour 
Moldova is poorer.

“The economic crisis is now so deep we see so many people are willing to 
accept any offer, risky offers, just for the chance to work abroad,” says Hanna 
Antonova, the IOM’s counter-trafficking programme coordinator inUkraine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine>.

The country has long been a regional trafficking hub. The IOM estimates that 
more than160,000 people have been trafficked from the country 
<http://www.iom.org.ua/en/combating-human-trafficking> since independence in 
1991.


“Ukrainians have traditionally used migration as a survival strategy. You can 
make more as a nanny or a construction worker in Russia than as a teacher or 
doctor in Ukraine,” Antonova explains.



An estimated 2.7 million people have fled their homes to escape conflict with 
pro-Russian separatists 
<http://ec.europa.eu/echo/files/aid/countries/factsheets/ukraine_en.pdf> (pdf). 
Traffickers prey on them, with police intercepting dozens of displaced people 
in the hands of traffickers en route to Germany, Russia, Belarus, Poland and 
Israel. The inflated currency is pushing millions of people into destitution. 
Thousands are trying to find work abroad – by whatever means possible. 
According to a 2015 survey commissioned by the IOM,41% of Ukrainians working 
abroad are doing so illegally 
<http://www.iom.org.ua/sites/default/files/pres_gfk_iom2015_ukraine_eng_fin_3_2.pdf>
 – compared with 28% in 2011. That puts them at the mercy of criminals.

Related: UK immigration bill will play into hands of traffickers, anti-slavery 
experts warn 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/21/uk-immigration-bill-trafficking-anti-slavery-experts-modern-slavery-act-2015>

Milinchuk says she has treated a 21-year-old daughter sold by her mother to a 
Turkish brothel and a 50-year-old mother with disabilities sold by her son to 
beg in Russia.

Former patients say the hospital saved their lives. Olya, a 52-year-old 
survivor from a small town in central Ukraine, travelled to Moscow with a 
friend in 2013 on the promise of a job selling Chinese products in a market. 
The salary seemed credible – $600 (£410) a month plus room and board.

On arriving, Olya says they were met by a man named Rahid, who took them to a 
warehouse where they were asked to sort clothes. He took their passports “to 
copy them” and introduced them to their employer.

“When we saw the conditions, we were shocked,” Olya recalls. “He locked us in 
the warehouse and we ate only doughnuts and fried hot dogs. We slept there on 
sacks and bags. There was no fresh air, no place to wash ourselves.”

The group told their employer they wanted to leave and asked for their money. 

“He drove us outside the city,” she says. “There was an abandoned territory – 
I guess it had been a factory, surrounded by a fence with barbed wire. The gate 
was closed but when the bus arrived, two guards came out. They were huge and 
had guns.

“The first night we didn’t sleep. The guards said we had to go with them. They 
took me and another girl. We didn’t want to go but they forced us. We were 
powerless before such huge men.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fxa4%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fxa4%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5fe1ce1024d199bf29e48d5afc32fb264555b642%2F0_57_850_510%2F850.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sex%2C%20lies%20and%20psychological%20scars%3A%20inside%20Ukraine's%20human%20trafficking%20crisis%20%7C%20Maxim%20Tucker&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fxa4%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sex%2C+lies+and+psychological+scars%3A+inside+Ukraine%27s+human+trafficking+crisis+%7C+Maxim+Tucker&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fxa4%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5fe1ce1024d199bf29e48d5afc32fb264555b642%2F0_57_850_510%2F850.jpg>
 Art work created by residents of the IOM hospital in Ukraine. Photograph: 
Maxim Tucker for the Guardian 
For almost two months Olya says she worked 18-hour days, bottling, packing and 
loading vodka from the plant’s illegal stills. “There were moments I asked for 
vodka. I drank it to relieve the stress,” she says.

Eventually, police raided the factory and the guards told them to run. Olya 
fled into a forest and spent the next few weeks hitchhiking and hiding on 
trains. When she finally arrived home, all she could bring herself to tell her 
husband was that she hadn’t been paid: “I wanted to tell him but I was afraid 
of consequences. … I just prayed to God that I didn’t have any diseases.”

A local NGO put her in touch with the IOM hospital. They treated Olya’s 
stomach and back problems, and her depression.

“This rehabilitation really helped me. I don’t know how my life would [have 
been] if I had stayed at home, shut in and thinking about that all the time. I 
think I would [have gone] mad,” she says.

Nadia, another of the centre’s patients, also credits the hospital with saving 
her life. She was recruited by a trafficker on the promise of work caring for 
an elderly woman in Moscow. Nadia and the three women with whom she had 
travelled were kept in a house, beaten, underfed, sexually harassed and forced 
into domestic servitude.

Related: ‘I carried his name on my body for nine years’: tattooed trafficking 
survivors reclaim their past 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/nov/16/sp-the-tattooed-trafficking-survivors-reclaiming-their-past>

“We worked there for six months until we were too thin and worn out. Then they 
said that we were ‘used goods’,” she says. “They gave us 2,000 roubles [£18.70] 
to get home.”

“I had grey hair when I came back,” she says. “Then … they examined me, 
treated me and now I feel better. I thought it was heaven after hell … they 
just dragged me out of that depression.”

The patients are usually from the most vulnerable sectors of Ukrainian society 
– with limited education and few opportunities. The rehabilitation centre not 
only treats their trauma, but trains them in vocational skills to make them 
more employable.

“Sometimes I see a person in the street and they recognise me but I don’t 
recognise them,” Milinchuk says. “Even if I’m related to a difficult experience 
for them, they’re happy to see me and say some warm words. That’s a great 
source of support.”
