
Whether you call them audience, customer or user, understanding people lies at 
the core of any agency and to producing the best, most effective work.

Our recent Feed Breakfast – entitled “Folk” – brought together a panel 
comprised of Mimi Turner, marketing director of theLAD Bible 
<http://www.theladbible.com/>; Ian Drake, director of customer engagement at 
Betsson Group <http://www.betssongroup.com/>; and Sameer Modha, customer data 
strategist atMindshare <http://www.mindshareworld.com/>.

It was fascinating to hear about the tactics they use to define and understand 
their audiences – and how they foster that relationship once it is established.

To start, we all agreed on a few simple premises:

 * Don’t presume you know people: most of the time you will get it wrong and 
the presumption will only lead to clichéd thinking. 
 * Don’t presume that customers have any loyalty to brands: accept that a 
customer will never be monogamous. 
 * Don’t undervalue utility for your customers: people like people who do 
things for them and make their lives easier.

The power of questions

Broader topics emerged once we had these key principles. The first being: 
understand the power of asking questions. Regardless of the mass of data that 
is being accumulated, the best way to understand people is still to talk to 
them.

When Lego started investigating falling sales, it used big data to spot 
patterns. The data said kids weren’t into building things any more and that 
Lego needed to go digital, so that’s what it did. But sales kept falling.

The breakthrough came when Lego asked a child 
<https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/lego-engineered-remarkable-turnaround-its-business-howd-lindstrom>
 about his most valuable possession. He said he valued his sneakers most 
because they carried the marks of his skill as a skateboarder. That led the 
company to realise that it was asking the wrong question. The question should 
not be: “what are kids doing?” But: “what do kids value?”

The answer is toys that will prove a child’s skill and provide cache in the 
playground.

So Lego went back to its core product – plastic bricks – and invested in 
appealing to skill. This resulted in a successful business transformation and 
shows that small data points can lead to breakthroughs when big data is failing 
you, just as long as you ask the right questions.

Data needs a human touch

People aren’t machines – they’re human beings and often do things for reasons 
that aren’t entirely obvious.

Related: Google Flu Trends is no longer good at predicting flu, scientists find
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/mar/27/google-flu-trends-predicting-flu>

There’s a famous example of Google using big data to predict flu trends 
worldwide, using its massive database of search terms. Over time, Google 
started overestimating flu outbreaks by 50%. The reason? People were searching 
“flu” when they got a cold. It’s a good example of the need to understand how 
people think when analysing data.

Right place, right time

Marketing isn’t static; it moves you from one place to the next. It picks you 
up and puts you down again. It flows with you. Find out what state of mind your 
audience is in when they arrive at your doorstep, work out how you want them to 
feel when they’re with you – and how you want them to feel when they leave.

It’s important to establish the state of mind a person might be in at any 
stage in a journey. For example, do they have points to redeem? Have they just 
expressed a preference for something? Are they expecting a reminder or a reward?

With digital channels merging and becoming much more fluid, the way that 
businesses and brands treat people at each touch point will be crucial.

Matt Lynch is managing director at Feed <https://www.feed.xyz/>

This advertisement feature is brought to you by the Marketing Agencies 
Association <http://www.marketingagencies.org.uk/maa>, sponsors of the Guardian 
Media & Tech Network’sAgencies hub 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media-network/series/agencies>.
