
Bubacarr* sits on a bench beside a playground in Ferrara, northern Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy>. The 24-year-old looks shattered. A 
proud young man, he is embarrassed by the donated clothes he is wearing, 
tugging at his loose, faded trousers to make a point.

It is almost a year since he was pulled from a stricken fishing boat near the 
coast of Libya by theMigrant Offshore Aid Station <https://www.moas.eu/>. In a 
video interview on the rescue vessel, his bloodshot eyes gleamed with the 
conviction that he would fulfil his dream of finding a career as a carpenter in 
Europe.

“I am a grown man now, so I must support my family,” he said.

But months later, he is living in an asylum centre, his new life a 
disappointment.

Asked how he is doing, he shakes his head disconsolately. “It is not good. I 
want to work but there are no jobs here. If I get my papers maybe I [will] go 
to the Netherlands.”

Related: The Gambia faces battle to deter its young people from migrating 
abroad | Louise Hunt 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/sep/11/the-gambia-migration-livelihood-empowerment-agricultural-project-concern-universal>

Bubacarr decided to leave the Gambia because his family were struggling and 
his salary as an apprentice carpenter was not enough.

“There are so many of us in my family, one bag of rice lasts only a week. In 
Gambia, we were going nowhere,” he says. “I had to come to make my family 
strong, to pay school fees for my brothers, because my father is getting old 
and he can’t work as much.”

Now, his family are relying on him to get refugee status and work so he can 
send money home. But Bubacarr’s only income is the €50 (£39) monthly allowance 
he receives as an asylum seeker.

The chances of finding legitimate work – with youth unemployment in Italy at 
37% 
<http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/Unemployment_statistics>
 – are slim, and his asylum application is unlikely to succeed:66% of claims by 
Gambians <http://appsso.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/nui/submitViewTableAction.do> 
last year were rejected, according toEurostat <http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat>.

Across Italy, migrants spend their days in parks, or loiter outside bus and 
train stations, homesick and shocked that, despite everything they risked, 
their new lives offer so few opportunities.

“We thought life in Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> is 
better than Africa, but here is very hard,” says fellow Gambian Charles*, who 
is sleeping in a homeless shelter after being thrown out of his asylum lodgings 
for reasons that were unclear to him.

Migrants in Europe are reluctant to share news of their desperate 
circumstances for fear of being seen as failures, especially by their families, 
who often make large financial sacrifices to get them there. Social media is 
more commonly used to suggest they are living the high life.

In the Gambia, plenty of people still believe that getting to Europe – even at 
a cost of about £1,600 – is the only way to improve their lives. Gambians are 
the second most frequent arrivals by sea in Italy, behind Nigerians, according 
to theInternational Organisation for Migration 
<https://www.iom.int/news/mediterranean-migrant-arrivals-2016-172458-deaths-714>
.

Abdou* says he will leave his home country because there are no jobs. 

“As soon as I have the money to travel I will do what I am planning,” says the 
23-year-old from Serekunda, near the capital, Banjul. He recently completed a 
diploma in IT, but has been unable to find a job and scrapes a living selling 
towels to tourists.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tfjv%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tfjv%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff96c24dee6cde76bdfb7588b9d7b95a4aea5bfc4%2F0_100_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gambian%20migrants%20who%20risk%20death%20find%20life%20less%20than%20sweet%20in%20Italy%20%7C%20Louise%20Hunt&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tfjv%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gambian+migrants+who+risk+death+find+life+less+than+sweet+in+Italy+%7C+Louise+Hunt&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tfjv%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff96c24dee6cde76bdfb7588b9d7b95a4aea5bfc4%2F0_100_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 A migrant man learns Italian at the Papa Francisco centre for minors in 
eastern Sicily. Photograph: Giles Clarke/Getty Images 
Many of his friends have already gone: some have made it to Europe, some have 
not. “One of the boys lost his life. We know it’s not safe, but for someone 
who’s sitting here with no job, it’s very difficult: people have to go,” he 
says. “I am 100% sure that if I can get there then changes will come to our 
family.”

The dreams of a better life do not come cheap. Teacher Bakkary* sold the 
family’s only asset – a small plot of land – after his brother called him from 
Mali to say he would be killed by smugglers unless a ransom was paid.

Sitting in a shack in Brikama town, the 35-year-old is clearly livid about the 
payment.

“I had to sell for a low price because my brother was putting me under 
pressure. I condemn the backway. I would rather sustain myself here,” he says. 
The backway describes illegal routes used by migrants to get to Europe.

Bintou Kamara, who is of Gambian heritage and lives in Paris, has lost several 
members of her family to the backway, and wants to smash the myths and 
misinformation that are luring more people to Europe. Last year, she set up a 
charity calledAgaid  <http://agaid.org/>to inform people about the reality of 
migration.

“Agaid’s role is to give people information so that they can make a conscious 
and rational choice,” says the former broadcast journalist. She visited urban 
communities in the Gambia this year to raise awareness by screening a short 
documentary.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tfjv%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tfjv%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad98007ed966a8410f0a55a7003079c4c1f4eebe%2F0_71_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gambian%20migrants%20who%20risk%20death%20find%20life%20less%20than%20sweet%20in%20Italy%20%7C%20Louise%20Hunt&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tfjv%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gambian+migrants+who+risk+death+find+life+less+than+sweet+in+Italy+%7C+Louise+Hunt&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tfjv%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad98007ed966a8410f0a55a7003079c4c1f4eebe%2F0_71_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
 By authorising a 100% rise in the levy payable to enter the Gambia, President 
Yahya Jammeh has triggered a border blockade by Senegalese drivers. Photograph: 
Jason Florio/Redux 
“I use really striking images, and a lot of people are surprised. Gambian 
television doesn’t show them the reality. It definitely has an impact; 
afterwards people do discuss what they have seen and they start advising each 
other,” says Kamara.

Bakkary says what’s needed is more training and employment programmes for 
young people in the Gambia. “The best thing is to create initiatives to engage 
youths because it is very painful when they finish education and sit for years.”


The European commission plans to spend part of its €1.8bn (£1.4bn) emergency 
trust fund for Africa 
<http://ec.europa.eu/europeaid/regions/africa/eu-emergency-trust-fund-africa_en>
, announced in November, on creating jobs in the Gambia anddeterring people 
from leaving 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/sep/11/the-gambia-migration-livelihood-empowerment-agricultural-project-concern-universal>
.

But such initiatives take time to implement, and time is crucial as the 
economic situation worsens in the Gambia, and political tensions increase.



Already high living costs are being exacerbated by a blockade by Senegalese 
truckers, who are refusing to pay a100-times price hike 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-36025182> for cross-border traffic, 
introduced in February by the Gambian president, Yahya Jammeh.

Fuel, and fresh and tinned foods – normally imported from Senegal – are not 
getting into the Gambia, causing price rises because of fears of shortages. 
Pharmacists are concerned about the prospects of medicines remaining available.

With the borders closed except for those travelling by foot, there is a 
growing sense of isolation in the narrow, riverine country, surrounded by 
Senegal on three sides.

Simmering anger triggered protests in Serekunda, with demonstrators calling 
for Jammeh’s resignation. Protests are rare in this tightly controlled state.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tfjv%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tfjv%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05d39136541c098b3a97231a297e5ff3202663ac%2F0_31_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gambian%20migrants%20who%20risk%20death%20find%20life%20less%20than%20sweet%20in%20Italy%20%7C%20Louise%20Hunt&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tfjv%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gambian+migrants+who+risk+death+find+life+less+than+sweet+in+Italy+%7C+Louise+Hunt&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tfjv%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05d39136541c098b3a97231a297e5ff3202663ac%2F0_31_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
 Goats congregate beside the Gambia river as a boat pulls in to shore. 
Photograph: Jason Florio/Redux 
Security forces used tear gas 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/world-location-news/eu-statement-on-recent-violence-in-the-gambia>
, and reportedly beat up and arrested demonstrators. Three activists from the 
opposition United Democratic party were allegedly killed in custody, although 
the government denies this.

The UN <http://www.un.org/sg/statements/index.asp?nid=9620> and human rights 
groups are calling for an investigation into the deaths and allegations of 
excessive use of force. There is still a heavy military and police presence on 
the streets.

“People are being advised to stay indoors and there is more harassment by the 
police,” a Gambian source said. “We are very worried about what will happen 
next.”

At a time when there may be more genuine cases for political asylum, Gambian 
migrants arriving in Italy are now often excluded from the asylum system, 
making their dangerous journeys futile.

The EU’s hotspot 
<http://ec.europa.eu/dgs/home-affairs/what-we-do/policies/european-agenda-migration/background-information/docs/2_hotspots_en.pdf>
 (pdf) approach, implemented in Italy and Greece late last year, allows 
migrants to be categorised by their nationality. Those from countries with 
asylum recognition rates below 75%, as is the case for the Gambia, are likely 
to be defined by police as irregular or economic migrants in a screening 
exercise that takes place before they are allowed to enter reception centres, 
without having the opportunity to seek legal and humanitarian advice, explains 
Federica Toso, a researcher with Italian NGOAsilo in Europa 
<http://www.asiloineuropa.it/>.

“This means they cannot enter the asylum system. They are given seven days to 
get to Rome airport and leave the country, but, of course, that will never take 
place as they don’t have money for flights, so they become illegal migrants on 
the streets without state support.”

*Some names have been changed to protect identities
