
Q I want to wear a blazer but have yet to find one to suit my shape. My bra 
size is 32F and my shoulders look broad. If a jacket fits my bust then it is 
too big on the rest of my body. The result is very unflattering. Is there a 
secret rule I'm missing?
Claudia

A You'll have to look to designers if you want to wear this style, as fitted 
high-street blazers won't have enough dart detailing to sculpt to your body 
shape and a masculine cut will look unflatteringly voluminous. Personally, I'd 
forget this trend (sometimes you do have to give them a miss - I was never 
going to cut the skinny jeans look, for example), but if you're determined, 
then try Vivienne Westwood who always cuts for a curvy figure. There's also a 
great jacket at Sonia by Sonia Rykiel which has a double wrap belt to create a 
great nipped waist. If you have a tight budget, visit Bravissimo (check
www.bravissimo.com <http://www.bravissimo.com> for shop locations) who do a 
wide range of clothes, including blazers, especially for women with large 
busts. This range will definitely help you get that fitted look while 
accommodating your assets.

Q Over the winter months my staple item of clothing is always a jumper. What 
style and colour should I look for this season?
Jackie

A My knitwear collection tends to change with my outfits, so although there 
are plenty of statement pieces this season, you should just pick the style that 
suits you best. Stella McCartney showed oversized jumpers and cardigans - one 
of which featured a polar bear motif. London designer Giles Deacon's knitted 
creations looked fantastic, but aren't suitable for the rush-hour commute: he 
sent girls down the catwalk encased in giant knits snaked around their necks 
and bodies. Both looks are very on-trend, but I'm more from the Paul Smith 
school of knitwear: light and delicate over a feminine chiffon shirt and 
pearls, or using a jumper to add a layer of colour to a sombre outfit (see 
above). My advice would be to go for something in a fluorescent or bold colour 
(these hues will carry over into spring/summer 2008). And if you opt for a 
cardigan, go for a long one and wear it belted.

Â· If you have a wardrobe question for Jo Jones, email her at 
ask.jo@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.jo@observer.co.uk>
