
I am a 28-year-old single woman. I work in a professional job and play quite 
hard at weekends. However, one thing missing in my life is a partner. I think 
about sex most hours of the day, and watch a lot of porn. I can pick up men 
very quickly, the sex is usually quite intense and I enjoy taking control. 
But, at heart, I want commitment and a partner. Please help.

When the lack of a committed partner becomes more important than your current 
sexual style, you will probably prioritise this quite naturally. Most likely, 
this process has begun already, and will intensify over the next couple of 
years. We all go through a series of developmental stages as our lives unfold, 
and with each stage comes a new challenge; yours appears to be changing from 
the “single” fun of one’s 20s, to the notion of stability and the desire to 
create a couple with the potential for longevity.

This is all normal, although it is worth remembering that not everyone 
progresses through the same developmental stages in the same order. What you 
have been achieving through experimentation is a wealth of learning about who 
you are sexually – what excites you, and the nature of your erotic triggers. 
Knowing about these will help you to chose longer-term partners who truly 
satisfy your erotic creativity. In fact, acquiring sexual self-knowledge in 
this way is a smart insurance policy.

• Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a US-based psychotherapist specialising in 
sexual disorders.

• If you would like advice from Pamela Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, 
send us a brief description of your concerns toprivate.lives@theguardian.com 
<mailto:private.lives@theguardian.com> (please don’t send attachments). Each 
week, Pamela chooses one problem to answer, which will be published online and 
in print. She regrets that she cannot enter into personal correspondence.
