
I moved from my native Cork to New York when I was 18. Eleven years later, 
when I boardedTWA Flight 840 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/TWA_Flight_840_hijacking_%281969%29> on 29 
August 1969, I was a seasoned traveller who enjoyed flying.

The plane was headed for Tel Aviv, but my friend Cathy and I were going to 
Athens, the second last stop; two friends were joining the flight in Rome. 
Cathy and I were in first class with only two other passengers when we left 
Italy. We had noticed the woman who was sat directly behind us while we were on 
the coach to the plane at Leonardo da Vinci airport. She was very striking, 
young and glamorous. The other passenger, a man, was in the aisle seat of the 
front row on the opposite side of the plane. Not long after we took off, the 
woman moved to the aisle seat just in front of me, and struck up a conversation 
with the man. We were quite impressed, and thought she seemed sophisticated, 
chatting up a man she didn’t know.

Then, as one of the stewardesses, as they were called then, was bringing the 
captain his lunch, the woman shoved her aside and rushed into the cockpit, 
rapidly followed by the man. I knew immediately that we’d been hijacked. Cathy 
couldn’t believe it. The woman, who we later found out wasLeila Khaled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2001/jan/26/israel>, announced that the 
plane had been taken on behalf of thePopular Front for the Liberation of 
Palestine (PFLP) 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Popular_Front_for_the_Liberation_of_Palestine> 
and said that there was one among us who was responsible “for the killing of 
Palestinian men, women and children”. Cathy and I were moved to the back of the 
plane to seats near our friends. People were very shocked, but there was no 
panic. I imagine this was because the crew remained very professional, and most 
people hadn’t witnessed the hijack.

Everyone was looking around, wondering who the “one among us” was. It later 
emerged that the PFLP thoughtYitzhak Rabin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/26/anniversary-yitzhak-rabins-assassination-what-ifs-violence-israelis-palestinians>
, then the Israeli ambassador to Washington, was on the flight. He wasn’t.

The flight was eerily quiet, just the background hum of the plane and at one 
point a small baby crying. After four hours or so, the cabin manager made an 
announcement, reassuring us that we had enough fuel. I hadn’t even thought 
about fuel, so that made me very anxious. The anxiety wasn’t alleviated by 
discovering that two small Israeli jets were flying on either side of our 
plane. I was so scared that my knees were knocking, but I honestly didn’t think 
I was going to die. I figured that the hijackers would put their own 
self-preservation first and make sure we landed safely. Not everyone felt the 
same. Cathy was terrified and the woman in front of me said goodbye to her 
husband, “in case we die”.

Finally, the crew told us we were making an emergency landing in Damascus and 
could take one small bag with us. I thought that if I died, it didn’t matter 
what I took, but if not, I’d need my passport, traveller’s cheques and makeup. 
The captain landed the plane smoothly and we were rapidly evacuated. The crew 
told us to run in the direction of the wind, but it was getting dark and there 
was no wind, only heat. Behind us, the hijackers threw grenades into the 
cockpit, destroying it and setting the plane alight.

The hijackers fired guns at the fuel tanks as we ran barefoot though a field 
of thorns. Amazingly, there wasn’t enough fuel left to detonate. The Syrian 
authorities sent buses to take us to the University of Damascus for 
interrogation. As I wasn’t American or Israeli, they weren’t too interested in 
me, and eventually I was reunited with Cathy and our friends.

Related: Experience: I was out at sea when a tsunami struck 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/22/experience-out-at-sea-tsunami-struck-thailand>

The following day, the Syrians gave us shoes and took us to see the 
Palestinian refugee camps. I hadn’t much love for Khaled, but seeing where a 
whole generation had grown up homeless made me view things in a different 
light: those camps were a breeding ground for revolutionaries, and 
understandably so. We finally got to Athens at 3am on Sunday morning, grateful 
to be alive and determined to make the most of our vacation. I still fly, but 
now insist on sitting near an emergency exit.

• As told to AM Scanlon

Do you have an experience to share? Email experience@theguardian.com 
<mailto:experience@theguardian.com> 
