
The rise of social media is viewed by many as yet another means of 
procrastination. Yet academics are increasingly turning to Twitter, not just 
for entertainment and networking, but to engage audiences in a new way.

Related: Eight smart ways to use social media in universities 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jan/20/eight-smart-ways-to-use-social-media-in-universities>

One of the best-loved academic accounts is @NeinQuarterly 
<https://twitter.com/NeinQuarterly>; a feed that blends aphorisms, jokes and an 
expert knowledge of German literature and culture. It was established by Eric 
Jarosinski, a former US professor of German literature, writing under the nom 
de plume. His work now appears in German and Dutch newspapers and has been 
turned into a book, Nein: A Manifesto, which was released last year.

I had less grand ambitions when I started my own anonymous account, 
@TheLitCritGuy <https://twitter.com/TheLitCritGuy>. I had finished my master’s 
degree and had a Twitter account that I didn’t really use, so decided to 
dedicate it to talking about the ideas that had intrigued me during my studies. 
I was pleased when it picked up a number of engaged and curious followers.

I had to decide what to talk about, develop a posting schedule and realise the 
limits of my own knowledge – with a vocal group of followers I had to be honest 
about my own inexperience (I actually found it liberating to tell them when I 
didn’t know the answer to something).

Anonymity comes with certain benefits. The persona means that I don’t have to 
run my opinions by my institution or worry whether my managers might deem 
something acceptable. I can express my anger about the conditions of higher 
education, and I get to mix jokes with theory without worrying that my 
colleagues will take me less seriously.

For others who wish to do something similar, there is no sure-fire approach, 
but here are the things that worked for me:

Have a distinctive voice 


Anonymous accounts do not have to have a name or a face, but must offer an 
original perspective. The pseudonymous accounts@EthicistForHire 
<https://twitter.com/EthicistForHire> and @CrankyEthicist 
<https://twitter.com/CrankyEthicist> offer potential followers a clear guide of 
what to expect.

Related: How social media can help universities in times of tragedy 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/feb/03/how-social-media-can-help-universities-in-times-of-tragedy>

Have a purpose 

One of the most successful anonymous academic accounts, @AcademicsSay 
<https://twitter.com/AcademicsSay>, posts jokes that academics connect with – 
about coffee, being overworked and the ever-present catchphrase “you should be 
writing”. These highly shareable posts keep the account focused and 
identifiable, and have drawn a huge following.

Find your audience

Rather than just posting into the void, the best academic accounts use the 
tools of social media to find an audience. There are hashtags such as
#twitterstorians <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23twitterstorians&src=tyah>, 
for example, where historians post their thoughts. I use#TheoryTime 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/theorytime?src=hash>, so my followers can catch up 
on topics they may have missed.

Try new formats 


I quickly realised the limitations of Twitter and decided to expand my account 
into a research blog, as well as using the platform I had built on Twitter to 
write on new websites, bringing my work to a much wider audience.

Create connections

Social media allows for academics to become relatable – Twitter is a space for 
conversation and mutual education. I try to keep the important details of my 
life private, but a few personal details, as well as opinions and replies to 
followers, make the account more interesting and fun for those following.

Away from the structures and rules of university networking, anonymous 
accounts can enable direct, non-hierarchical connections. Impact becomes 
something more than a metric as people are able to communicate with academics 
and see both the good and bad sides of university life. Anonymity has enabled 
me to share the struggles of being an early career researcherand the sheer joy 
of teaching, as well as talking about my intellectual passions.

Related: Twitter journal: would you share your original research on social 
media? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2014/jan/27/twitter-only-journal-academic-research>

Anonymity does mean that my account won’t necessarily benefit my career within 
the university system. However, as more academics take to social media 
anonymously, such accounts are allowing a new kind of creative, flexible 
academic voice to emerge, more closely linked with the public than the ivory 
towers of the university system.

I’ve received countless tweets, Facebook messages and emails from people 
across the world, who, for various reasons, couldn’t pursue their own passion 
for literary theory. It’s a genuine privilege to answer their questions and 
learn from them, whether I’m emailing economists about Foucault or discussing 
phenomenology with a nursing student.

Social media has shown me that people are curious and searching for new ways 
to be engaged and to learn. It can change the way we teach and spread knowledge 
beyond the limits of the university, allowing us to connect with the public 
like never before.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
