
If ever an academic exercise threatened to be long-winded and expensive, it 
was the one flagged up in last week's Education Guardian, in a piece about the 
merits - or otherwise - of teaching illiterate adults to read by phonic 
methods. A proposal to "carry out a substantial, randomly controlled trial 
comparing phonics with other mainstream methods of teaching adult literacy has 
been put to the Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC) by a team of 
academics from London University's Institute of Education and the University of 
York".

A "team" of academics! They won't come cheap, and I instead offer the ESRC a 
solution to save it money and time. If it wants proof of how phonic learning 
can be effective with adults, it needs only enter any prison or young offender 
institution in the UK and see a highly successful phonic-structured reading 
scheme cemented into the educational ethos.

The scheme is Toe by Toe (TbT), based on the reading manual of that name, 
developed by Keda Cowling and inspired by her experience of teaching children 
with dyslexia. The programme is run by the Shannon Trust, a charity which, 
since 1997, has worked with the prison service to provide the manual and enable 
prisoners who can read to teach those who cannot.

I declare an interest: I am a trustee of the Shannon Trust and echo the 
comments of the prisons ombudsman, Stephen Shaw, and writer JK Rowling, who 
respectively called TbT "the best thing to happen in the prison service in 10 
years" and "maybe the one thing that makes a difference".

Does it work? The prison population is in constant movement and statistics are 
hard to gather. But, in 2008, a survey of 20 prisons using TbT showed over 
1,000 trainee reader recruits, with almost 10% of students progressing into 
other learning and training areas, and a high number of trainees becoming 
mentors. Learning takes place five times a week, with sessions lasting up to 20 
minutes. The scheme is facilitated by volunteers. Teaching is on a one-to-one 
basis and Julie Carthy, volunteer development manager at Shannon, says the 
importance of support for trainees from their peers cannot be overestimated. 
She accepts that the scheme involves a lot of repetition, but asserts that this 
provides a safe and predictable zone for "fragile adult learners" starting 
their journey to literacy.

The programme is particularly successful with young offenders, an area where 
you would imagine the stigma of illiteracy to be acute. But Susie O'Hagan, who 
runs the reading network for the trust, says that in institutions where TbT has 
a high profile, it is "no big deal" for youngsters to admit to being 
non-readers. She says phonics work in a way that other schemes don't because 
learners know the sounds already and quickly begin to recognise the shape of 
the letters that represent them.

Can phonic learning flourish beyond prisons? Libby Ainley is a prison 
volunteer. Eighteen months ago, armed with a grant from the Urban Regeneration 
Fund, she distributed 160 copies of the TbT manual around deprived estates in 
Brighton, supported by an estate "matriarch" whose son had learned to read by 
TbT in prison. Ainley now knows 80 people who have learned to read - and who 
are passing their new skill on to others.

Initially, Ainley was sceptical about teaching prisoners to read by simple 
words and pictures; would they see it as babyish, demeaning? Not at all. 
Pictures and simplicity are the key: they look at them and say, "I can do 
this". It really is as simple as that. Academics take note.

shannontrust.org.uk <http://www.shannontrust.org.uk>

â€¢ Eric Allison is the Guardian's prison correspondent
