
Nicky Morgan, the education secretary, has called for an “urgent 
investigation” into a website set up by theVote Leave 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/13/vote-leave-official-brexit-campaign-eu-referendum-boris-johnson>
 campaign that appeared when people searched for information on how to register 
to vote.

The advertised link, which appeared above the official government site, asked 
individuals to fill in personal information, including email and address, and 
then click on a “register to vote” button.
Referendum explained: young people 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/05/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=young_people>
However, the action did not actually sign people up to vote, but simply 
provided their details to theout campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/26/brexit-campaign-wrong-uk-sovereign-nation-eu-masters-of-our-destiny-power>
 and then redirected to a second page with further information.


In a letter to the Electoral Commission, Morgan and the Labour MP Stella Creasy
 <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/stella-creasy>, accused their opponents 
of manipulating online listings and of “underhand tactics that could 
disenfranchise citizens” who were trying to register in good faith.

“It has come to our attention that Vote Leave 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/01/eu-referendum-live-vote-leave-remain-immigration>
 appear to have paid for online advertising to ensure that their campaign 
website regarding registration is promoted ahead of the government website that 
directly enables citizens to register to vote,” they wrote.

“The Vote Leave campaign site presents users with a form to fill in their 
contact details and then click on a button which clearly says ‘Register to 
Vote’. This website, however, does not enable people to register, and therefore 
could easily mislead people in to thinking that they have secured their ballot 
paper,” they added before the website ad appeared to have been taken down on 
Monday.


An Electoral Commission 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/24/nearly-800000-names-axed-from-voter-register-officials-figures-show>
 spokeswoman said it was not within the remit of her organisation to “regulate 
the content of campaigner websites”. She encouraged people to remember that 
registration closes at midnight on Tuesday and only takes a few minutes.

Related: 'I'm selling democracy': activists rally young people to vote in EU 
poll 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/06/im-selling-democracy-activists-rally-young-people-to-vote-in-eu-poll>

Vote Leave did not respond to questions about the link.

Discovery of the Vote Leave registration advert came as data journalists at 
Euronews found that more than 50,000 young people applied to register to vote 
in the past weekend alone, with another surge expected on Tuesday.

The figures suggest that young voters have responded to a campaign 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/06/im-selling-democracy-activists-rally-young-people-to-vote-in-eu-poll>
 to sign them up, with over one in four of the 2 million people registering 
since the start of May being under 25, according to data available on thegov.uk 
<https://www.gov.uk/> website.

The news will come as some relief to the remain camp, as pollsters believe 
young people are more likely to vote to stay in the EU.Young people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/youngpeople> are twice as likely to vote 
to remain in the EU, but under-25s are only half as likely to vote at all as 
over-65s.

Despite the Tories’ attractiveness to older voters, David Cameron has made a 
personal plea to younger people to turn out, calling the referendum a “vote for 
their lifetimes”. He and other remain campaigners have tried to impress on 
Britain’s millennials just how important the referendum is to their future 
prospects, with polls suggesting they are most concerned about jobs.

According to YouGov, 45% of 18 to 24-year-olds said employment was the key 
issue of the referendum, while only 8% said immigration was their main concern.

Activists, however, are concerned younger voters will not turn out, despite 
the fact that they will, arguably, be most affected by the outcome. Almost 30% 
of under-25s are not registered to vote, making them half as likely to be on 
the electoral register as members of the population at large.

Politicians, particularly those on the remain side, have been scrambling to 
engage younger voters and campaigns to to do so have stepped up a gear this 
week.Tinder 
<https://twitter.com/Tinder?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
, the dating app on which 85% of users are aged 18 to 34, is running Swipe the 
Vote, where users can choose whether statements about the EU are true or false. 
They are also offered a link to learn more about both sides and to register to 
vote. The taxi app Uber will send its users pop-up adverts to encourage them to 
register.


The youth voter movements Bite the Ballot <http://bitetheballot.co.uk/> and 
Hope Not Hate <http://www.hopenothate.org.uk/> are running a series of 
initiatives across the country, including registration drives, a leaders’ live 
debate on Facebook and popup “democracy cafes” in Starbucks outlets.

In Chrisp Street, east London, between market street stalls piled high with 
plastic bowls of tomatoes and rails of sequinned dresses, six activists have 
been chasing after young shoppers in recent days, waving blue and 
yellow-starred leaflets.

“People always think I’m selling something,” said Udoka Maya Okonkwo, a 
19-year-old student, in her blackand pink slogan T-shirt. “I’m selling 
democracy, that’s what I should say to them.”
