
Does volunteering abroad on short-term aid projects do more harm than good? 
It’s an issue that’s hotly debated. Many argueagainst the rise of the volunteer 
tourism industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/feb/13/beware-voluntourists-doing-good>
, claiming it hurts the communities it aims to help. Volunteering overseas has 
also been the butt of jokes parodying thegap-year armies 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eKFjWR7X5dU> and well-meaning but possibly 
ill-equipped <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ymcflrj_rRc> adults who take time 
off to make a difference.

Related: Are there too many sustainable development goals? | Carla Kweifio-Okai
 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/20/are-there-too-many-sustainable-development-goals>

But in the rush to take down the “voluntourism 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/feb/17/volunteer-holidays-how-to-find-right-project>
” sector, have the detractors overlooked more worthwhile forms of volunteering? 
A new report from Voluntary Service Overseas and the Institute for Development 
Studies says yes, claiming that volunteers contribute positively to sustainable 
development. TheValuing Volunteering 
<http://www.ids.ac.uk/project/valuing-volunteering> report involved both local 
and international volunteers in Kenya, Mozambique, Nepal and the Philippines, 
and found that the often informal nature of volunteering provedhelpful in 
reaching the poorest 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/mar/19/gap-yah-volunteers-not-all-bad-says-new-report>
 and most vulnerable communities, with volunteers living and working alongside 
community members. The report also claimed volunteering had created new ways 
for communities to collaborate on projects and supported people who may not be 
heard by traditional NGOs or governments.

We want to know what you think about the merits or pitfalls of volunteering 
overseas. Can it be a force for good? Or are there more effective ways to bring 
about change? Submit a response of 250 words or fewer, andwe’ll publish a 
selection of the best ones 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/series/students-speak>. Keep 
your response clear and concise, avoiding development or academic jargon. Email 
your response todevelopment@theguardian.com <mailto:development@theguardian.com>
 with “Students Speak 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/series/students-speak>” in the 
subject line. Please include your name, the country where you live, and the 
university or college you attend. Submissions close at 6pm GMT on 24 April.
