
Broadcaster Larry Madowo has a blunt message for his colleagues in the 
television industry: forget geography when it comes to global hit series like
Game of Thrones <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/game-of-thrones>.

Madowo, news anchor at NTV Kenya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/kenya> and 
host of the country’s Friday night primetime entertainment show The Trend, 
believes the old broadcast model of staggered global release of major US or 
European programmes is “collapsing”.

“This might come as a shock to people who run big media companies in the New 
York or London,” Madowo said.

“There are people watching your content who aren’t all in America and Europe. 
“They’re all over the world - in Africa, east Asia, South America. They want to 
pay for that content if you’ll let them. When you don’t let them, they pirate 
it.”

Figures that rank Game of Thrones as the world’s most pirated television 
series for thelast four years running 
<https://torrentfreak.com/game-of-thrones-most-pirated-tv-show-of-2015/> – and 
as generating the biggest social buzz, onFacebook at least 
<http://www.thedrum.com/news/2015/12/14/game-thrones-was-most-talked-about-tv-show-facebook-2015>
 – underline his argument.

According to one estimate, there were more than 1m illegal downloads 
<https://torrentfreak.com/game-of-thrones-season-6-premiere-triggers-piracy-craze-160425/>
 of the season six premiere within 12 hours of its broadcast in April.

Madowo used the platform at April’s UN-backed conference on the world digital 
content market 
<http://www.wipo.int/meetings/en/2016/global_digital_conference.html> to call 
for simultaneous global release of blockbuster shows, whether US exports like 
Game of Thrones and The Walking Dead, or BBC hits like Sherlock and Luther.

“Geographies in the traditional sense that media networks saw them no longer 
exist – they’ve entirely collapsed,” he told theWorld Intellectual Property 
Organization’s <http://www.wipo.int/portal/en/> conference in Geneva.

“But there’s an old school thinking about taking programmes to air in America 
and Europe and then eventually use a local distributor network to reach 
everywhere else. The minute a big show airs, it’s trending on social media. 
Everyone is talking about it globally. So even people without access to 
channels want to watch it.”

But there are signs the international television market is embracing the model 
of simultaneous broadcast – “simulcast” – that Madowo describes.

Last year, season five of Game of Thrones was simulcast across 170 countries 
<http://hbob2b.vo.llnwd.net/u/mr_twitter/March2015/gameofthrones15simulcast_.pdf>
, either through HBO’s own regional channels or local distributors, including 
the subscription service M-Net in Africa.

This year’s season six premiere was simulcast across 194 countries. 

According to HBO, this was both a move against piracy and a reflection of how 
technology has evolved from the era of delivering tapes to different 
territories for translation before broadcast.

“Several years ago, HBO went to great lengths to make its original programming 
available to all of our partners for same time airing as the United States,” an 
HBO spokesperson said. “This had been a goal of HBO for many years and 
technology had finally evolved to a point of making it a reality.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kfkf%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kfkf%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5d99b21c11bc0d12fcd9336690c6d6a90f35af1%2F0_123_4284_2570%2F4284.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Simultaneous%20global%20broadcasting%20could%20help%20tackle%20TV%20piracy&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kfkf%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Simultaneous+global+broadcasting+could+help+tackle+TV+piracy&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kfkf%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5d99b21c11bc0d12fcd9336690c6d6a90f35af1%2F0_123_4284_2570%2F4284.jpg>
 BBC Worldwide is using local partnerships to air shows like Sherlock within 
days of British transmission. Photograph: BBC/PA 
The move towards simulcast may also reflect the impact of streaming services 
likeNetflix <http://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> and Amazon on both the 
television industry and the growing consumer appetite for on-demand shows.

The number of global subscribers to on-demand streaming video services are 
forecastto rise from 28 million in 2010 to 306 million by the year 2020 
<http://www.researchandmarkets.com/research/mn3q7r/global_svod>.

Indeed, Netflix founder Reed Hastings announced plans in January to extend its 
services to 130 more countries 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/07/netflix-streaming-ces-global-tv-network>
 – close to the 200 country target it had set for 2017.

“Our goal is to offer a fully global service with a global catalogue so no one 
has to wait for the latest show or movie,” said Joris Evers of Netflix.

“We release nearly all our original series, films, documentaries and kids 
programming at the same time everywhere.

“We released nearly 450 hours of global original content in 2015 and are 
planning over 600 hours in 2016.”

BBC Worldwide, the corporation’s international distribution arm, also appears 
to be moving closer to the simulcast model, either through local partnerships 
or its own brand channels: BBC First, BBC Earth and BBC Brit.

“Unless there are specific scheduling reasons, we now bring African audiences 
UK content faster than ever before so the new series of Top Gear will air three 
days after its UK transmission while Sherlock and Luther were both shown within 
days of their British transmission earlier this year,” a BBC Worldwide 
spokesperson said.

But while simulcast is a positive step to widen international access to 
popular shows in principle, a practical barrier – and pull to piracy – remains 
in the cost of premium subscription services in some countries.

“Satellite services are still out of the reach of the majority,” said Madowo.

“Even in Africa, there’s a generation of cord cutters that don’t want a 
cable/satellite subscription but have Netflix, or just pirate the shows they 
want.”

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.


All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Paid for by” – find out morehere 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
