
Major UK transport projects, such as HS2, Crossrail, or the trans-Pennine 
tunnel 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/aug/05/trans-pennine-rail-tunnel-transport-north-england>
, are announced to much fanfare – but also criticism. Their champions say 
infrastructure projects of this scale can deliver widespread regeneration, 
boost the economy and offer mass employment opportunities. But others have 
reservations about whether such infrastructure benefits everybody, particularly 
local people with lower paid and lower skilled jobs.

“There is a tendency for governments to only want to fund transport projects 
you can see from space,” says Stephen Joseph, executive director ofCampaign for 
Better Transport <http://www.bettertransport.org.uk/>. “But we have long argued 
that it is local infrastructure that actually matters to most people, but gets 
the least funding.”

He says standard transport appraisals carried out for these projects overlook 
the social impact for existing communities and focus more on reducing commuter 
journey times. “Our view is that [this aspect] is overplayed and doesn’t tend 
to reflect either the impact big projects will have on the poorest people, or 
the distribution of benefits.”

If the UK wants to compete for jobs and investment, world class infrastructure 
will be absolutely essential
Andrew Adonis 
The proposed trans-Pennine road tunnel, for example, promises to cut road 
journey times between Sheffield and Manchester by half an hour and avoid delays 
caused by bad weather over the Pennines. But it will also tip extra road 
traffic into those regions’ poorest parts, where air pollution and traffic 
accidents are already a problem, warns Joseph.Evidence suggests 
<http://www.makingthelink.net/topic-briefings/inequalities-and-deprivation> 
children in socially deprived areas are more likely to be involved in road 
deaths and injuries, and the damaging effects of air pollution havebeen widely 
publicised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jan/08/air-pollution-will-scar-londons-children-for-rest-their-lives>
.

Perhaps the biggest transport talking point at the moment is HS2 – a train 
line that Lord Adonis, chair of the National Infrastructure Commission, says 
will unlock jobs between London and the major cities of the Midlands and the 
North, creating as many as 14,600 jobs and apprenticeships across the UK.

Related: Lord Adonis: HS3 could be the rail revolution of the 21st century 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/apr/27/lord-adonis-hs3-rail-revolution-north-high-speed>

“If the UK wants to compete for the jobs and investment of the future, world 
class infrastructure will be absolutely essential,” he says. “In Birmingham 
alone, major projects like HS2 and the redevelopment of New Street station can 
help transform communities, supercharge the local economy and create jobs.”

But Richard Wellings, head of transport at the Institute of Economic Affairs, 
says existing, often low-skilled populations in the areas around HS2 may 
struggle to exploit any benefits offered by improved transport links. A lack of 
suitably skilled workers in an area puts big businesses off expanding or 
relocating, he adds, and while homeowners can take advantage of compensation 
schemes and buy elsewhere, renters and those in social housing are left behind.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jtze%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jtze%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d75dc664e05c5d35816c30ca202b8316635f1a1%2F0_385_3120_1872%2F3120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Do%20major%20transport%20projects%20only%20benefit%20wealthy%20commuters%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jtze%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Do+major+transport+projects+only+benefit+wealthy+commuters%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jtze%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d75dc664e05c5d35816c30ca202b8316635f1a1%2F0_385_3120_1872%2F3120.jpg>
 HS1 train track near Charing, Kent. Photograph: Invicta Kent Media/REX 
Wellings cites HS1 as a prime past example 
<http://www.iea.org.uk/publications/research/failure-to-transform-high-speed-rail-and-the-regeneration-myth>
: “HS1 was going to transform the economy in poor areas of East Kent – and 
those areas have actually slipped down the league table in terms of employment 
and poverty.”

It’s also possible for an area to be regenerated with no substantial benefits 
to local people, he adds. “Look at Canary Wharf, built on massive amounts of 
transport spending, and yet we haven’t seen that wealth trickle down to the 
areas next door; they are among the poorest in the UK.”

But Lord Adonis highlights two new High Speed Rail academies in Birmingham and 
Doncaster, which will create “high quality careers [...] giving young people 
the skills they need to get on”.HS2 claims it will create nearly 25,000 jobs 
<http://careers.hs2.org.uk/about-hs2/>, including 2,000 apprenticeships. 

Related: Roads and railways: where south-east Asia leads, Britain trails behind
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/may/17/roads-railways-south-east-asia-britain-investment-infrastructure>

A spokesperson for Manchester city council, in reference to HS2, said: “We 
fundamentally reject the suggestion that only big business and wealthy 
commuters will benefit from these once-in-a-generation rail improvements.”

Local authorities should broker employment opportunities for its poorest 
residents when large infrastructure projects come to town, saysMike Haw 
<https://www.jrf.org.uk/contact/mike-haw>, who works in the cities, growth and 
poverty team at the Joseph Rowntree Foundation.

“Work is still the best way out of poverty and employment outcomes from 
infrastructure projects are what’s key,” he says. Long lead-in times for large 
infrastructure projects should be spent thinking about how to equip those out 
of work with the skills that will be in demand, according to Haw, who would 
like to see an element of local labour ringfenced during the procurement 
process.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jtze%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jtze%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ab806e3cccfa5de96aeb33fa32e43164704b654%2F0_232_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Do%20major%20transport%20projects%20only%20benefit%20wealthy%20commuters%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jtze%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Do+major+transport+projects+only+benefit+wealthy+commuters%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jtze%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ab806e3cccfa5de96aeb33fa32e43164704b654%2F0_232_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 Greater Manchester’s Metrolink. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the 
Guardian 
Joseph cites examples of how major infrastructure projects can be an 
investment for everybody: he is broadly positive about the railway line 
upgrades between Manchester and Leeds, which he says should expand access to 
jobs and help combat air pollution. Meanwhile Greater Manchester’s Metrolink is 
connecting residents in old mill towns with potential employers.

But Joseph adds the caveat that all transport initiatives need to be 
accompanied by initiatives such asWorkWise 
<http://www.mynetwork.org.uk/offers/offers-list/workwise> – a programme giving 
unemployed people help and advice with travel costs – to truly make a 
difference to the most disadvantaged.

The Campaign for Better Transport would like to see discounted train fares for 
part-time workers, andhas published a report 
<http://www.bettertransport.org.uk/sites/default/files/research-files/Getting_there_final_web_0.pdf>
 on how sustainable transport can support new developments. Jospeh says: “There 
needs to be a much sharper focus on who actually benefits from transport 
investment – broad assertions that everybody will win just won’t do.”

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
