
I have strong feelings for a woman who works for me in my business, but I have 
absolutely no idea whether these feelings are reciprocated. Our work requires 
us to spend a lot of time together. There is a constant flow of electronic 
messages between us, some of which seem to me quite personal in nature. We 
regularly socialise together. There is no overt flirting – by my reckoning – 
but there is a lot of laughter. She is very single. There is a running joke 
with a colleague that we are having an affair – the chemistry between us has 
attracted comment. I am several years older than her, which confuses me 
further. If I tell her about my feelings, and I have misread the situation, 
then I can see this will destroy our working relationship. She is an absolutely 
key member of my team, creative and dynamic, and the thought of losing her is a 
total nightmare. What should I do?

• When leaving a message on this page, please be sensitive to the fact that 
you are responding to a real person in the grip of a real-life dilemma, who 
wrote to Private Lives asking for help, and may well view your comments here. 
Please consider especially how your words or the tone of your message could be 
perceived by someone in this situation, and be aware that comments that appear 
to be disruptive or disrespectful to the individual concerned will be removed.

• If you would like fellow readers to respond to a dilemma of yours, send us 
an outline of the situation of about 150 words. For advice from Pamela 
Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your 
concerns.

• All correspondence should reach us by Wednesday morning. Email: 
private.lives@theguardian.com <mailto://private.lives@theguardian.com> (please 
don’t send attachments).
