
My partner won’t have sex with me, as the result of a past trauma. He is 
obsessed with, and terrified of, getting me pregnant, because of a past 
relationship. I’ve tried everything, but I am desperate. I cannot go on with 
him without sex. I love and want him.

There are many sexual problems that can be solved, or partly solved, simply 
through better communication, advice about better technique, or reassurance. 
But when it comes to a problem that is created primarily by trauma, direct 
professional advice is often necessary.

Reactions can vary from person to person. Some individuals develop strong 
post-traumatic reactions that mean that, thereafter, they will do anything they 
can to avoid a repetition of that event, or even something that reminds them of 
it. Sometimes the trauma is not even consciously remembered, but continues to 
trigger reactions that can seem mysterious to the person and others nearby.

Ideally, your partner needs to work with a qualified therapist. Now, here is 
the tricky bit: he may be highly resistant to this. You can offer support and 
gently push him to make that first appointment; but then it is up to him. 
Perhaps being clear about your inability to continue without having the option 
to make love will motivate him sufficiently. And don’t forget to analyse your 
own part in this; for some people the state of longing – even over long periods 
– is delicious and sustainable.

• Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a US-based psychotherapist specialising in 
sexual disorders.

• If you would like advice from Pamela Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, 
send us a brief description of your concerns toprivate.lives@theguardian.com 
<mailto:private.lives@theguardian.com> (please don’t send attachments). Each 
week, Pamela chooses one problem to answer, which will be published online and 
in print. She regrets that she cannot enter into personal correspondence.
