
Andy Burnham <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/andyburnham>, the shadow 
home secretary, is to call on the government to adopt a so-called “Hillsborough 
law”, that would give bereaved families the same resources as the police to 
make their case at future inquests.

The families of the 96 football fans who died in the Hillsborough stadium 
disaster <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hillsborough-disaster> had to 
raise the money to pay for their own lawyers at the earlier inquests in 1991, 
while South Yorkshire police had a top legal team.

Related: Hillsborough verdict sparks call to rebalance police and criminal 
justice system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/11/hillsborough-verdict-sparks-call-to-rebalance-police-and-criminal-justice-system>

Burnham, who campaigned on behalf of the families over many years, has tabled 
an amendment to the policing and crime bill, to be debated in the House of 
Commons on Monday, aimed at helping families in similar situations in future by 
granting them legal aid equal to the cost of police spending on lawyers. “The 
27-year struggle of the Hillsborough families exposes how the odds are all too 
frequently stacked against ordinary families seeking truth and justice,” he 
said. “Never again should any bereaved families have to fight like the 
Hillsborough families have had to fight.”

Burnham plans to force a vote on the law. He will also advocate several other 
proposals, including urging the government to go ahead with the second phase of 
theLeveson inquiry <http://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-inquiry> into the 
media and restricting the ability of police officers to retire rather than face 
disciplinary action.

The home secretary, Theresa May, gave a statement in the House of Commons in 
April on the new Hillsborough inquests, including the jury’s finding that the 
victims wereunlawfully killed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/26/hillsborough-inquests-jury-says-96-victims-were-unlawfully-killed>
 in the crush at the stadium in 1989. She paid tribute to the families, saying: 
“They have faced hostility, opposition and obfuscation, and the authorities 
that should have been trusted have laid blame and tried to protect themselves 
instead of acting in the public interest. But the families have never faltered 
in their pursuit of the truth.”

The original Leveson report, published in 2012, examined phone-hacking cases 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/phone-hacking> and the nature of media 
regulation. But a second inquiry was envisaged, to investigate the relationship 
between the police and other public bodies, and the media. The government has 
said it wants to wait until all criminal investigations into phone hacking are 
complete before it commissions a new inquiry, but Burnham fears this is just a 
bid to kick the issue into the long grass. He would like to see the government 
pass legislation committing it to holding Leveson II.

Burnham said: “The government made a clear commitment to victims of press 
intrusion and parliament cannot let them renege on it. We need a full and 
thorough consideration of the relationship between press and police as 
recommended by Lord Leveson.”

Hacked Off <http://www.theguardian.com/media/hacked-off-campaign>, the 
campaign group representing the victims of phone hacking, is backing the call 
for a second inquiry, and lobbied MPs over the weekend to support the bid to 
force the government to legislate for one. A Home Office spokeswoman said she 
had no comment.

Burnham, who stood unsuccessfully for the Labour 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> leadership last year, now hopes to 
be selected as the party’s candidate to contest the new metro mayoralty in 
Manchester. Elections to the new post, which will have enhanced powers over 
health, transport and economic policy as part of George Osborne’s ”northern 
powerhouse”, will be held next May.
