
Promising to be the most ambitious celebration of London’s creative quarter 
yet, the seventh Clerkenwell Design Week (CDW, 24-26 May) will bring together 
leaders in international design and home-grown British talent.

Related: Clerkenwell Design Week preview – in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/renault-on-road-revolution/gallery/2016/may/19/clerkenwell-design-week-preview-in-pictures>

Creativity thrives in east London. Clerkenwell is at the heart of the action 
with, according to event organisers, more creative businesses and architects 
per square mile than any other place on the planet. Hundreds of new products 
will launch at the event, cementing its status as a world-class design hub.


CDW has always used a variety of local spaces, and its organisers have 
introduced several new locations this year; creating a dedicated route running 
from Exmouth Market to Smithfield market, incorporating eight exhibition spaces 
and a series of commissioned installations.


“The scale and ambition is the most significant change this year,” says show 
director, William Knight. “We’re extending the reach geographically and pushing 
the programme further north to Spa Fields. The half-mile route is a Hansel and 
Gretel model that joins the dots between installations and exhibitions. Local 
architects OMMX helped us with the strategy; they are stars of the future.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tqgd%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tqgd%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3b5033c54a7da971f92062b2431d9132d75c118%2F0_51_1200_1500%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Renault%20and%20Clerkenwell%20Design%20Week%3A%20a%20creative%20partnership&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tqgd%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Renault+and+Clerkenwell+Design+Week%3A+a+creative+partnership&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tqgd%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3b5033c54a7da971f92062b2431d9132d75c118%2F0_51_1200_1500%2F1200.jpg>
 Jennifer Newman: ‘CDW gives designers access to the Clerkenwell vibe and 
customers can touch and feel the products.’ Photograph: PR 
The new Spa Fields area houses the experiential Renault stand, which focuses 
on the company’s commitment to innovation, technology and sustainable mobility 
for all. Here visitors can explore the innovative emissions-reducing 
technologies of the EOLAB, a revolutionary car prototype. Weighing 400kg less 
than an ordinary B-segment vehicle and using innovative ZE Hybrid rechargeable 
technology, it can travel 100km on just 1 litre of petrol, and implements 
around a hundred engineering innovations that will be incorporated in Renault 
cars of the future.

One of eight main exhibition spaces, Icon House of Culture will be set in 
Smithfield’s Fabric nightclub. Within the exhibition, Hove-basedDare Studio 
<http://www.darestudio.co.uk/> will show an exclusive cabinet collaboration 
with fashion house Eley Kishimoto, known for its vibrant graphic prints. Dare 
will also show a new chair from emerging furniture designer Alys Bryan and 
auction a special wingback chair, upholstered in John Burgerman fabric, to 
raise money for Maggie’s Centres. “We’re embracing the venue; creating a club 
within a club,” says Sean Dare, who established Dare Studio in 2009. “We’ve all 
enjoyed a night out at Fabric, so everyone is excited to see how it works as an 
exhibition space.


“We’ve been showing at CDW since the beginning. Putting on an exhibition on 
the doorstep of London’s most important designers and architects is inspired, 
and the event gets bigger every year.”


The British Collection exhibition, at the Crypt on Clerkenwell Green, includes 
the launch of the new “club table”, with steel legs and a bamboo surface, from
Jennifer Newman Studio <http://jennifernewman.com/>. “We’ve been based in 
Clerkenwell for five years and CDW allows us to say hello to architects, 
interior designers and clients,” says Jennifer Newman. “As well as showing new 
products, CDW is a testing area for us. We show prototypes to get direct 
feedback; people bring us new ideas, too.


“CDW gives designers access to the Clerkenwell vibe and customers can touch 
and feel the products; we first came to the event before we had a showroom, and 
giving our clients real-life access to our products was crucial. Even if new 
designers just get a tiny corner at the event, it can be a launchpad for them.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tqgd%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tqgd%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09871a7f6478d0cda29128e76c628e10bb12a471%2F0_0_1177_837%2F1177.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Renault%20and%20Clerkenwell%20Design%20Week%3A%20a%20creative%20partnership&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tqgd%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Renault+and+Clerkenwell+Design+Week%3A+a+creative+partnership&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tqgd%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09871a7f6478d0cda29128e76c628e10bb12a471%2F0_0_1177_837%2F1177.jpg>
 Renault’s stand focuses on the company’s commitment to innovation, technology 
and sustainable mobility. Photograph: Renault 
At the other six exhibitions, Platform, hosted by the atmospheric House of 
Detention, showcases the work of 40 emerging designers; Design Fields at Spa 
Fields features 25 international brands; at St. John’s Square, Detail and the 
Detail Pavilion celebrate fine craftsmanship and luxury interiors; Project, 
within the Garden of St James Church, will host more than 20 leading 
manufacturers presenting furniture, lighting and contemporary product design; 
and Additions (also in the Garden of St James) is devoted to small home 
accessories.


With a focus on innovation that combines beautiful design and user-friendly 
technology, Renault is a natural headline sponsor for the event. This spring, 
Renault is alsocollaborating with Central Saint Martins 
<http://www.theguardian.com/renault-on-road-revolution/2016/may/19/robotic-hammocks-and-mobile-gyms-the-future-of-car-interiors>
 on a project that invites design students to shape the future of personal 
transport, working with eco-friendly materials and technologies.


At CDW, Renault will provide a fleet of electric Twizy cars to shuttle 
visitors around the show and opportunities to test-drive the all-electric 
Renault ZOE on site. “Visitors loved jumping in and out of the Twizys last 
year,” says Knight. “We have a true collaboration with Renault, and it adds a 
nice layer of creativity to CDW.”


Clerkenwell Design Week runs from 24 to 26 May 2016 
http://www.clerkenwelldesignweek.com/ <http://www.clerkenwelldesignweek.com/>

