
Last week my column critiqued the utter stupidity of advertising. But when in 
Rome, as I always say, put on a toga and start vomiting in a big vat while 
seducing young boys and inventing a crude form of democracy. We live in a world 
dominated by advertising. I discovered this last Christmas, when Pastor Ed 
referred to the manger scene as "The blessed Nextel/Merrill Lynch 
saviour-birthing observation area". At first I was taken aback by it all - the 
Microsoft camels; the Coca-Cola sheep; the three Sony wise men; the host of 
heavenly Victoria's Secret angels; the Virgin Mary wearing Guess jeans; Joseph 
playing Wii golf with the innkeeper - but then realised I had to get into the 
modern age.

So I've been working on an ad for this column. (I'm going to advertise on TV, 
since no one reads any more.)

It goes like this: We see a dark screen and hear the swelling, gut-wrenching 
sounds of terrified screaming. It's like someone has lowered a microphone into 
hell itself. Slowly, the screen fills with a photo of me, holding up one of my 
columns. The screaming recedes and we hear Beethoven's Ode To Joy - the most 
beautiful, soul-transporting version ever. It's like a microphone has been 
affixed to a very long pole and poked through the pearly gates. Then we CUT 
back to the darkness. The screaming begins again. We CUT back and forth several 
times, the subliminal message being: George's column is the root of all 
ecstasy, whereas, when one ceases reading it, one is thrown into a vast dark 
space of existential angst and horror.

The other thing I was going to try was advertising via skywriting. You know, 
have a plane fly over and spray out smoke reading, like: READ GEORGE'S COLUMN, 
YOU A-HOLES! Or: WHY ARE YOU LOOKING UP HERE WHEN YOU COULD BE READING GEORGE'S 
COLUMN IN THE GUARDIAN, WHICH RUNS ONCE A WEEK AND IS A LITE HUMOUR READ THAT 
MAY GIVE YOU SOME PLEASURE IF THERE IS EVEN A TOUCH OF POSITIVE LIFE-FORCE LEFT 
IN YOUR EMBITTERED WEARY FRAME!

Then I realised this would be a waste of money, since nobody reads any more. 
Then I thought: Why not skywrite something that doesn't require reading? So I 
hired 10 planes to fly over England, leaving behind a hi-tech material that 
simulates (during the day) sun, clouds, birds and (at night) stars, darkness 
and the moon. You look up, observe the beauty of the "firmament"- and think 
gratefully of me.

Via the awesome power of advertising.
