
I started in the gym at seven years old – I enjoyed bouncing around. At 11 or 
12 I was told by the coach that I needed to lose weight and stop eating school 
lunches, so Mum arranged all my food. I got classed in the elite and started 
doing 25 to 30 hours a week in the gym and it was a massive commitment that has 
stayed since. Healthy eating hadn’t been a family priority – I’d eaten a lot of 
junk food – but suddenly the whole family changed nutrition, skimmed milk 
instead of semi-skimmed, and everything else. Then my younger sister Ellie took 
up gymnastics and the family adjusted to the needs and schedules of both of us.

For my breakfast, Mum – or me – will usually have made scrambled egg whites or 
one of many varying omelettes with vegetables and tuna or fish. This morning I 
had an omelette with tuna, runner beans, corn and chia and caught up on the 
Kardashians. After a morning gym session of two and a half hours, we’ll have an 
hour and a half or two for a break for lunch – sometimes in the canteen but 
usually I’ll bring lots of salad, maybe with prawns, probably quinoa, some 
sweet potato, rice and Naked or Primal bars. I’ve never liked the taste of 
beetroot shots but I’ll have one. In the afternoon it’s another two and a half 
hour session, followed quickly by a protein yogurt or shake. Then home for 
dinner, getting recovery in early. My bones, at 24, are equivalent to a 
40-year-old’s, apparently.

Related: The road to Rio 2016: how the key Olympic sports are shaping up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/27/rio-2016-olympic-games-sports-shaping-up>

Mum will have texted us in the afternoon to decide on our dinners. It’s not 
often we get home and there isn’t what we want, or need, on the table. Often 
lean fish or meat and veg-based, but adding more things, not necessarily 
carbohydratey, like butternut squash when I’m really, really hungry. One thing 
I’ve got into is pasta alternatives – carrot spaghetti and courgette spaghetti. 
For a while I’ve been doing no-carb or low-carb evenings, because I don’t want 
carbs sitting on me. In this sport, body composition and weight is really 
important, not necessarily for our look but because we have to do so many 
repetitions and impacts. Extra pounds means extra pounds of impact on joints.

It’s all about making little decisions, choices, changes and hopefully 
improvements each day, including diet, that are right forthat day. Every day in 
gymnastics is different, no one is the same; that’s what’s so hard about our 
sport. Some days I can be feeling really bouncy and light and work’s really 
easy, but on others I’m slower, more tired, my timings are off. This sport’s 
about fractions of seconds, so you’re either on the bar or on the floor. I 
think it’s important as an athlete to feel you’re making your own food 
decisions, because if restricted too much you might rebel. I go crazy when it’s 
downtime with friends, and chocolate is my greatest weakness. Any chocolate, 
I’m not picky.

Becky is European and Commonwealth Games champion on the uneven bars. She 
competed at the 2008 Olympics in Beijing but missed London 2012 through injury. 
Athletes benefit from National Lottery funded nutritional advice;
thefoodchampions.org <http://thefoodchampions.org/>

Becky’s ‘Perfect 10’ yogurt nut bowl 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzmk%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzmk%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F677d8815ba5b312ccb42d8ff7f84e5cff85025e8%2F0_916_3658_2195%2F3658.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Becky%20Downie%3A%20In%20this%C2%A0sport%2C%20extra%20pounds%20means%20extra%20pounds%20of%20impact%20on%20joints%20&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzmk%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Becky+Downie%3A+In+this%C2%A0sport%2C+extra+pounds+means+extra+pounds+of+impact+on+joints+&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kzmk%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F677d8815ba5b312ccb42d8ff7f84e5cff85025e8%2F0_916_3658_2195%2F3658.jpg>
 Photograph: Heather Wilkinson 
Benefits: stay-lean recovery snack

Serves 2
almonds 100g 
Greek yogurt 300g 
blueberries 50g 
chia seeds 2 tbsp 

Crush the almonds to form a base, top with yogurt and berries and sprinkle 
with chia seeds.


Recipes created by The Food Champions, a collaboration between the National 
Lottery and sports nutritionists from the English Institute of Sport
