
It’s 6pm on a Friday and even a police car, lights blaring, is stuck 
helplessly in the gridlocked traffic of central Kuala Lumpur. Motorcycles fill 
the junctions ahead of cars, including lines of Myvis, the best-selling product 
of one of the country’s two national car manufacturers. There’s not a bicycle 
in sight.

The car has become a status symbol in Malaysia – and one of the country’s 
biggest drivers ofpersonal bankruptcy <http://www.thesundaily.my/news/1795586>. 
Heavy government subsidies and quotas on imported vehicles have encouraged 
Malaysians to buy home grown cars. Car ownership here is the third highest in 
the world, with93% of people 
<http://www.thestar.com.my/business/business-news/2014/04/16/car-ownership-in-msia-third-highest-in-the-world/>
 owning, renting or leasing a vehicle, double that of neighbouring Indonesia 
and the Philippines.


Congestion is notorious in south-east Asia, with cities such as Jakarta and 
Manila 
<http://cnnphilippines.com/metro/2015/10/01/Metro-Manila-Philippines-worst-traffic-longest-commute-Waze-survey.html>
 ranking among the world’s worst for traffic. In Greater Kuala Lumpur it is
estimated 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/malaysia/publication/malaysia-economic-monitor-june-2015>
 that congestion costs the economy up to 2.2% of GDP, while in Malaysia as a 
whole, a third ofurban roads 
<http://www-wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2015/06/18/090224b082f3c367/1_0/Rendered/PDF/Malaysia0econo0ming0urban0transport.pdf>
 are “at capacity or extensively queuing”.

Now, in an unlikely move, Uber and its south-east Asian competitor Grab are 
claiming they can cut congestion in the region. “What we really want to do with 
our technology is put more people into fewer cars,” says Leon Foong, Uber’s 
general manager inMalaysia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia>. “We 
are not competing against the taxi industry, rather we are competing against 
total miles driven for every single vehicle on the road.”

Both Uber and Grab’s hopes are largely pinned on a revolution in car-sharing. 
In May, Grab launchedGrabHitch <https://www.grab.com/my/driver/hitch/>, a 
cut-price option that matches drivers and passengers travelling the same route 
at the same time. Uber is rolling out a similar scheme,UberPOOL 
<http://ubermovement.com/all-about-uberpool/> in the region, with Jakarta 
becoming the 37th city worldwide to join it in May.


Joe G – not his full name – is among the first drivers to try out GrabHitch. 
In its first week in service, he took 11 trips, having found a passenger who 
wanted to join his 30km commute four times a week. He lives with his mother and 
brother, who each own a car.


“We used to share but with work it got difficult,” he tells me. “I can’t get 
there on public transport. Also, it’s very cheap to own a car here … I think 
[Uber and Grab] are revolutionising transport but I’m not sure about the 
congestion. People will still have cars.”


Today in KL we share a ride to a shopping area. He says my fare will cover his 
fuel costs. As we traverse the city on busy carriageways, the giant silver 
train tracks of the government’s latest efforts to improve public 
transportation snake above us. Once complete, the Mass Rapid Transit system 
(MRT) will comprise three train linesdesigned 
<http://etp.pemandu.gov.my/Greater_Kuala_Lumpur_Klang_Valley-@-Greater_Kuala_Lumpur_-_EPP_4-;_Building_an_Integrated_Urban_Mass_Rapid_Transit_System.aspx>
 as part of the government’s commitment to increase public transport’s share of 
journeys to 40% by 2030.

Related: Tackling pollution: Beijing's electric bikes and buses - in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/gallery/2016/jun/11/beijing-pollution-smog-electric-bikes-buses-china>

Few would dispute that the MRT is needed. Only 17% of commuters 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/malaysia/publication/malaysia-economic-monitor-june-2015>
 in Kuala Lumpur use public transport, compared with 62% in Singapore and 89% 
in Hong Kong.

Relieving congestion

Uber argues that it does not compete with public transport, but extends its 
reach. Data from May shows that 24% of Uber trips in Kuala Lumpur begin or end 
at a train station, whichUber <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber> 
says suggests commuters are using its service for the start and end of their 
commutes.


Grab has also announced projects to relieve congestion in the region, 
including ascheme 
<http://www.enterpriseinnovation.net/article/real-time-data-aid-traffic-management-philippines-1761075307>
 to provide free GPS data to help public authorities manage traffic flow, and a 
partnership with the emergency services that will provide Grab with information 
so it can reroute its vehicles.


Even so, the fear is that taxi apps will bring more cars on to the roads. 
Initial studies by SPAD, Malaysia’s land public transport planner and 
regulator, show that Uber and Grab have 21,412 and 15,000 drivers respectively 
in peninsular Malaysia. However 80% and 81% of these are part-time drivers, so 
they are are likely already to be using a car.


It is too soon to know if ridesharing will make a difference here, but Uber 
claims that elsewhere the launch of UberPOOL has already led to 100m carshare 
rides, which it estimates have saved 6.8m litres of petrol and 16,000 metric 
tons of carbon emissions,equivalent to 
<https://www.epa.gov/energy/greenhouse-gas-equivalencies-calculator> the yearly 
emissions of 3,380 passenger vehicles. In San Francisco, rideshares now account 
for nearly half of all Uber rides.


But the crucial change that Uber says it would like to bring about is to make 
the transport ecosystem so cheap and convenient it no longer makes sense to own 
a car. UberPOOL is up to 50% cheaper than Uber’s other services, and Foong says 
the firm will soon have enough vehicles to create a service that is on-demand 
and therefore as reliable as a car. KL residentsspend 10% 
<http://www-wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2015/06/18/090224b082f3c367/1_0/Rendered/PDF/Malaysia0econo0ming0urban0transport.pdf>
 of household expenses on transport, more than double the proportion of Hong 
Kong or Tokyo.


“It boils down to economics,” says Foong. “Public transportation is not that 
cheap. If you don’t drive that many kilometres on a yearly basis, it makes more 
sense for you to give up your car and use other forms of transportation.”


As Uber spreads across the globe it has consistently faced controversy, 
triggering numerous protests 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/picture-galleries/11902080/Anti-Uber-protests-around-the-world-in-pictures.html>
 by the taxi industry and debates about its legality. A few weeks ago the firm 
was hit with alarge fine <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-36491926> by a 
French court for creating a service deemed to be illegal using non-professional 
drivers.

Although SPAD has previously disputed the legality 
<http://www.spad.gov.my/media-centre/media-releases/2014/media-release-uber-services-must-be-accordance-law>
 of taxi apps, CEO Mohd Azharuddin bin Mat Sah remains optimistic: “We see the 
potential [hailing companies] have to help demand-based mobility without 
worsening congestion and pollution in densely populated urban centres. Whatever 
the outcome, one thing is for sure, the biggest winners in the mobility 
transition will be commuters, who will have many more ways to get around.”
