
David Cameron <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> has styled 
himself the leader of “Project Fact”, dismissing claims that he is trying to 
scare voters into remaining in the EU.

The prime minister, who has repeatedly characterised a decision to leave the 
EU as a “leap in the dark”, has been accused of playing up the risks of Brexit 
in a strategy dubbed “Project Fear”.

But speaking to students in Ipswich on Monday, he presented an upbeat picture 
of Britain’s future inside the EU, saying: “The only project I’m interested in 
is Project Fact. Project Fact is about saying: ‘Stay in and you know what 
you’ll get.’”

Related: EU referendum: Cameron says he is running 'Project Fact' campaign on 
Brexit - Politics live 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/feb/29/eu-referendum-grayling-cameron-sturgeon-government-brexit-report-as-clearly-ludicrous-politics-live>

He spoke of the benefits of unfettered access to the European single market, 
and argued that Britain had a more powerful influence over global affairs in 
partnership with other EU countries than it could have alone. “I’m interested 
in Britain’s ability to bend the world to our way of thinking,” he said.

As the war of words raging at the top of the Conservative party intensified 
over the weekend, Iain Duncan Smith, the work and pensions secretary, accused 
the prime minister of having a “low opinion of the British people” in doubting 
the country’s ability to go it alone.

But Cameron said: “I have the highest opinion of the British people; I am a 
huge believer in our country, but I think that a greater Britain can be 
achieved inside the EU.”

The prime minister also sought to play down the escalating row over the 
restrictions placed by Whitehall on ministers who will campaign for Britain to 
leave the EU.

Priti Patel, the employment minister, earlier described the cabinet secretary 
Sir Jeremy Heywood’s decision 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/29/priti-patel-attacks-civil-service-chief-brexit-minister-jeremy-heywood>
 to limit the support civil servants can provide to pro-Brexit ministers as 
“unconstitutional”, but Cameron said: “I think this has got completely out of 
proportion.”

He said the restrictions were reasonable because “the government isn’t neutral 
on this: the government has a clear position”.

Related: EU referendum row could affect functioning of Whitehall, says FDA 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/29/eu-referendum-row-civil-servants-role-ministers-brexit-sir-jeremy-heywood>

The Cabinet Office published a detailed document on Sunday warning of what the 
prime minister called a “decade of uncertainty” if Britain leaves the EU, as 
politicians would have to negotiate with the 27 other member states and then 
with non-EU countries such as China, India and the US over the terms of access 
to their markets.

Chris Grayling, the leader of the House of Commons and one of the six cabinet 
members who favour Brexit, dismissed the report as “completely ludicrous”.

Cameron said he planned to publish another study later this week setting out 
the alternatives to EU membership.
