
The cost of a family holiday could rise by £230 and new limits on duty free 
could put an end to “booze cruises” to the continent if Britain votes to leave 
the EU,David Cameron <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> is to 
claim.

In the latest warning about the price of Brexit, the prime minister will argue 
that the cost of holiday spending and accommodation could go up because of the 
falling pound.

The leave campaign is likely to level charges of exaggeration and 
scaremongering at the new Treasury figures, released a day after awarning about 
job losses, lower wages, higher inflation and falling house prices 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/23/cameron-warns-against-self-destruct-vote-to-leave-eu>
.
Guardian explained: the referendum and airfares 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/05/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?sheet=intermediate&id=airfares_costs>
But Downing Street insists it is setting out the government’s objective 
viewpoint ahead of the 23 June vote.

In its new analysis, the Treasury claimed holiday prices could go up as soon 
as this summer because the pound is likely to fall by around 12%, making the 
cost of accommodation, food and drinks higher for those travelling overseas. It 
predicted that two years after Britain leaving the EU, the average holiday for 
four people travelling together for eight nights inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> would cost £230 more.

The government argued that other benefits would be at risk, including the end 
of roaming charges from 2017, free healthcare within the EU and booze cruises 
because of potential limits on duty free.

“All the evidence points to the value of the pound falling after a vote to 
leave the EU. A weaker pound means people’s hard-earned savings won’t go as far 
on holidays overseas,” Cameron will warn.

Related: Cameron warns against 'self-destruct' vote to leave EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/23/cameron-warns-against-self-destruct-vote-to-leave-eu>

“The choice facing the British people on 23 June is increasingly clear: the 
certainty and economic security of remaining in the EU, or a leap in the dark 
that would raise prices – including the cost of a family holiday.”

His warnings add to a previous ones by airline chief executives, including 
Carolyn McCall of easyJet and Michael O’Leary of Ryanair, that the price of 
flights could be affected.

McCall said: “For easyJet and our passengers, membership of the EU has been a 
good thing. The common aviation area created by the EU allows any European 
airline to fly anywhere in Europe. This has kept all airlines’ costs low and 
has enabled low-fare airlines like easyJet to expand.


“If the UK were to vote to leave the EU any new, more restrictive aviation 
arrangements would add cost and therefore fares would rise. And a weaker pound 
would mean the cost of a holiday abroad – including food, accommodation and 
drinks – would be more expensive. That is why we think our customers are better 
off in Europe.”

Two bosses of mobile phone companies backed the government’s claims that the 
UK would not necessarily benefit from the end of mobile roaming charges from 
June 2017 if it left the EU.


Related: Brexit could risk tourists' safety and push up flight prices, say top 
travel figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/14/brexit-could-risk-tourists-safety-and-push-up-flight-prices-say-top-travel-figures>

Gavin Patterson, chief executive of BT Group, which owns EE, said: “Because of 
the UK’s membership of the EU, BT and EE have been able to offer our customers 
lower charges, including inclusive roaming plans and data charges that are over 
90% lower for Britons travelling on the continent. Voters need to think very 
carefully before turning their backs on an institution that helps to ensure 
benefits like that are delivered.”

Vittorio Colao, chief executive of the Vodafone Group, said: “The end of 
roaming charges – which was driven by the EU – and Europe-wide offers from 
operators like Vodafone – the European leader in 4G – mean that everyone can 
use their mobiles anywhere in Europe without having to worry about excessive 
costs.

“Britain will benefit from being part of a borderless European single digital 
market as it will create new opportunities for economic growth. Consequently, 
we believe it is better to be a shaper and leader from within, rather than 
being just a commercial neighbour.”
