
I have worked as a housing options officer since 2002. The job, as well as the 
job title, changes with each parliament. Homeless persons unit, homeless 
prevention team.Housing <https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing> options, 
housing choices, housing assessment – unfortunately, none of these titles 
actually provide more housing for the homeless but I am sure somewhere a 
consultant is getting a nice payout for creating job titles.

I first decided to work in homelessness with a local authority as a gateway to 
working in housing. I was advised by someone at housing charity Shelter to do 
the job for six months to learn “how the enemy works”. But my colleagues were 
great and are dedicated to helping the people that came steadily pouring 
through the door. So 14 years later I am still doing the same job, albeit with 
a different title.

Homelessness is a nice little earner for slumlords

Homeless assessment is a thankless task. The council only has a duty to 
provide accommodation for those that meet the criteria under the Housing Act. 
It is, strictly speaking, a gatekeeping service. Like most public services it 
is ruled by targets and performance indicators.

Every borough in London is drastically short of housing, as everyone knows. 
There are scant few affordable tenancies out there. People come to us when they 
are threatened with homelessness and, if they manage to jump through all the 
hoops, we have to provide them with some kind of accommodation. All the local 
authorities in England are competing against each other to secure accommodation 
in the private rented sector to place these people. Much of this accommodation 
is expensive and of very low quality because the landlords know they can play 
one desperate council off another.Homelessness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/homelessness> is a nice little earner for 
slumlords.

Related: Each 'investment opportunity' means a life of insecurity for a tenant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/apr/30/investment-opportunity-insecurity-council-tenants-social-housing>

My colleagues and I are on the frontline, interviewing and assessing homeless 
people, deciding if someone is vulnerable enough to deserve a room with a 
shared bathroom and kitchen in a decrepit building 20 miles away. We become the 
punchbag for social workers, solicitors, housing advisers, MPs and anyone else 
who fancies having a go because us doing our job has made their job a little 
more complex.

Solicitors are the best at spinning a yarn. Everyone has a right to legal 
representation – or should have – but the way some legal firms turn a 
legitimate decision into condemnation of an individual housing officer is, I 
guess, how they earn their money. I once tried to offer a woman housing south 
of the Thames, 45 minutes away by train, but she refused to accept the 
placement and gave a list of coherent but rather flimsy arguments as to why she 
could never go south of the river. Her solicitor threatened to take the council 
to court, saying I had been arguing with a woman who could not speak a word of 
English. I do not begrudge the woman having accommodation or her right to 
complain about its location but I draw the line at being made to look 
delusional about the language someone is speaking to me in.

This is the expensive game we play as an alternative to building social 
housing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktzy%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktzy%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2aac8644920db6b484c60727fe9285500fb239cf%2F0_269_5440_3265%2F5440.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%20work%20in%20a%20council%20homeless%20unit%2C%20where%20not%20helping%20people%20is%20seen%20as%20a%20good%20job&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktzy%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I+work+in+a+council+homeless+unit%2C+where+not+helping+people+is+seen+as+a+good+job&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktzy%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2aac8644920db6b484c60727fe9285500fb239cf%2F0_269_5440_3265%2F5440.jpg>
 Ask almost anyone working on the frontline in housing what the answer is 
homelessness and they will say build more social housing. Photograph: Dan 
Kitwood/Getty Images 
I’ve even had social workers threatening to take a mother’s children away from 
her because the family has been found to be intentionally homeless – for 
failing to organise their housing benefit, for example – and has been referred 
to children’s services. It’s an empty threat – Article 8 of the Human Rights 
Act prevents children being taken away from their parents unless they are in 
danger – but that doesn’t stop social workers from trying to pass their 
responsibility back to housing officers.

I work in a service where not helping people is generally seen as doing a good 
job

If I had a choice I would house pretty much everyone I see in my work. No one 
deserves to sleep on the street, and let’s be honest, no one wants to see 
people sleeping on the street. But I do not have that choice. The resources 
available are slim. Legislation limits the council’s accountability to those 
who are “vulnerable” and not “intentionally homeless”. No children, no severe 
medical issue – no housing. I have never met anyone who wants to place people 
in accommodation miles away from their support network, but they have no choice.


Ask almost anyone working on the frontline in housing what the answer is to 
the growing homeless problem and they will say build more social housing. It 
really is that simple, but it never happens. So an endless parade of 
consultants and political opportunists come up with fanciful ways of preventing 
people becoming homeless despite the ever-decreasing housing benefit budget and 
the ever-increasing rents. And it is my job to implement these ideas, 
signposting the most vulnerable people in society to the local estate agent 
with a threat of temporary accommodation in the wilds of Essex.

I work in a service where not helping people is generally seen as doing a good 
job. But I keep doing the job because just occasionally I can slip someone 
through the gate who others might have shut out. It’s easy to be critical from 
outside the system and accuse council staff of social cleansing but fighting 
from the inside and occasionally making a big difference to someone’s life 
makes the whole charade worthwhile.

Related: I hate having to explain the housing crisis to women who feel life 
couldn’t get worse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/jan/09/housing-crisis-women-domestic-violence-survivors-refuge>

While working for a local authority in Essex, I managed to find accommodation 
for a man called John*. He had depression and major drug and alcohol issues. He 
had been sleeping in a tent since his mother killed herself and the council 
decided he had no right to the flat where she was living. Single men generally 
get the roughest deal from councils, and keeping performance indicators looking 
good means for every John that gets help there are a many more who you’ll see 
in shop doorways at night.

Homelessness <http://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/homelessness> options 
continues to be an expensive way to choose who deserves to have a roof over 
their head – a strange concept in the 21st century. But while there’s a lack of 
political motivation to change the system. So consultants, solicitors, my 
colleagues and I will continue to make a living out of playing Russian roulette 
with the lives of vulnerable and destitute people.

*Name has been changed

This series 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/series/public-servant-my-letter-to-the-public>
 aims to give a voice to the staff behind the public services that are hit by 
mounting cuts and rising demand, and so often denigrated by the press, 
politicians and public. If you would like to write an article for the series, 
contacttamsin.rutter@theguardian.com <mailto:tamsin.rutter@theguardian.com>.


Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
