
The big picture

Yesterday was ITV’s turn to host the prime minister and a Brexit-favouring 
rival in separate Q&A sessions 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/02/eu-referendum-tv-debates-when-where-watch-them>
, and this time David Cameron followed Nigel Farage on to the studio floor.

Related: EU referendum live: voter registration site crashes after 
Cameron-Farage debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/08/eu-referendum-live-voter-registration-site-crashes-cameron-farage-debate>

The Q&A followed familiar themes for this campaign: immigration, the economy, 
accusations of scaremongering by both sides, and the question of sovereignty, 
with theconsensus from political observers 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/jun/07/eu-referendum-tv-debate-cameron-farage-face-brexit-grilling-live?page=with:block-57573d9be4b06a49db63ad24#block-57573d9be4b06a49db63ad24>
 being that neither man was particularly hoiked out of his comfort zone.

Here’s the round-up of the debate 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/07/farage-calls-migrant-sex-attack-comments-tiddly-issue-in-eu-referendum-campaign>
 from our Westminster team, and theverdicts from Guardian columnists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/07/eu-referendum-our-panel-nigel-farage-david-cameron-tv-debate>
.

The debate does appear to have had a galvanising effect on some, though, with 
the government website to register to vote in the referendum – deadline: 
midnight Tuesday –crashing in the wake of the Cameron/Farage show 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/07/eu-referendum-voter-registration-site-crashes-before-deadline>
. Reassuringly, the Cabinet Officetweeted 
<https://twitter.com/GOVUK/status/740331905891983360> at 12.57am (57 minutes 
past cut-off time) to say everything was working again nicely.

Jeremy Corbyn and Tim Farron were just two of the voices calling for the 
deadline to be extended to allow frustrated would-be voters to sign up.

What we learned

David Cameron does not think Brexit would be a boost to British sovereignty:

 It might give you the illusion of sovereignty to withdraw on June 23, but 
you’d find out, in area after area after area, things that affect our great 
country, we would have no say over.

 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fdavid-cameron-and-nigel-farage-face-grilling-over-brexit-video-highlights&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fdavid-cameron-and-nigel-farage-face-grilling-over-brexit-video-highlights&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Cameron%20and%20Nigel%20Farage%20face%20grilling%20over%20Brexit%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fdavid-cameron-and-nigel-farage-face-grilling-over-brexit-video-highlights>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David+Cameron+and+Nigel+Farage+face+grilling+over+Brexit+%E2%80%93%C2%A0video+highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fdavid-cameron-and-nigel-farage-face-grilling-over-brexit-video-highlights&media=>
David Cameron and Nigel Farage face grilling over Brexit – video highlights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jun/07/david-cameron-and-nigel-farage-face-grilling-over-brexit-video-highlights>
(With Peter Mandelson as his unlikely inspiration 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2001/jun/08/election2001.politics5>) 
Cameron said the British were fighters, not quitters:

 Leaving is quitting and I don’t think Britain, I don’t think we are quitters, 
I think we are fighters.


Despite previous insistences to the contrary, he does fear another bid for 
independence for Scotland:

 Frankly I do worry about a second Scottish referendum 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/26/alex-salmond-scottish-independence-vote-likely-brexit>
 if we vote to leave. You don’t strengthen your country by leading to its 
break-up.


And he thinks the cross-party backing for Remain is an:

 extraordinary alliance of Greens and Liberals and the Labour party and the 
Conservative government, the trade unions, business large and small.


Nigel Farage doesn’t think GDP is all that important:

 Do you know something? There is more to this country, there is more about 
this community than just being competitive … What I’m saying is that it’s 
wrong, wrong, wrong for average decent people in this country, their living 
standards are falling by about 10%.

It’s about time we were not thinking about GDP, the rich getting richer, and 
think about ordinary decent people who are having a rotten time.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ky2m%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ky2m%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad4ffc75df1d91cd470fa0bb9093b2901c9be8be%2F0_258_5261_3157%2F5261.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%20morning%20briefing%3A%20what%20we%20learned%20from%20the%20Cameron%20v%20Farage%20debate&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ky2m%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EU+referendum+morning+briefing%3A+what+we+learned+from+the+Cameron+v+Farage+debate&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ky2m%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad4ffc75df1d91cd470fa0bb9093b2901c9be8be%2F0_258_5261_3157%2F5261.jpg>
 Nigel Farage answers questions from the audience. Photograph: ITV via Getty 
Images 
Despite the row over his comments 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/06/nigel-farage-accused-of-age-old-racist-claim-in-linking-migrants-to-sexual-assault>
 on the mass sexual assaults in Cologne – includingcriticism yesterday from 
Justin Welby 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/07/nigel-farage-helping-to-legitimise-racism-justin-welby-says>
, the archibishop of Canterbury – Farage thinks it’s a “tiddly issue”:

I’m used to being demonised ... I’m not going to stand and attack the 
archbishop of Canterbury but he would have done better to read what I actually 
said … It is a tiddly issue in this campaign. I knew the Remainers would come 
for me and inflate what I said out of proportion.

And the Ukip leader doesn’t think the EU will be around in 20 years’ time:

I think it’s done for, frankly … The project doesn’t work. 


What we didn’t

Cameron remains very reluctant to put a date on his ambition to reduce net 
migration to the tens of thousands and whether new restrictions on benefits 
might speed that along:

I haven’t made a forecast, because frankly we have had pretty extraordinary 
years recently in the EU. The first five years I was prime minister, our 
economy created more jobs than the rest of the EU put together and so we have 
seen a lot of people coming to live and work here.


The key exchange

Quizzed by a woman in the studio audience over his Cologne comments, Farage 
resorted to the “calm down” tacticsused by Cameron in the past 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/apr/27/david-cameron-calm-down-dear>:

Audience member: In light of the recent, horrific sexual assaults in Germany, 
you have basically suggested that a vote to remain is a vote for British women 
to be subdued to the same horrific assaults.

Farage: Well, just calm down there a little bit.

Moderator Julie Etchingham: She asked it perfectly calmly.

Audience member: I am calm.
— ITV News (@itvnews) June 7, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/itvnews/status/740279055929380865> 
Nigel Farage tells audience member to 'calm down' #ITVEURef 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/ITVEURef?src=hash> https://t.co/EVIua9pngG 
<https://t.co/EVIua9pngG>
 <https://twitter.com/itvnews/status/740279055929380865> 
Clarification of the night

Courtesy of ITV’s Chris Ship, responding to Ukip MEP David Coburn’s tweet:
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ky2m%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ky2m%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a99b66f037bc79c008b274e15aafbe695ebc4d9%2F0_0_1278_688%2F1278.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%20morning%20briefing%3A%20what%20we%20learned%20from%20the%20Cameron%20v%20Farage%20debate&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ky2m%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EU+referendum+morning+briefing%3A+what+we+learned+from+the+Cameron+v+Farage+debate&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ky2m%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a99b66f037bc79c008b274e15aafbe695ebc4d9%2F0_0_1278_688%2F1278.jpg>
The Remain campaign verdict

Tory minister Anna Soubry said Farage had displayed an “awful, patronising, 
slightly chauvinistic attitude” towards the woman he told to “calm down”:

That’s the trouble with Nigel: he’s a prickly pear really, and he doesn’t like 
it up him when someone asks him a tough question.

Labour’s deputy leader Tom Watson said the prime minister had done … OK:

 Cameron did his job adequately. The frustration as Labour politicians is that 
we could not talk about our distinct message on the EU that, yes, it’s a single 
market but it also offers full workplace protections and we don’t want a race 
to the bottom on workplace rights. But I guess we couldn’t expectDavid Cameron 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> to make that case.

The Leave campaign verdict

Matthew Elliott, chief executive of Vote Leave, which did not attend the 
debate after ITV invited Farage in place of an official campaign spokesperson, 
said Cameron had “told five outright lies”:

He lied about being able to remove EU jobseekers without a job after six 
months, our ability to stop foreign criminals walking into the UK, our ability 
to deport foreign criminals, his pledge to restrict benefits and how much his 
government is investing in the NHS.


He still claims that Turkey won’t join the EU while his government is spending 
£1bn to help speed up their membership.

Steven Woolfe, Ukip’s immigration spokesman, said Farage was the victor:

What I was surprised by was how weak David Cameron 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> looked. His demeanour, his 
shoulders, even the way he was looking at the audience, showed this is a man 
under intense pressure. He couldn’t seem to answer the questions on immigration 
and was deeply confused about the question on the NHS.

You should also know

 * Michael Gove and Boris Johnson say Cameron should take on one of them in a 
head-to-head debate 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/07/david-cameron-challenged-eu-referendum-tv-debate-michael-gove-boris-johnson>
. 
 * A group of Labour MPs will put pressure on Jeremy Corbyn with a rival 
Trident report saying it should be renewed 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/07/labour-backbench-mps-pressure-jeremy-corbyn-rival-trident-report>
. 
 * Shadow health secretary Heidi Alexander warns that Brexit would blow a 
£10.5bn hole in the NHS budget 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/07/brexit-blow-billions-hole-nhs-budget-heidi-alexander-eu-refendum-immigration>
. 
Poll position

Findings today from the Pew Research Centre 
<http://www.pewglobal.org/2016/06/07/euroskepticism-beyond-brexit/> indicate 
that euroscepticism is on the rise across Europe. Greeks, in particular, are 
not all that keen on the EU right now:
— PewResearch Global (@pewglobal) June 7, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/pewglobal/status/740307123037458432> 
CHART: Favorable views of the EU, 2004 to 2016 https://t.co/FsADUUPMo7 
<https://t.co/FsADUUPMo7> pic.twitter.com/exZ6e3hQ1n <https://t.co/exZ6e3hQ1n>
 <https://twitter.com/pewglobal/status/740307123037458432> 
The Pew study found only 6% of British respondents would be in favour of 
transferring more power to the EU.

Overall, 70% of Europeans in the nine EU nations surveyed (excluding the UK) 
think Britain leaving the EU would be a bad thing, with only 16% branding it 
positive.

Meanwhile, the Financial Times poll of polls 
<https://ig.ft.com/sites/brexit-polling/> has Remain on 45% and Leave on 43%.

Diary

 * At 9.30am shadow health secretary Heidi Alexander makes a speech on the EU 
and the NHS. 
 * At 10.45am MoJ colleagues Michael Gove and Dominic Raab talk on the EU and 
security. 
 * At noon it’s the regular joy of PMQs. 
 * At 2pm William Hague makes a speech intriguingly titled: Why a eurosceptic 
should vote to remain. 
 * At the same time former environment secretary Owen Paterson appears for 
Grassroots Out on the EU’s “litany of errors”, eco-wise. 
 * And at 7.30pm, the next in Andrew Neil’s BBC1 interview series is George 
Osborne. 
Read these

Alice Thomson in the Times 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/comment/dont-be-deluded-by-tick-box-democracy-df8wz06ps>
 is not impressed by the rash of online quizzes that claim to help voters 
determine if they’re Innies or Outies:

 They are also part of a trend that feels alien to British politics: direct 
democracy. Most British voters don’t want to choose their mayors or police 
commissioners; many are already fed up with this referendum and don’t quite 
understand why we are holding it. They don’t yearn for yet more referendums on 
abortion, defence spending or going to war. The British are still more or less 
believers in Edmund Burke’s representative democracy where ‘your representative 
owes you his judgment, and he betrays, instead of serving you, if he sacrifices 
it to your opinion’.


We prefer to delegate our democracy to the politicians and party we think will 
make the best go of it rather than tick boxes. If they make a bog of it we will 
complain; otherwise we want to get on with our lives until the next election.

George Eaton in the New Statesman 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/uk/2016/06/eu-referendum-debate-david-cameron-outshines-nigel-farage-appealing-unconverted>
 says last night’s debate was an illustration of why Cameron is the prime 
minister and Farage has failed (seven times) to become an MP:

If there were no dramatic gaffes from Farage tonight, his performance 
confirmed his profound limitations. Though he struck populist blows against 
‘the rich getting richer’ andJean-Claude Juncker … he failed to offer the 
reassurance that a Brexit-sceptic public craves. ‘No deal is better than the 
rotten deal we’ve got at the moment,’ he declared on the economy, a line 
perfectly crafted to alienate risk-averse voters …

The Ukip base will have lapped it up but centrist voters will have been 
unimpressed. Farage again showed why he is a 15% politician, not a 50% one.

In the Scotsman 
<http://www.scotsman.com/news/opinion/scott-macnab-eu-referendum-campaigning-is-missing-a-trick-1-4148726>
,Scott Macnab says EU campaigners on both sides could learn from the – 
sometimes exceedingly detailed 
<http://www.scotsman.com/news/politics/scottish-independence-consumer-ombudsman-planned-1-3043108>
 – agendas of the Scottish referendum campaigners:

No one can say Scots didn’t give all the issues a good run around the course. 
In the currentEU referendum <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> 
voters say they don’t have enough information. In the Scottish referendum, they 
complained of being swamped with too much.

Perhaps more fundamentally, Scots at least did get an impression of the kind 
of role the new independent Scotland would fill in the world, a left-of-centre, 
Scandinavian-style social democracy with a focus on excellent public services 
and, perhaps, higher taxes. This is a challenging concept to get across two 
years on in such a brief campaign. But if the Leave side fails to hold its 
current polling advantage and loses on 23 June, perhaps the absence of any real 
sense of the UK’s place in the world outsideEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> will prove a fatal shortcoming.


Baffling claim of the day

It’s churlish to chide twitterers for bad grammar, I know, but then again Ukip 
did alsotweet this <https://twitter.com/ukip/status/594091834906927105> about 
how essential it is to be able to speak English properly:
— UKIP (@UKIP) June 7, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/UKIP/status/740286173013282816> 
The choice is between a free independent the country, or one which cannot 
control it's destiny#ITVEURef <https://twitter.com/hashtag/ITVEURef?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/UKIP/status/740286173013282816> 
Celebrity endorsement of the day

YouTube vloggers Jamal Edwards and Louise Pentland have been unveiled as 
questioners in a referendum debate to be held next week, hosted by YouTube, the 
Telegraph and Huffington Post, and featuringBoris Johnson, Priti Patel, Alex 
Salmond and Liz Kendall.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ky2m%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ky2m%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F022707a24cb8792e6c470d0a81de59e1aa3c4e5a%2F0_278_3634_2179%2F3634.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%20morning%20briefing%3A%20what%20we%20learned%20from%20the%20Cameron%20v%20Farage%20debate&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ky2m%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EU+referendum+morning+briefing%3A+what+we+learned+from+the+Cameron+v+Farage+debate&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ky2m%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F022707a24cb8792e6c470d0a81de59e1aa3c4e5a%2F0_278_3634_2179%2F3634.jpg>
 Jamal Edwards. 
The Telegraph says 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/06/07/boris-johnson-and-alex-salmond-to-be-grilled-at-telegraph-brexit/>
 (the “YouTubers” quote marks are very much the Telegraph’s own):

The two online video bloggers have 3.2 million subscribers between them … The 
hope is that these successful “YouTubers” could help reach young people and 
engage with them about the referendum in a way in which conventional media 
cannot.

The day in a tweet
— Electoral Commission (@ElectoralCommUK) June 7, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/ElectoralCommUK/status/740317677479071744> 
The deadline to #RegisterToVote 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/RegisterToVote?src=hash> in the #EURef 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/EURef?src=hash> has now passed. If you did not 
register, you cannot vote in the EU Referendum.
 <https://twitter.com/ElectoralCommUK/status/740317677479071744> 
If today were a song ...

It would be Carole King’s It’s Too Late 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q8b8Nz31jZw>, 504 gateway timeout error or no 
504 gateway timeout error.

And another thing

Would you like to wake up to this briefing in your inbox every weekday? Sign up
here 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/31/eu-referendum-morning-briefing-sign-up>
!
