
What is it about writers and huts? Dylan Thomas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/dylanthomas>, Virginia Woolf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/virginiawoolf>, Roald Dahl  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/roalddahl>all worked in them. Authors so 
often long for the solitude, the escape from distraction, the scent of wood sap 
in which to create. Yet, as a novelist, I can’t use this as my only excuse. I 
have simply, most of my adult life, longed for a hut of one’s own.

In an ideal world, this would have been a treehouse, if not a hollow oak. But 
as the owner of a single spindly tree that is, in fact, a shrub, my notion of 
writing hidden in leaf shade and sleeping among owls belongs with the clouds 
and cuckoos. This folly, I know, is a form of regression, an eternal fantasy 
clearly fuelled in childhood byArthur Rackham 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arthur_Rackham>’s twisted bark, Laura Ingalls 
Wilder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/aug/25/laura-ingalls-wilder-memoir-little-house-prairie>
’s little houses, tales of rope ladders strung between branches, driftwood and 
tumbledown cabins up mountains. It’s the profoundly gorgeous feel, smell, 
almost taste of wood that gets to me. Patently, I have a problem. In fact, 
initially scornful of this enterprise, my daughter threatened to write an 
article forthis magazine’s Experience series 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/series/experience>: My Mother Has 
Turned Into A Child. Despite this, I knew with all certainty that the family 
would use and love a wooden bolt hole at the end of the garden.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jext%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jext%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcdf64023d915ea8c66c490e137c9508328eab807%2F0_666_2967_1780%2F2967.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Author%20Joanna%20Briscoe%3A%20my%20fairytale%20shed&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jext%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Author+Joanna+Briscoe%3A+my+fairytale+shed&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jext%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcdf64023d915ea8c66c490e137c9508328eab807%2F0_666_2967_1780%2F2967.jpg>
 Joanna Briscoe. Photograph: Antonio Olmos 
My voluntary urban exile is tinged with both rural nostalgia and with some 
need to experience the seasons among the carbon monoxide, even in a London 
garden whose average measurements are 30ft x 16ft. My soul won’t rest unless 
mainlining the scent of sun-warmed cedar. For me, a rustic wooden hut is a very 
different concept from a contemporary she-shed, Shoffice, garden-room or purely 
functional space: it is more the incongruous log cabin of a city dweller with 
children.

Wild notions and reality are so often hard to marry, and sourcing a 
sufficiently loggy cabin in this country is much harder than you’d think. The 
quest to match a crooked rural aesthetic with a miniature garden that is 
largely patio, in a terrace with no street access, provided difficulties. 
Commercial “log cabins” are, by and large, simply not that. They are sheds with 
a tiny bit of cosmetic work. And something as small as mine (the interior is 
5ft x 7ft) is hard to find.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jext%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jext%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa2a4e83461c86d66e4a6589dceb09925bbecb9d2%2F0_130_2111_1267%2F2111.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Author%20Joanna%20Briscoe%3A%20my%20fairytale%20shed&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jext%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Author+Joanna+Briscoe%3A+my+fairytale+shed&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jext%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa2a4e83461c86d66e4a6589dceb09925bbecb9d2%2F0_130_2111_1267%2F2111.jpg>
 The interior features a sofa bed, a pendant lamp (fromconranshop.co.uk 
<http://conranshop.co.uk>) and a wooden table that serves as a desk. 
Photograph: Antonio Olmos 
In my search, I encountered the cheap but flimsy; the overpriced and 
aspirational; the sheddy, the super-modern or and the just plain dull. Stark 
glass and timber cubes and pretentious summer houses with carriage lights 
proliferate. Shepherd’s huts on wheels are charming but too large and not 
sufficiently bark-covered.Keops <http://logcabins.co.uk/> makes good sheds, and 
Blue Forest <http://www.blueforest.com/> makes outstanding treehouses and 
cabins, but at a price and for bigger areas. Also, with a shed near 
neighbouring walls, you have to stick to the regulation maximum height of 2.5m, 
so there are serious restrictions.

I perused books and checked out the Cabin Porn <http://cabinporn.com/> 
website, increasingly frustrated. By and large, this is a very American 
phenomenon: a Vermont aesthetic, the territory of off-grid backwoods hippies, 
or a historic idea based on Thoreau’sWalden 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Walden>. Although as a nation we revel in this 
idea, the wild and wonderful sheds of the world are largely not here.

Then I read Shedworking <http://www.shedworking.co.uk/p/buy-book.html>, by 
Alex Johnson, a brilliant resource for all things hut in this country, and 
stumbled upon Mark Burton’sTiny House Cabins <http://www.tinyhouseuk.co.uk/> 
company ; I fell in love with a website. Here was my vision of a minuscule 
family cabin in real bark and shingle. I took on extra work and put the money 
aside for the madness.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jext%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jext%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda0dd36d2cde44719be5620dd6aed89a23a0963a%2F0_65_934_560%2F934.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Author%20Joanna%20Briscoe%3A%20my%20fairytale%20shed&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jext%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Author+Joanna+Briscoe%3A+my+fairytale+shed&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jext%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda0dd36d2cde44719be5620dd6aed89a23a0963a%2F0_65_934_560%2F934.jpg>
 Photograph: Antonio Olmos 
Burton sucked his teeth at my tiny jungle of a garden, and quailed at the 
logistics. The initial sketch was disappointing. It looked too shed-like. 
Overnight, Burton, who has a vision and a passion, had another idea. I was 
enamoured of his plan for a gingerbread cottage, however crazily Hansel and 
Gretel. He emailed me a photograph of a pile of larch trunks with the message, 
“Went shopping for a tree today”, and I knew we understood each other.

As the hut was being built, I fully appreciated that, however minuscule, this 
was no thin, spidery shed: its walls are an astonishing 18cm thick, with wooden 
tiles laid over 19 layers of insulation. With its front gable, crooked cedar 
shakes, bark and tiny windows, it does indeed resemble a peculiar child’s 
dwelling, a fairytale cabin that should be in the woods, or even a playhouse. 
My daughter was right, but she and I are both enchanted. Homework and writing 
occur side by side.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jext%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jext%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F495e1a13fcdcf67856a13686fa8f6fa3e0735654%2F0_97_915_549%2F915.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Author%20Joanna%20Briscoe%3A%20my%20fairytale%20shed&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jext%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Author+Joanna+Briscoe%3A+my+fairytale+shed&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jext%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F495e1a13fcdcf67856a13686fa8f6fa3e0735654%2F0_97_915_549%2F915.jpg>
 Photograph: Antonio Olmos 
The neighbours’ reactions have varied, from two complaints to a rendition of, 
“If you go down to the woods today”, along with the offer of a Little House On 
The Prairie box set. “I thought it was a Wendy house, but I want one,” the 
woman next door said, while comments about Red Riding Hood’s cottage and Hobbit 
Holes keep coming. But the further I’ve embraced it, the more I realise I’m far 
from alone. It has brought out the sheddies, cabin enthusiasts and dreamers, 
keen for a look – and they are out there in droves.

Related: A nautical New York apartment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/29/new-york-apartment-with-nautical-interior>

With a house that is impossible to extend, the cabin has proved a delight: a 
tiny study, a teenage escape and a children’s sleepover retreat. I wanted the 
interior to be rustic but restrained, without going the gingham or polka dot 
route: strictly no bunting, barge ware or Hunter wellies are allowed near it. 
It is just big enough for two adults to squeeze in and sleep side by side, and 
oh the joy of waking among the dew and vegetables, with birdsong in the cold 
air; of lounging on the sofa reading; and, as my next deadline approaches, of 
writing in the tranquillity and resin scent of a real cabin. I can only 
recommend it. Wherever you live, the woods can come to a place very near you.
