
Adam Crozier <http://www.theguardian.com/media/adam-crozier>, the chief 
executive of ITV, has branded BBC1 talent show the Voice "derivative", but 
admitted the broadcaster needs to look beyond the ageing X Factor at fresh 
entertainment formats for the future.

Crozier said ITV <https://www.theguardian.com/business/itv> "is famous for and 
very good at … shiny floor [entertainment] shows" and wanted to step up 
development of formats in this area.

He has earmarked about 50% of a £25m strategic investment for ITV Studios to 
develop pilots with a focus on finding the next big entertainment hits for ITV1.

Crozier said the X Factor, which last year recorded its first year-on-year 
audience decline since launching in 2004 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/oct/17/tvratings-the-x-factor?INTCMP=SRCH>
, was one of a number of ITV's ageing entertainment franchises .It was 
imperative to keep developing new formats.

ITV1's lineup includes I'm a Celebrity … Get Me Out of Here! (debut: 2002), 
Dancing on Ice (2006) and Britain's Got Talent (2007). No entertainment show 
the broadcaster has launched in the past five years has matched these shows in 
ratings terms.

"Of course Britain's Got Talent and X Factor are important programmes on the 
entertainment side," said Crozier, in a conference call with journalists on 
Wednesday. "A lot of these shows have been running for some time and it is 
sensible to look at new ideas. The last two or three years there really hasn't 
been anything new around. Probably only the Voice and even that is a derivative 
of some of the shows around."

ITV, which said a turnaround in its production division helped fuel 
investor-pleasing results for 2011 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/feb/29/itv-profits-crozier-production>, 
has earmarked £25m in extra investment this year across its online, content and 
technology operations.

The broadcaster spent a similar amount in 2010 with ITV Studios, the 
broadcaster's production arm, receiving £12m for talent development and pilots. 
It is thought that about 50% of this year's £25m will be spent on programme 
development.

"In the last 10 to 15 years there has not been that many breakthrough ideas," 
Crozier said. "It is the way you craft things and put them together that makes 
the difference."

Crozier defended Red or Black? – the big budget co-production with Simon 
Cowell's Syco which critics say underperformed on its 2011 ITV1 debut. He said 
an average viewing figure of about 5 million across the series was perfectly 
respectable for a fledgling gameshow.

He pointed out that the X Factor and Britain's Got Talent have turned into 
enormous ratings winners but at launch each only managed a similar level of 
viewing.

Crozier said established entertainment formats "take up a lot of time in the 
schedule and a lot of budget", which can make it difficult for small, new shows 
to be given space and time to become established.

ITV has not yet recommissioned Red or Black? and is in negotiations with Syco 
about a scaled down version 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/feb/28/red-or-black-return>.

In ITV's 2011 results presentation Crozier admitted I'm A Celebrity … and the 
X Factor underperformed last year but said the broadcaster was "continually 
looking at ways of refreshing them to improve their on-screen performance".

Despite its dip the X Factor retained its crown as the largest entertainment 
show on British television in 2011.

ITV said it will maintain its programming budget at about £1bn this year, with 
about £800m to be spent on ITV1.

Crozier said it was highly unlikely that ITV would bid for any Premier League 
TV rights when they come up for auction later this year. Rights holders BSkyB, 
ESPN and the BBC are expected to bid and could be joined by new contenders 
including al-Jazeera.

"We always look at all sports rights," he said. "But I doubt it, it is 
unlikely that it would pay for us."

ITV had acquired a significant amount of sports rights recently and made about 
£35m in savings on deals for the Champion's League and FA Cup from 2013, which 
may be reinvested in the programme budget.
