
Leaving the EU could put Britain’s biggest cities at risk of the industrial 
decline last seen in the 1980s under Margaret Thatcher,Gordon Brown 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/gordon-brown> will warn.
Brexit explained: Norwegian model 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/05/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=norwegian#>
The Labour former prime minister will say the UK’s 10 biggest cities outside 
London, from Manchester to Glasgow, will see their economies threatened by 
leaving the EU. Appearing inManchester 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester> at a Labour In event, he will point 
out the EU has poured funding into areas that the Tories turned “from 
industrial heartlands into industrial wastelands” in past decades.

Adding to Brown’s warning, the leaders of those 10 cities are uniting on 
Thursday to claim that leaving Europe would put their areas in “serious 
economic danger”. The heads of theCore Cities group of councils 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jan/23/new-city-centres-the-alternative-establishment>
 – Birmingham, Bristol, Cardiff, Glasgow, Leeds, Liverpool, Manchester, 
Newcastle, Nottingham and Sheffield – said that if Britain leaves the EU, it 
will be “working people, not the leaders of the leave campaign, who will pay 
the price”.

Brown will speak in the north of England alongside John McDonnell 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/john-mcdonnell>, the shadow chancellor, 
despite coming from different wings of the Labour party. Together, they will 
claim that households could be £1,300 a year better off in the EU if the UK 
fights for better per capita funding from Brussels. Brown will go on to warn 
that the Conservatives leading the Brexit campaign cannot be trusted to look 
after northern cities if the UK votes to leave.

“In the 1980s the Tories turned our industrial heartlands into industrial 
wastelands,” he will say. “Their ideology was that there was no such thing as 
society and everyone was on their own. What stood between our communities and 
further devastation was the European structural funds, regional funds and 
social funds that Tory Brexiters would now cut.

“European money is necessary for renovation, renewal and regeneration – and 
right across the north, Scotland and Wales it is still vitally needed now.”

He will be backed up by Neil Kinnock, another former leader of Labour, who 
will say leading leave campaignersBoris Johnson and Michael Gove will end up in 
power 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/01/boris-johnson-insists-not-presenting-post-cameron-government-vote-leave>
 if the UK votes to leave.

“They are never going to change from being the Sheriff of Nottingham to Robin 
Hood,” he said. “They would use the damage to the economy as an alibi, an 
excuse, for deeper, wider austerity. Working-class people will be hit hardest.”

In an alarming series of statements, he will warn people not to be on low or 
middle incomes, not to be young or old, not to expect to work, not to fall ill 
and not to expect rights in the workplace if the UK votes to leave.

“I warn you not to be on low or middle incomes as the disruption brought by 
Brexit pushes up interest rates and prices, slashes benefits, and causes 
slump,” he said. “I warn you not to expect work, as uncertainty causes 
investment to move to the single market which we would be leaving.”

The former leaders are appearing together as Labour 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> steps up its campaigning for 
remain in the final week before the referendum, amid concerns in the in camp 
that its voters are turning to Brexit over concerns about immigration.

The Vote Leave campaign said the claims of Brown, Kinnock and the council 
leaders made the remain camp look like they were struggling. Matthew Elliott, 
its chief executive, said: “These are desperate times for the In campaign – 
recycling a declaration of support that was first made in February and then 
repeated again in April. The truth is that the UK’s cities have prospered in 
spite of our EU membership, not because of it.”
