
A TV ad showing women using a corset to squeeze their waists to a “sexy, tiny” 
size has been banned for being irresponsible.

The Shop Channel UK ran an infomercial promoting the Velform Mini Waist that 
showed women using the product with a presenter stating: “Have you ever 
wondered how celebrities get those tiny little waists they flaunt on the red 
carpet?”

The ad, which showed women using the compression garment to make their waists 
look extremely small, promised that the product was the “secret to getting that 
sexy, tiny waist, so small that you’ll be everyone’s envy”.

The Advertising Standards Authority <http://www.theguardian.com/media/asa> 
received a complaint that the ad encouraged unhealthy body perceptions and that 
it was irresponsible and harmful.

Chromotion, which trades as The Shop Channel UK, said that its product was a 
temporary way to “achieve a slimming effect” and that the commercial did not 
specify any specific levels of tightness to use the product.

The ASA, which was concerned about shots that showed women using the product 
to make their waists “extremely small”, said that the ad implied that a very 
small waist was desirable and should be aspired to by women.

“We considered it was irresponsible to imply that a very small waist should be 
aspired to and that all women should aim for that figure,” said the ASA. “We 
were concerned that in some shots the women were shown compressing their waists 
to appear extremely small and that, particularly in the context of the 
aforementioned claims, this added to the impression that women should aspire to 
very small waists. Overall, we concluded that the ad encouraged unhealthy body 
perceptions and was therefore irresponsible.”

The ASA said that the ad broke the UK code relating to social responsibility 
and must not appear again.

The watchdog told the advertiser not to imply that all women should aspire to 
a certain figure and to take care when demonstrating the use of the product.

