
QSince we bought our house seven years ago, we've had numerous problems with 
the extension at the back, from heating to electrics. However, one of the 
biggest is soundproofing, especially in our upstairs bedroom. The floor has 
been laid with large sheets of MDF that squeak very loudly if we get out of bed 
in the night to use the bathroom or because shiftwork demands it. I have had 
very thick underlay and carpet laid, and last year my builder screwed all the 
sheets down again, but it hasn't made any difference. I yearn for a good 
night's sleep. Is there anything we can do?

A Squeaky floors are caused by movement between materials. I have heard that 
sprinkling talcum powder on the cracks between the MDF sheets may stop the 
squeaks - it's worth a shot if you're at the end of your tether. There 
shouldn't be any movement from the floor surface if it is screwed firmly enough 
to the joists, so the cause may be from the joists themselves. Employ an 
experienced builder to take everything up and assess the joists and the 
construction in general. Most importantly, don't try concreting your 
first-floor bedroom - apart from being messy, it will soon become your 
ground-floor bedroom, as concrete is extremely heavy.

Q We have a marble fireplace surround that has been painted over. Is there a 
specific method to remove the paint without damaging the walls?

A Conventional paint strippers often inflict acid burns if they touch other 
paintwork, carpet or, worse still, your skin. A much gentler and safer 
alternative is Home Strip, which is an eco-friendly paint remover available from
decoratingdirect.co.uk. <http://www.decoratingdirect.co.uk>. It's a thick, 
gel-type liquid that sticks to vertical surfaces, so you just paint it on, 
leave it for a few hours or overnight, and then strip off the paint, which 
should come away like sheets of old wallpaper. It's best to try a small section 
as a trial - if successful, mask off the surrounding area and cover carpets 
before you start. The other benefit is it is water-based and pH neutral, so 
doesn't contain any toxic volatile organic compound solvents, which would 
otherwise give off gas as you work.

Â·If you have an interior design question for Oliver Heath, email 
ask.oliver@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.oliver@observer.co.uk>
