
Long before I arrive in Haiti <http://www.theguardian.com/travel/haiti> I get 
a sense of what the name itself conjures up. There are no direct flights from 
the UK, so I’ve flown in viathe Dominican Republic 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/dominicanrepublic>, Haiti’s conjoined twin 
on the island of Hispaniola. The tourists on my flight cannot understand why 
anyone would risk Haiti: “I hope you survive!”; “Will you have armed guards?” 
and, perhaps the key question, “Why?” But tour operators like the one I’m 
travelling with,Wild Frontiers <http://www.wildfrontierstravel.com/en_GB/>, 
feel that Haiti’s time has finally come, especially withCuba 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/oct/30/travel-to-cuba-increases-us-trade-embargo>
 looking more visitor-crowded and less adventurous than before. There is also a 
sense that responsible tourism to Haiti could put money where it is really 
needed.

Hispaniola is shaped like a large canine tooth extracted from the gob of 
Mexico and thrown into the centre of the Caribbean Sea. Haiti is the western 
third of it, and I’m arriving on a small plane from the east of the island, 
gazing out at the mountainous terrain and totting up reasons for Haiti’s 
unsavoury reputation. So far I’ve got deadly earthquakes, dire poverty, the 
brutalTontons Macoutes 
<http://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2011/jul/25/duvalier-handover-haiti-1971>
, the tyrantPapa Doc Duvalier 
<http://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2013/may/03/papa-doc-duvalier-haiti-usa>
, plus, of course, the zombies – mustn’t forget the zombies. On the plus side, 
I scribble “fresh fruit”. Then, out of the aeroplane window, the verdure of the 
Dominican Republic is giving way abruptly to something eroded and bone-like. 
Over Port-au-Prince, the Haitian capital, we enter a pall of dust, and the 
plane bounces and sways before landing. I cross out fresh fruit.
interactive map Haiti 
<http://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/11/travel_haiti_map/giv-31114e7R5kHzCrAZf/>
It was not always this way. Expectations of this land were high when Columbus 
touched down in 1492, noting the extreme fertility, the abundance of food and 
clean water, the gold, and the handsome, happy people. “With 50 men,” he noted 
ominously, “we could subjugate them all and make them do whatever we wanted.” 
And that is what theconquistadores did, shipping in fresh workers from west 
Africa when the locals died. By 1660, the western third of Hispaniola was 
French, the other part Spanish, and in all but name, the two countries of Haiti 
and the Dominican Republic were established. They both had wars of 
independence, years of American occupation, and brutal dictators, but Dom Rep, 
as everyone now refers to it, somehow emerged as a place where you can buy a 
pizza 24 hours a day and visit shopping malls. But what aboutHaiti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/haiti>?

The first thing I notice in Port-au-Prince is the people: they are all out on 
the street. Men and women carrying their goods on their heads: bananas to sell, 
water, a roll of naif paintings to hang up outside a hotel. There are horses, 
mules and donkeys amid a tangle of good-natured, slow-moving traffic. And 
behind all this frenetic activity, rising above the heads, is a mixture of 
ruins and new buildings. It is five years sinceone of the most devastating 
earthquakes in human history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2015/jan/16/the-haiti-earthquake-five-years-on-then-and-now>
 razed huge areas of the city, killing up to 220,000 people. Finally, 
Port-au-Prince is being rebuilt, and very attractively too, judging by what’s 
been done already.

I visit the reconstructed Marché de Fer, the bustling central market, where a 
stately rastaman called Dominic shows me around (for $1 – this is a place where 
you need lots of small dollar bills). After spices, vegetables and beauty 
products, we enter an area selling flouncy blue dresses and sinister-looking 
dolls. I tackle the voodoo question head on.

“Is voodoo scary?”

Dominic chuckles gently: “No way. It’s our religion.”

He shows me some veve, intricately beaded flags that carry the symbols of 
certain spirits.

“This one is Ayida Weddo, the rainbow snake.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evm6%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evm6%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faff92cb4394dc8eeb92f16954659d1d35ab924c6%2F0_0_3840_5760%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Haiti%20deserves%20visitors&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evm6%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why+Haiti+deserves+visitors&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evm6%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faff92cb4394dc8eeb92f16954659d1d35ab924c6%2F0_0_3840_5760%2F3840.jpg>
 Dominic – Kevin’s guide to Port-au-Prince’s central market – shows off some of 
his own art. Photograph: Kevin Rushby 
Voodoo is a polytheistic faith that came to the island with slaves from west 
Africa, and took on a camouflage veneer of Roman Catholicism. Its importance to 
Haiti was firmly established when,in 1791, a voodoo ceremony triggered the only 
slave revolt which has led to the founding of a state 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bois_Ca%C3%AFman>. Ever since, the religion has 
prospered, often in the teeth of official disapproval. Western attitudes have 
sometimes been fearful, and frequently condescending: “proper” religions have 
gods and miracles; voodoo has spirits and mumbo jumbo. Unfortunately, Papa Doc, 
dictator during the 1960s, further tarnished the religion’s image by 
encouraging the belief that he was Baron Samedi, the spirit of the dead.

At the refurbished National Museum 
<http://haitist.com/explore-haitian-art-and-history-at-the-national-museum/> I 
get to see Papa Doc’s bowler hat, cane and evil little machine gun, plus photos 
of Haiti’s many other presidents. It is a wonderful little museum – from the 
slave torture devices to the inscribed names of early rebels (Hyacinthe and 
Chickenshit included); from the ostentatiously Napoleonic insignias of the 
first black leaders to the earlier simplicity of Taino Indian stone carvings 
(the Tainos were all but wiped out within a century of Columbus’s arrival). 
There is even an anchor that claims to be from Columbus’s ship, the Santa 
María, wrecked on the north coast.

After a night at the Montana Hotel 
<http://www.hotelmontanahaiti.com/default-en.html>, elegantly rebuilt from the 
ruins of the quake, I meet Serge, my local guide, who takes me to the highlands 
behind Port-au-Prince. He’s a fascinating character: having grown up in an 
orphanage, he had a successful career as a dancer, then worked as a researcher 
on almost every film project in Haiti for the past decade. We leave the car and 
walk aroundWynne Farm <http://www.wynnefarm.org/>, a project encouraging 
farmers to plant trees and work sustainably. Hummingbirds thrum past and we 
spot two nests, one with a pair of tiny chicks inside, neither of them larger 
than the tip of my little finger. Serge’s conversation runs through modern 
slavery, voodoo, cuisine, art, music and the iniquities ofMinustah 
<http://www.un.org/en/peacekeeping/missions/minustah/>, the UN stabilisation 
mission that still exerts a powerful influence in the country. Over the 
treetops we enjoy vast panoramas of green hills, heavily farmed. Haiti has a 
severe deforestation problem.

We head downhill, to the home of Janey Wynne, the owner of Wynne Farm, and a 
plant enthusiast. Her current obsession is bamboo. “It could save Haiti’s poor 
farmers,” she says. Some of her poor neighbours just sold a bundle of canes for 
US$200 – a small fortune. We drink herbal tea, eat mango cake and then tour the 
garden, which is magical: there’s macadamia, ginger, naranjilla, datura, and 
several strange fruits I’ve never seen before.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evm6%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evm6%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff77a36fe69336e46a31338d2b27e3bbd5662dff%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Haiti%20deserves%20visitors&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evm6%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why+Haiti+deserves+visitors&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evm6%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff77a36fe69336e46a31338d2b27e3bbd5662dff%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Street life in Cap Haïtien, on the north coast. Photograph: Kevin Rushby 
Serge finally drags me away: he wants us to visit Croix-des-Bouquets, a 
village on the east side of Port-au-Prince, where a tradition of metal-working 
has developed. As we drive, I note that Janey’s enthusiasm has worked: Serge is 
clutching a handful of seeds and some cuttings for his garden.

En route, we stop at an upmarket art gallery, a chance to orientate myself. 
Haitian art is complex and colourful, incorporating various schools and 
traditions, and long since “discovered” by collectors. Top names, such as
Prospere Pierre-Louis <http://www.artshaitian.com/Pages/haitianartprosper.html>
, command substantial prices, but there is always the chance of finding an 
emerging talent.

When we reach Croix-des-Bouquets, Serge introduces me to Jacques Eugene 
<http://www.indigoarts.com/gallery_haiti_j.eugene1.html>, who makes mask-like 
pieces, punctured and perforated, adorned with twisted cutlery and car parts. 
His inspiration comes in dreams, from a voodoo spirit called Ezili Danto.

Down the road we pass dozens of workshops and shops. At one we meet Serge 
Jolimeau <http://www.indigoarts.com/gallery_haiti_jolimeau.html>, one of the 
stars of Haitian art, whose work hangs all around us: huge, textured heads 
surging with vitality. In Jolimeau’s hands the metal becomes fluid and magical. 
The trouble is, once I’ve seen what I can’t afford, I don’t want the cheap 
stuff.

We drive north-west along the coast, stopping at simple fishing villages such 
as Luly, where the people are sitting in the shade, weaving fish traps. The 
beach is something of a curate’s egg: gorgeous pink conch shells mixed with 
plastic bottles in one great fascinating mess, like the country itself. At 
Montrouis I tour theMuseum Ogier-Fombrun 
<http://www.moulinsurmer.com/museumogierfombrun.html>, part of the delightfully 
laid-back Moulin-sur-Mer beach hotel. At this former French plantation, 600 
slaves eked out miserable lives to help create what was France’s richest 
colony. Now the place is home to a superb collection of artefacts, and tranquil 
gardens filled with semi-tame birds.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evm6%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evm6%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d4a017868efa4d6cfc3b020e70fa0762b83243e%2F0_0_5760_3457%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Haiti%20deserves%20visitors&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evm6%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why+Haiti+deserves+visitors&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evm6%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d4a017868efa4d6cfc3b020e70fa0762b83243e%2F0_0_5760_3457%2F5760.jpg>
 Hotel Habitacion Jouissant, in Cap Haïtien. Photograph: Kevin Rushby 
The visitors here seem to be mainly Haitian emigres from the US. The few 
European tourists tend to head south – to Jacmel, and a few well-kept beach 
resorts. Haiti, however, has a lot more to offer. Up in the north is the city 
of Cap Haïtien, a crumbling masterpiece of colonial-era architecture: brightly 
painted, well-kept houses mixed with the dilapidated and ruined. Like 
everywhere in Haiti, I find the people friendly but not effusive: smiles are 
not freely given, they have to be elicited. I stay at Habitacion Jouissant, a 
much-extended, shady bungalow on a patio high above the sea, where at dawn, 
wooden sailing boats can be spotted heading off to the Turks and Caicos Islands.

Cap Haïtien has some great markets and, nearby, good beaches and a potentially 
world-class attraction inLa Citadelle Laferrière 
<http://www.citadellelaferriere.com/>, an imposing fortification that sits on a 
high ridge above the village of Milot, where it’s worth seeking out Maurice 
Etienne, owner of a guesthouse-cum-cultural centre. Maurice’s 
great-great-grandfather was a soldier in La Citadelle, and Maurice has turned 
himself into an expert on the place. When I arrive, two American archaeologists 
are picking his brains.

Built by Haiti’s first post-slavery president, Henri Christophe, between 
1805-1820, La Citadelle was both a warning to France and a bold statement that 
the former slaves were capable of great achievements. As the latter it was a 
success, but sadly the French did return, blockading the ports and demanding 
reparations for their lost, slave-driven businesses. Haiti capitulated, 
embarking on a withering series of debt repayments that would sap its strength 
for generations to come.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evm6%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evm6%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F235931dfa15a0c24ac9aa7a9d752eb78f18127c1%2F0_108_5760_3457%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Haiti%20deserves%20visitors&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evm6%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why+Haiti+deserves+visitors&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4evm6%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F235931dfa15a0c24ac9aa7a9d752eb78f18127c1%2F0_108_5760_3457%2F5760.jpg>
 Sans-Souci Palace, the home of Haiti’s first independent ruler, near La 
Citadelle Laferrière. Photograph: Kevin Rushby 
After our visit, Maurice and I have lunch on his patio. He’s optimistic about 
Haiti’s future now, and with La Citadelle, he knows Milot has a real winner. We 
eat fresh fruit – yes, there’s plenty of it – and he talks of Haiti’s unique 
culture, more strongly African than anywhere else in the Caribbean.

“Once, a government delegation came here from west Africa and we entertained 
them with voodoo drummers.” He laughs. “When it ended, we found the head of the 
group was in a deep trance.”

I’m beginning to feel a similar trance-like state coming on.

Back in Port-au-Prince, I meet up with Serge again, and ask him a question 
that’s been bothering me: do zombies exist? He is perfectly sure they do, but 
there is nothing supernatural about them. He found some when researching a film 
years ago. “They are people who get drugged, then buried alive and dug up at 
midnight. After that they are kept as drugged slaves, working in bad 
conditions.”

“And people are really afraid of it – being made into zombies?”

“It’s like a cultural memory of slavery, really – a fear that it could return, 
to you personally.”

In a few words, Serge has blown away all the nonsense that is talked about 
zombies, and revealed something deeper and very real. And then, a few minutes 
later, I’m heading into the airport to leave, and I’m thinking, I’ve barely 
scratched the surface here. This place deserves time, and it deserves visitors 
who want more than a beach.

• The trip was provided by Wild Frontiers 
<http://www.wildfrontierstravel.com/en_GB/destination/haiti/group-tours/master/2000351/haiti-the-undiscovered-caribbean>
 (020-7736 3968), which offers an 11-day small-group tour to Haiti, including 
visits to Bassin Bleu and La Citadelle, whale- and dolphin-watching, walking in 
the Central Plateau, local guides and overnights in homestays, but excluding 
flights, from £2,450pp. The next departures are 16 March and 28 December 2016. 
Local excursions and tours available withVoyages Lumiere 
<http://voyageslumiere.com/>. British Airways 
<http://www.britishairways.com/travel/home/public/en_us> flies from London to 
Punta Cana in Dominican from £303 one-way; onward flights to Port-au-Prince 
were provided bySunrise Airways <http://www.sunriseairways.net/> (US$140 
one-way).Casa Sanchezhotel <http://www.casasanchezhotel.com/> (double rooms 
from $90) is an excellent boutique hotel near the historic colonial city of 
Santo Domingo in Dominican Republic. Further informationExperience Haiti 
<http://www.experiencehaiti.org/>. Transfers were provided by the Dominican 
Republic Tourist Board <http://www.godominicanrepublic.com/>




