
Sitting back on a bench at Ramsgate harbour, 87-year-old Matthew Maudlin gives 
a “where do I begin?” shrug before launching into his own version of a commonly 
held sentiment along this stretch of the east Kent coastline, which is widely 
expected to register a strong vote to leave in the 23 June referendum.

“Immigration’s out of control, the country is a mess and Brussels and the 
Germans are telling us what to do even though we won two world wars,” says 
Maudlin, a former council worker who was bitterly disappointed when Nigel Farage
failed to become the local MP for South Thanet 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/08/ukip-frustrated-share-vote-fails-translate-seats>
 in one of last year’s most bitter general election battlegrounds.

Yet while the wind should really be in the sails of the leave campaign here – 
home to Britain’s only Ukip-controlled council and an enthusiastic 
Brexit-backing MP in the form of Farage’s Tory nemesis, Craig Mackinlay – 
Kent’s district of Thanet is also emblematic of sharp national divisions within 
the leave camp and among voters of different generations and social classes. 

To find polar opposite views, you only need compare the outlook of many 
members of Ramsgate’s older, white working-class community with that of the new 
generation of younger middle-class voters who have flocked in recent years to
Margate <http://www.theguardian.com/travel/margate>, just five miles away. 

Described by some as “Shoreditch on Sea”, it’s not hard to find support for 
the position of Margate’s most famous daughter, the artist Tracey Emin, who 
recently said leaving the EU would be “insanity”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jgtc%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jgtc%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee413315cc24767ba488f9a2f873bed66b92f022%2F0_183_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fear%20and%20loathing%20in%20Brexit's%20heartland%20%E2%80%93%20and%20that's%20just%20in%20the%20out%20camp&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jgtc%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fear+and+loathing+in+Brexit%27s+heartland+%E2%80%93+and+that%27s+just+in+the+out+camp&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jgtc%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee413315cc24767ba488f9a2f873bed66b92f022%2F0_183_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Nigel Farage in Ramsgate. Photograph: Carl Court/Getty Images 
“To be honest it winds me up when I hear people saying things like ‘migrants 
are coming to take our jobs’,” says Clare Roberts, who is originally from Wales 
and now runs a home decor and design shop around the corner from Margate’s 
Turner Contemporary gallery. The vast majority of her friends, she believes, 
will vote to remain, although there’s a niggling worry: “I just think a really 
large group of people will be missing because they’ll be at Glastonbury that 
weekend.”

Margate’s cosmopolitan enclave and other voters aside, however, even leading 
remain campaigners admit they face an uphill struggle in areas such as east 
Kent, where even the Greens’ 2015 South Thanet candidate is defying his party 
by campaigning for a leave vote.

Across Kent, YouGov’s Eurosceptic Map of Britain 
<https://yougov.co.uk/news/2016/02/28/eurosceptic-map-britain/> ranks the 
county as “leaning towards Brexit”, although less rigorous surveys also show 
wariness among its farming and business sectors about leaving the EU.

“Thanet will probably vote out as a place because of the activism of older 
people who actually do go and vote,” says Laura Sandys, a former Conservative 
MP for South Thanet who now chairs the UK’s branch of the European Movement 
lobby group.

Sandys, who addressed a rally in Margate earlier this month alongside Lord 
Ashdown, believes that the deep-rooted Euroscepticism in many English coastal 
towns has more to do with “feeling left behind”, adding: “It’s almost as if 
their economies have been allowed to work at a different pace, and there is 
huge and justified resentment at that. But coming out of Europe is not the 
answer.”

Sandys’ successor, from the Brexit wing of Conservatism, predicts a 
particularly large turnout among an older group of what he describes as 
“bungalow estate type” voters, who have sold up in London and come to live in 
Kent.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jgtc%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jgtc%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64bbd739865a492ecd1ae9e66c06196882252072%2F0_1256_4125_2475%2F4125.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fear%20and%20loathing%20in%20Brexit's%20heartland%20%E2%80%93%20and%20that's%20just%20in%20the%20out%20camp&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jgtc%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fear+and+loathing+in+Brexit%27s+heartland+%E2%80%93+and+that%27s+just+in+the+out+camp&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jgtc%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64bbd739865a492ecd1ae9e66c06196882252072%2F0_1256_4125_2475%2F4125.jpg>
 The Turner Contemporary gallery in Margate. Photograph: Alamy 
“Traditionally they will be sceptical of the EU and will be voting out in very 
large numbers. I think they will be 80-20 for that, without doubt,” says 
Mackinlay, who expects Thanet to register just above a national turnout of 60%. 
Not all is harmonious, however, within the local out campaign, largely due to
the toxic hangover from Farage’s struggle 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/mar/24/south-thanet-voters-heart-nigel-farage-bid-capture-tory-seat>
 with Mackinlay, who accuses Ukip of failing to “put their backs” into the 
campaign with him.

In addition to the leave camp’s civil war, the major Tory splits produced by 
the referendum are also evident in the fact that Charlie Elphicke, Mackinlay’s 
parliamentary colleague for Thanet’s neighbouring constituency of Dover, is 
backing a vote to stay. It’s one of the tougher positions for a Tory remain 
campaigner, given how large Dover looms as the frontline in the minds of those 
voters among Kent’s larger 1.5 million population who are motivated by 
immigration concerns.

The port’s own complicated relationship with Europe manifests in a myriad of 
ways these days. Leaving aside the ferries connecting it daily to the 
continent, slightly ragged bunting made up of the flags of EU states hangs over 
its recovering high street, which noisy bands of prepubescent French 
day-trippers march down. One shop sign states: “Nous acceptons €. On parle 
français.”

Ask about the referendum among locals drinking outside pubs in the summer sun, 
however, and it won’t be long before mutterings turn to migration.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jgtc%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jgtc%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9451e634b64a1716a122387ab4af30e179f0293%2F0_45_5118_3070%2F5118.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fear%20and%20loathing%20in%20Brexit's%20heartland%20%E2%80%93%20and%20that's%20just%20in%20the%20out%20camp&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jgtc%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fear+and+loathing+in+Brexit%27s+heartland+%E2%80%93+and+that%27s+just+in+the+out+camp&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jgtc%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9451e634b64a1716a122387ab4af30e179f0293%2F0_45_5118_3070%2F5118.jpg>
 Police in front of a group of far-right protesters in Dover in April. 
Photograph: Steve Parsons/PA 
The perception that parts of Dover have become a magnet for migrants is not 
borne out by the statistics – the most recent census recorded that 93% of the 
port’s population were born in the UK – has brought in far-right groups.Rallies 
and counter-demonstrations over the past yearhave regularly descended into 
violence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/02/far-right-and-anti-fascist-rallies-bring-dover-to-standstill-again>
 and a large police presence was in place for Far Right rally in the town 
which, in the end, turned out to be smaller than anticipated.

Walking his dog along the Dover seafront in between weekday showers, Ross 
Revell says the activities of the “crazy far right and left” are not helping to 
ensure a calm and reasoned local referendum debate.


The financial services worker, who commutes to London and “on balance” will 
probably vote to remain, isn’t impressed either with official messaging: “One 
of the things that has turned me off has been the venom that Cameron has come 
out with. You just think, how dare you tell us what to do?”
