
Fighter Ronda Rousey, Canada’s prime minister, Justin Trudeau, and anonymous 
Italian author Elena Ferrante all landed on this year’sTime 100 most influential
 <http://time.com/topic/time-100/> people list, a roundup of the world’s 
current brightest thinkers, leaders and artists.

A read-through of the top 100 is a reminder of who has dominated headlines 
over the last year, from basketball player Stephen Curry, in the midst of a 
record-breaking season at the Golden State Warriors to the German chancellor,
Angela Merkel <https://www.theguardian.com/world/angela-merkel>, and her 
handling of the European migrant crisis.

Lin-Manuel Miranda, the creator of the musical Hamilton, made the magazine’s 
list days after winning a Pulitzer Prize.


The country’s most famous transgender celebrity, Caitlyn Jenner, also appears 
on the list, as do rappers Nicki Minaj and Kendrick Lamar.International 
Monetary Fund chiefChristine Lagarde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/christine-lagarde> is also featured.

Each honoree gets a tribute written about them by another well-known figure, 
with the secretary of state, John Kerry (himself on the list 
<http://time.com/4298225/leonardo-dicaprio-2016-time-100/>, with kind words 
written by Bono),honoring actor and now Oscar-winner Leonardo Dicaprio 
<http://time.com/4298225/leonardo-dicaprio-2016-time-100/>.

 Bill and Melinda Gates pay tribute 
<http://time.com/4301268/priscilla-chan-mark-zuckerberg-2016-time-100/> to 
fellow husband-and-wife tech boomers turned philanthropists Mark Zuckerburg and 
Priscilla Chan.


This year’s presidential race featured heavily, with Donald Trump, Hillary 
Clinton, Ted Cruz and Bernie Sanders all making the list (with Ohio governor 
John Kasich a notable absentee).


Actor Jennifer Lawrence paid tribute to singer Adele, whose latest album 25 
sold 3.38m copies in the first week in the US alone, a new record. “Adele is a 
gift, an international treasure, but she’s also sweet, funny, intelligent and 
beautiful. Bitch,”wrote <http://time.com/4298223/adele-2016-time-100/> Lawrence.


It’s not all inspirational types who made Time’s cut: the North Korean 
dictator Kim Jong-un made the list, as did the Russian president,Vladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin>.


And there were some noticeable drop-offs from last year. Jeb Bush’s 
embarrassing presidential run ensured he didn’t make it this year, and 
Elizabeth Warren’s name might still be thrown around as a possible 
vice-presidential pick, but she was knocked off the list.

Kim Kardashian West and husband Kanye West both fell off this year’s list.
