
If you like a challenge, enjoy working with people and can handle a difficult 
situation, then joining the police force could be for you. From working with 
communities to diffusing potentially volatile situations, police work can be 
both rewarding and diverse.

“Everything I’ve done so far has been really interesting,” says Pollyanna Cox, 
who works as a special constable while working on a degree in government and 
politics at the University of Hertfordshire. “Once I graduate I’m going to see 
what my options are and maybe go in as a full-time officer.”

So how can graduates find work with the police?

A number of options are available to university leavers. There are 43 police 
forces across the UK, as well as the British Transport Police 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/police-workforce-england-and-wales-31-march-2013/police-workforce-england-and-wales-31-march-2013>
, and a variety of different roles that graduates can apply for.

One of the most obvious routes for those leaving university is the “fast track 
programme <http://www.college.police.uk/en/21592.htm>”, an accelerated 
promotion and development scheme that gives graduates with a 2:1 or above the 
chance to go from police constable to inspector in three years. The scheme is 
open to both graduates and serving officers, and offers classroom learning as 
well as operational training and development in a local force.Applications open 
<http://www.college.police.uk/en/21592.htm> in October, with assessments in 
April for those who meet the criteria.

Competition can be tough and police forces say they look for individuals with 
ambition, determination and vision to reach the higher ranks of the force.

“They’re after people who show leadership skills, who are good with members of 
the public and who have good decision-making skills,” says Margaret Gladwell, a 
careers advisor forCareers Wales <http://www.careerswales.com/en/>. “It’s good 
to have work experience, community work or volunteering experience.”

The Metropolitan Police force in London is the biggest in the UK. If you’re 
interested in working for them there are other paths you can take. As well as 
the fast track scheme, you can join their two-yearPolice Now graduate 
leadership development programme <http://www.metpolicecareers.co.uk/graduates/>.

“Policing is a career like no other – it’s a genuinely unique opportunity to 
serve the people of London,” says Tamsyn Heritage, head of talent management at 
the MetropolitanPolice <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/police>. “There are key 
behaviours that we look for in anyone joining the MPS - a commitment to public 
service and integrity.”

Indiya Eckley has been training with the Metropolitan Police since graduating 
with a degree in criminology and law from the University of Derby last year. 
She says: “It’s an exciting thing to do and an amazing experience, but it’s 
hard work because it’s not your standard nine to five. So many challenges are 
created and thrown at you. The mystery makes the job exciting: No day is ever 
the same.”

If a fast track or graduate programme doesn’t appeal to you, or your 
application is unsuccessful, graduates can also join the force as a police 
constable in a similar way to non-graduates.

Recruitment for this 
<http://www.policecouldyou.co.uk/police-officer/am-i-eligible/index.html> is 
handled by individual police forces, which will have different assessment 
criteria, but standard requirements are that you are 18 or over, eligible to 
work in the UK and that you pass background and security checks.

There are also a number of opportunities outside of those in direct entry 
roles. Graduates can apply for jobs in communications, human resources, 
crime-scene investigation and in finance and accounting.

Monique Myers, resourcing and workforce planning manager for the British 
Transport Police <http://www.btp.police.uk/>, says: “We have multiple vacancies 
open across the police staff spectrum, ranging from analysts to programme 
managers.

I would advise setting up job alerts with our online recruitment portal. We 
are looking for the ability to deliver in the role, why you want to work for us 
and what value you can bring.”

Graduates also have the option to become a special constable 
<http://content.met.police.uk/Site/specialconstables> and volunteer to get more 
experience before joining in a full-time role. Special constables are trained, 
have the same powers as regular officers and wear a similar uniform. They are 
required to volunteer for at least 16 hours a month.

Cox says she would definitely recommend joining in this way. “The experiences 
you get are really good. Last time I was working I went to emergency calls and 
we were the first people on the scene.”

With so many ways to join the police, it’s worth speaking to a careers advisor 
to find out what might be the best route for you.

“It’s complex,” says Susan Hughes, careers advisor for the National Careers 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/careerseducation> Service. “So it’s a 
good idea to get someone to unpick it. A careers advisor can go through all 
these things on an individual basis. We can work with you on a strategy and 
think about the different entry programmes you could take.”

Read more

 * How to join the civil service fast stream 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/sep/01/civil-service-fast-stream-how-to-join-graduate-careers>
 * How to get a graduate job in local government 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/sep/29/how-to-get-a-graduate-job-in-local-government>

 * Join the Public Leaders Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> 
 * How to get a job in the public sector 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/sep/01/public-sector-jobs-top-employers-career>
• This article is part of our series on joining the public sector 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/joining-public-sector>. 
Contactpublic.leaders@theguardian.com <mailto:public.leaders@theguardian.com> 
with your suggestions for the series


Interested in public services? Sign up for your weekly Public Leaders 
newsletter <https://register.guardian.co.uk/public-leaders/> with news and 
analysis sent direct to you every Thursday. Follow us on Twitter via
@Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic>
