
Newcomers do not want to stay long in Obock. In the summer, 50C temperatures 
and ferocious sandstorms sear this dusty port in Djibouti’s underdeveloped 
north. And yet the small town has become a haven for two very different groups. 
Travelling south are refugees fleeing the war inYemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/yemen>, 25 kilometres away across the 
Bab-el-Mandeb strait. Heading in the opposite direction are Ethiopian migrants 
taking smugglers’ vessels towards the very same conflict.

Nearly 35,000 <http://www.regionalmms.org/index0b30.html?id=2> people have 
made the journey southwards across the strait (which translates as Gate of 
Tears) to the tiny authoritarian state of Djibouti since March 2015, when 
Houthi Shia rebels overthrew the Yemeni government andSaudi Arabia responded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/27/saudis-pledge-continue-yemen-bombing-campaign>
 with a relentless bombing campaign. Just over half are Yemeni. According to the
regional mixed migration secretariat 
<http://www.regionalmms.org/index0b30.html?id=2> (RMMS), which monitors 
movements between the Horn of Africa and Yemen, the rest are Somali refugees, 
Djiboutian returnees and other nationalities.

The Somalis and a small number of Eritreans are transferred to two camps in 
the south of the country and most of the Yemenis move on toDjibouti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/djibouti> City, the capital.

But not all have the resources to do so. Many of the 3,000 refugees stuck at 
Markazi camp, a few miles outside Obock, have already endured one summer of the 
hot, dusty winds known locally as the khamsin. The winds are so strong they can 
uproot tents and the refugees are dreading their arrival again this summer.

Related: Yemen: the devastation of a nation, largely ignored | Stephen Twigg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/27/yemen-devastation-nation-largely-ignored-uk-paradox-aid-arms-saudi-arabia>

“We are scared of staying for another one, but what can we do about it?” asks 
Fawaz, who worked for an oil company in Aden before moving his wife and their 
four young children to Yemen’s capital Sana’a and then to Djibouti as the civil 
war spread. His tone is injured, close to anger. “We cannot move. So we have to 
suffer again.”

The well-educated Fawaz, who teaches English to 55 students in the makeshift 
secondary school, is something of an oddity in the camp. Most of Markazi’s 
residents are from poor fishing villages on Yemen’s Red Sea coast. Abdullah, a 
50-year-old father of six, thought he and his family would only be in Djibouti 
for a few days when they boarded his boat in September 2015 to avoid the Saudi 
bombs raining down on the village of Bab-el-Mandeb. “Prison in Saudi Arabia is 
better than this place,” he says dryly, sparking knowing laughter among the 
other refugees sheltering from the burning sun in a tent furnished with thin 
sleeping mats.

More than 500 
<http://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/Djibouti%2520Inter-Agency%2520update%2520for%2520Yemen%2520Situation%2520-%252031MAR16.pdf>
 Yemenis have decided war is preferable to the bleak desert camp and have 
headed home in their boats, ignoring warnings from the UN refugee agency, the 
UNHCR, that the security situation is still volatile.

Among the few hundred returnees to Yemen are smugglers’ boats carrying 
migrants from Ethiopia, as well as a smattering of Somalis. More than92,000 
migrants, almost 90% of them Ethiopian, arrived on Yemen’s Red and Arabian Sea 
coasts in 2015 <http://www.regionalmms.org/index0b30.html?id=2>, according to 
RMMS data. The pace has continued in 2016, with more than 10,000 migrants 
landing in Yemen in March (another 65 did not survive the crossing).

Mostly men from Ethiopia’s Oromo ethnic group, they continue to make use of 
this centuries-old trade route, to escape oppression and discrimination back 
home, and in pursuit of jobs as taxi drivers and plantation labourers in Saudi 
Arabia and the Gulf states.

Bram Frouws, a coordinator at RMMS, says that most know about the conflict in 
Yemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/25/we-are-trapped-in-war-no-end-in-sight-for-yemen-civilians>
, which has killed atleast 6,400 Yemeni people and displaced 2.8 million 
<http://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/OCHA%20Yemen%20Humanitarian%20Bulletin%20Issue%2011%20-%208%20May%202016.pdf>
, but view it as a necessary way station en route to Saudi Arabia in search of 
a better life. He speculates that the chaos of war may even mean that “they 
think it’s easier to transit through Yemen irregularly and undetected”.

The majority of migrants from the Horn of Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> now depart from Somaliland rather 
than braving the four-day walk through barren desert to reach Obock from the 
Ethiopia-Djibouti border. The Djibouti route via Obock and the Red Sea has also 
gained a reputation for being more dangerous, with smugglers routinely 
assaulting, robbing and abducting their charges and holding them for ransom 
once they reach Yemen.

But despite the higher risks, at least 1,300 migrants departed from beaches on 
the outskirts of Obock in March.

Jamal Faraja, 31, from Ethiopia, crammed into a smuggler’s boat that departed 
from Obock more than four months ago.

Dropped just offshore from Hais – a small Yemeni town about 80 kilometres to 
the south of the Houthi-controlled port of Hodeidah – they were met by local 
armed men who locked them up in a walled enclosure for weeks.

“They [the armed men] were forcing us to call our families back in Ethiopia to 
send money,” recalled Faraja, speaking in Raboo Matwala, near the bombed-out 
town of Haradh. “Four Ethiopians were killed in front of my eyes.”

Faraja survived but was left penniless. After being released, he and nine 
other migrants walked for 10 days to reach Raboo Matwala, 350 kilometres away 
from Hais. Now they beg for food at the marketplace and sleep in a warehouse 
used during the day by local sellers of khat – a mild stimulant leaf chewed by 
most Yemenis.

According to Ali al-Jefri, a field officer with the International Organisation 
forMigration <https://www.theguardian.com/world/migration> in Djibouti, 
migrants who avoid abduction by their smugglers often end up in prison. 
“Houthis round up all migrants going to Saudi Arabia,” he said.

Those who survive the sea crossing and manage to evade arrest make the trek 
from the narrow coastal plain of Tehama in Hodeida province toHaradh 
<http://www.irinnews.org/news/2014/11/20/yemen-crisis-boon-people-smugglers> in 
the north, just 10 kilometres from the al-Tuwal border crossing.

But the anarchy in Yemen has made even approaching Saudi Arabia’s tightly 
controlled border virtually impossible. Not only has the border area been 
subjected to daily airstrikes and artillery barrages, but Houthis are manning 
checkpoints on the road to Haradh, preventing migrants from passing or getting 
anywhere near the border.

The IOM used to run a centre to assist African migrants stranded in Haradh, 
but last May the facility was struck by an airstrike, killing five Ethiopians 
inside. The IOM shut down its operations in Haradh, and the few aid agencies 
still operating in the area are struggling to respond to the needs of thousands 
of people displaced by the conflict, let alone the needs of the migrants.

The IOM has managed to evacuate 3,500 Ethiopian migrants from Yemen since June 
2015, the majority of them from prisons in Hodeidah. Among them was 25-year-old 
Ali Ahmed Ibrahim, from Ethiopia’s Oromia region. His family sold cows to fund 
his “very exhausting and dangerous” journey to find work in Saudi Arabia.

“I really don’t know,” Ibrahim says, when asked about his hopes for the 
future. “Maybe I will try to go another time when things are better in Yemen, 
but I don’t see a future in Ethiopia.”

Faraja, who has a wife and young son waiting for him back home in Alitena in 
Ethiopia’s northernmost Tigray region, says he plans to wait out the war in 
Yemen, possibly even to find work on one of the khat farms in the central 
province of al-Bayda, and then attempt the crossing into Saudi Arabia.

Others are desperate to get back home. Ibrahim Ali Youssif, a 40-year-old from 
Ethiopia’s Amhara region who crossed the Red Sea more than six months ago, 
hopes to find a way to return to his hometown of Dessie. He has been unable to 
make contact with any organisation that can help him, including the Ethiopian 
embassy in Sana’a.

“We feel that we’re trapped here,” Youssif says.
