
The human biology course at King's College, London emerges as the leading 
course in anatomy and physiology in the country, according to the Guardian's 
teaching quality rankings.

The course at King's comes out particularly well in terms of the value-added 
measure, which gauges a department's ability to turn students with a range of 
entry qualifications at the start of a course into university leavers with 
upper second or first-class degrees. The score for King's suggests that the few 
students enrolling with lower A-level grades than average for the course are 
still graduating with top degrees.

Professor Keith Webster, head of anatomy at King's, says that variety is the 
key element to training in anatomy and physiology, taught at the university 
within the human biology degree. 'We teach a variety of courses, students have 
to be able to pick and mix as far as possible,' he says.

 Apart from learning the science governing the structure of living things, 
students these days are also introduced to a range of transferable and 
vocational skills as part of the degree. These include meeting deadlines, 
giving presentations, becoming computer literate and performing an academic 
literature search.

Professor Webster says that graduates go into a number of different 
professions from teaching to working in the city. Dundee spends most money on 
teaching students in anatomy and physiology according to the statistics and the 
best staff-student ratio was at Glasgow. Some HESA data for the following 
universities was not available and has affected their ranking: Sunderland, 
Nottingham, Glasgow, St Andrews, Sheffield, Manchester, Westminster, 
Wolverhampton, Southampton, Reading.
