
Sound and image have always seemed to me symbiotically connected. I hear 
Dylan’s Blonde on Blonde or Prince’s Around the World in a Day and immediately 
I picture the sleeve. Likewise, with my favourite films, the soundtrack has the 
same emotional weighting as the acting. I can’t imagine Once Upon a Time in the 
West or Barton Fink without their soundtracks.


Related: Dave McKean: 'Art is an empathy machine' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/the-art-of-1418-now/2016/jun/03/dave-mckean-art-is-an-empathy-machine>

As a member of Saint Etienne, I have always thought of our music as fairly 
cinematic – it didn’t seem unusual to jump into working on our own films, 
starting with the Paul Kelly-directed Finisterre in 2003. Even so, I was 
surprised and pleased when Sunderland council asked me be the creative producer 
on a special event to commemorate the anniversary of the Somme, co-commissioned 
by 14-18 NOW as part of their five-year programme of innovative cultural 
collaborations inspired by the first world war.

Where would I start? Researching the Sunderland Echo’s archive, I was struck 
by the parallels between the uneasy calm on the home front in 1916 and the 
British media’s skewed portrayal of the country in 2016 (transcripts of the 
official contemporary reporting of the war in the Sunderland Echo feature in 
the film). The beginning of the 20th century was at least as tawdry, 
fear-filled and xenophobic as the start of the 21st; similarly, there was still 
optimism, almost squashed out of existence by nationalism and rage.

Reading the words of Sunderland footballer and conscientious objector Norman 
Gaudie, you wouldn’t know if he was speaking in 1916, 2016, or at the height of 
California hippydom: “Love is the only thing which can be both the means and 
the end.” Gaudie was sentenced to death for refusing to play any part in the 
war, not even as a stretcher-bearer. That’s because he was a Quaker, a brave 
and extraordinarily principled man, and his story is one of the most remarkable 
to emerge from the horrors of the first world war.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DeBvd55fqHVc&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DeBvd55fqHVc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DeBvd55fqHVc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DeBvd55fqHVc&media=>
 Bob Stanley talks about Asunder. 
I had wanted to work with the Sheffield-based social history documentary-maker 
Esther Johnson ever since I saw her short film on an eccentric south London 
radio museum, Analogue Kingdom, five years ago. Choosing the musicians was 
trickier. It would have been easy to put together a score that sounded bleak 
and empty, but a chat over a pint with Peter Brewis of Sunderland band Field 
Music gave us some direction – he surprised me by saying most of the music he 
listens to these days was written around the time of the first world war. 
Dumbly, I thought he had found a stack of Vesta Tilley and Marie Lloyd 78s in 
his grandmother’s attic; what he meant was Stravinsky, Schoenberg and Messiaen. 
Using the structures and chord changes from works like Stravinsky’s The 
Soldier’s Tale and allying them to the tricky pop of Field Music and the 
electronic instrumentals of Newcastle-based duo Warm Digits, the score began to 
fall into place. The icing on the cake was that Peter Brewis would score the 
two bands’ compositions for the Royal Northern Sinfonia.

Flicking through an English Folk Dance and Song Society publication, Esther 
Johnson came across a song called The Rigs of Sunderland Fair which was perfect 
for the film; it painted an idyllic version of the town that was just as 
sentimental and effective as The White Cliffs of Dover. As well as the Field 
Music/Warm Digits score, I wanted to include a song that might have kept a 
Wearside soldier going in the trenches, something that might evoke the very 
powerful essence of simple, popular music: “May Old England flourish before 
very long / We’ll have drinking and singing and a day that is rare / When we go 
with our sailors to Sunderland Fair.” The Cornshed Sisters will perform the 
song a cappella in the film.

The narration, by Kate Adie and Alun Armstrong, will be moving, but all the 
more so for the score. I couldn’t begin to think about how I’d do justice to 
the courage of Norman Gaudie, without the power of music to back it up.

Bob Stanley’s film Asunder has its world premiere at the Sunderland Empire on 
10 July. See1418now.org.uk/commissions/asunder/ 
<https://www.1418now.org.uk/commissions/asunder/>
