
It is a magical experience to watch Christian Felske sketching on his pad. One 
of the talented designers at SEAT, he sits at an uncluttered desk, the pencil 
swooping across the paper, laying down lines, building up the car.

Related: Inside the mind of an innovator – audio interactive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/inside-seat/ng-interactive/2016/may/24/inside-the-mind-of-an-innovator-audio-interactive>

Designing a vehicle is still an art, even in this world of computers and 
advanced technology. Of course, digital devices play an enormous part in the 
process, doing jobs that in the past took months or required a more complicated 
manual task. For example, there’s something called anti-clash software. This 
allows engineers to plot, on a computer, the placement and movement of parts. 
Will a moving suspension arm hit the exhaust system when the car goes over a 
big bump? In the past, clashes might only be discovered on prototypes, but by 
using this technology to make virtual parts on screen, problems are ironed out 
before any physical components have been made, saving time and money.


But in SEAT’s design studio, when the new Ateca was born, the process started 
with pencils held by talented hands. Felske is one of a team of several 
creatives working for the head of design Alejandro Mesonero. Every designer has 
his own style and technique: Felske draws quickly, with sweeping lines laid 
down in one flowing movement of arm and pencil. For the wheels he uses a 
stencil that has various different angles, saving Felske a bit of time and 
ensuring that the proportions are correct. That said, it’s quite clear that 
Felske has the talent to draw them freehand. Within a minute or two we have a 
rough sketch of a new car.

The first month of the Ateca project, from when the green light is given on 
day one, sparks literally hundreds of sketches, as Mesonero and his team bounce 
ideas around and think about how SEAT’s first SUV should look. They have clues 
to follow from the 20V20 concept car, but aren’t beholden to its design. At the 
end of this first month, it’s time for Mesonero to make some choices. “At this 
point,” he explains, “we’re not looking to make a final decision but simply 
narrow our ideas down to a handful of proposals. When we’ve got our first 
choices, the designers will create their designs in 3D on a computer. From 
these we will build clay models.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jhjz%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jhjz%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4fcf744aed826b872c8b21ea97ecef46356af01c%2F0_0_4247_2548%2F4247.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20SEAT%20Ateca%3A%20it%20started%20with%20a%20sketch&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jhjz%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+SEAT+Ateca%3A+it+started+with+a+sketch&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jhjz%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4fcf744aed826b872c8b21ea97ecef46356af01c%2F0_0_4247_2548%2F4247.jpg>
 Felske uses stencils for the wheels to save time. Photograph: Jake Curtis for 
the Guardian 
Clay modelling is even more fascinating an art than sketching. In the 
pre-digital age a clay model was created entirely by hand. A buck or former was 
built from wood to give a base to work on, and clay was built up and sculpted 
by hand. It was a laborious and lengthy process.


Today, a robotic system creates a raw clay model by sweeping backwards and 
forwards with a cutter to create the basic shape of the car. The key word here 
is basic, because clay modellers will now fine-tune the design by hand, adding 
intricate details, changing lines, reworking angles and fine-tuning. Modern 
technology does the donkey work, but it is still down to the craftsman and the 
eye of a designer to hone the clay to the finished article. Not least because a 
line or detail that works in a computer-generated 3D model might not look right 
when it’s on a full-scale model.

“When the designers have created their designs on the computer we will create 
six scale models and one full-size model,” says Mesonero, “which will then be 
shown to the head of the VW Group. From this we will select three designs to go 
ahead with and, over the next month, we’ll turn each one into a full-size clay 
model.


“These three designs will be different from each other but will have the same 
philosophy running through them. At this point I will be working on the models 
with one designer, while the other designers in our team continue sketching to 
hone and refine elements of the design. It’s a subtle process, with every 
detail of the new car, right down to minute changes of angle and line.

“Eventually, of course, we have to freeze the Ateca’s design because the 
temptation is to carry on fine-tuning the details endlessly. By the time we’ve 
got down to one model the design is more or less set in stone, or to put it 
mathematically, around 90-95% of the final production-ready Ateca.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jhjz%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jhjz%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50804431e5fd371bbaceb935f5d64b741d1a2e1b%2F0_0_4247_2832%2F4247.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20SEAT%20Ateca%3A%20it%20started%20with%20a%20sketch&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jhjz%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+SEAT+Ateca%3A+it+started+with+a+sketch&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jhjz%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50804431e5fd371bbaceb935f5d64b741d1a2e1b%2F0_0_4247_2832%2F4247.jpg>
 The basic shape of the clay model is formed by a robotic system, before being 
finished by hand. Photograph: Jake Curtis for the Guardian 
So far we have been talking about the Ateca’s exterior design, but while 
Mesonero’s team are working on sketches and clay models, the same process is 
going on with the interior team. They also create hundreds of sketches and, 
while the full-size clay models are being produced, will build an interior 
proportion model, or in German what is known as aSitzkiste. This dummy interior 
allows the designers to plan the Ateca’s ergonomics and visualise the space 
they have to work with.

These processes take around six months – which, from blank paper to a 
full-size model that is 95% complete, is pretty good going. You’d have been 
forgiven for thinking that it might take double that time.


For Mesonero and his team, the ultimate reward is to see the new Ateca out on 
the street, being used and enjoyed by customers. But before that happens 
there’s an event that must be both nerve-wracking and a source of great pride.

Several times a year all the Volkswagen Group brands come together in 
Barcelona with up to 30 full-size clay models. About 20 senior executives from 
the group will view this enormous display. According to Mesonero, Barcelona is 
chosen because it’s neutral ground and it takes people away from their office 
and gives less excuse for being late or getting distracted. The fact that the 
climate is considerably better than northern Europe’s and that Barcelona 
inspires art and creativity also have something to do with the choice.


“We’ll have painted our model for this exercise because it’s very difficult 
for people to grasp the design when it’s in unpainted clay,” he says. “We’ve 
been living with it for months, so for us it’s not the same.”

The process of taking a concept for a new car, realising it as a design and 
then fine-tuning it to eventually come up with the finished article, has not 
changed considerably over the history of the car. It is today, with a new car 
like the Ateca, a very human process. Technology has stepped in to save time 
and therefore cost, but it starts as it always has done, with a blank sheet of 
paper, a pencil and an artist.

