
The assassination attempt on Malala Yousafzai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/oct/07/malala-yousafzai-hard-to-kill-taliban>
, thegang-rape of a young woman on a Delhi bus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/dec/19/delhi-bus-gang-rape> and the mob 
killing of Farkhunda Malikzada in Afghanistan 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/28/farkhunda-women-kabul-afghanistan-mob-killing>
 are only some of the stories that have sparked global outrage and protests at 
the failure of governments to prevent violence against women and girls. While 
the extreme level of brutality in these cases is shocking, violence against 
women is widespread – one in three women experiences abuse in her lifetime.


The UK prioritised tackling violence against women in its development work, a 
move that has helped shift the issue up the international agenda – eliminating 
all forms of violence is a target within the sustainable development goals. The 
Independent Commission for Aid Impact (Icai) hasreleased a report 
<http://icai.independent.gov.uk/> examining the Department for International 
Development’s (DfID) efforts.

Icai found that the government had demonstrated strong, global leadership and 
made significant contributions to preventing abuse. However, Icai also found 
that funding women’s rights organisations is a “neglected” area of DfID’s work. 
Women’s rights organisations are the backbone of rights movements and, without 
them thriving, the government, along with the international community, will 
struggle to achieve its vision of ending violence against women and girls.

Related: Gates Foundation commits $80m to plugging gender equality data gap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/17/gates-foundation-commits-80m-to-plugging-gender-equality-data-gap-women-deliver>

Evidence from activists 
<http://www.actionaid.org/sites/files/actionaid/from_the_ground_up_-_full_report.pdf>
,academics <https://www.wider.unu.edu/sites/default/files/wp2014-104.pdf> and 
the World Bank 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/gender/publication/voice-and-agency-empowering-women-and-girls-for-shared-prosperity>
 makes a strong case that vibrant women’s rights organisations are fundamental 
in achieving gender equality and eliminating violence. Similarly, DfID’sTheory 
of change for tackling violence against women and girls 
<https://www.actionaid.org.uk/sites/default/files/doc_lib/theory_of_change_on_vawg.pdf>
 recognises the pivotal role women’s rights organisations play in ending abuse. 
Themost comprehensive research to date 
<http://policy-practice.oxfam.org.uk/publications/feminist-mobilisation-and-progressive-policy-change-why-governments-take-action-295457>
 revealed that the mobilisation of women’s movements is more important to 
ending violence than the wealth of nations, left-wing political parties or the 
number of women in politics.

The evidence is clear: women’s rights organisations are best placed to create 
and sustain real changes. Womankind Worldwide’s partnerMusasa 
<http://www.musasa.co.zw/> runs the only specialist women’s shelters in 
Zimbabwe. Staff work 24 hours a day, seven days a week to provide lifesaving 
services. ActionAid’s partner theWangu Kanja Foundation 
<http://www.wangukanjafoundation.org/> in Kenya supports survivors of rape to 
access justice.

In Ghana, it was the mass mobilisation 
<http://r4d.dfid.gov.uk/PDF/Outputs/WomenEmp/GhanaDV.pdf> led by a women’s 
rights coalition that got domestic violence legislation passed. In India, 
protests led by thewomen’s movement 
<http://www.worldbank.org/content/dam/Worldbank/document/Gender/Voice_and_agency_LOWRES.pdf>
 helped to pursue wide-ranging reforms to secure justice and protection for 
survivors of rape. In the UK,women’s rights organisations 
<https://www.womensaid.org.uk/sos/> in the UK are fighting for shelter doors to 
remain open to women fleeing abuse.

In a global context, the creation of UN Women in 2010, the only UN agency 
wholly dedicated to supporting gender equality and women’s rights, was to a 
large extent the result of efforts by theGender equality architecture reform 
campaign <http://www.wedo.org/category/themes/global-governance/gear-campaign> 
led by women’s rights and feminist organisations.

Yet donors are not yet channelling money towards women’s rights groups. The 
latest OECD data 
<http://www.oecd.org/dac/gender-development/Aid-in-support-of-gender-equality-and-womens-empowerment.pdf>
 has revealed that, although globally aid to support gender equality has been 
growing, support to women’s rights organisations decreased from 1.5% into 1.2% 
from 2013 to 2014. UK funding has followed this trend: despite significantly 
increased funding for women’s rights organisations and gender equality 
institutions from£10m in 2012-13 
<http://www.oecd.org/dac/stats/documentupload/Aid%20in%20Support%20of%20Gender%20Equality%20and%20Women%E2%80%99s%20Empowerment%20-%20Donor%20Charts.pdf>
 to£22m in 2013-14 
<http://www.oecd.org/dac/gender-development/Aid-in-support-of-gender-equality-and-womens-empowerment.pdf>
, this is still less than 1% of UK gender-focused aid.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fwhy-do-women-still-die-in-childbirth-asks-emily-watson-video&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fwhy-do-women-still-die-in-childbirth-asks-emily-watson-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20do%20women%20still%20die%20in%20childbirth%2C%20asks%20Emily%20Watson%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fwhy-do-women-still-die-in-childbirth-asks-emily-watson-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why+do+women+still+die+in+childbirth%2C+asks+Emily+Watson+%E2%80%93+video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fwhy-do-women-still-die-in-childbirth-asks-emily-watson-video&media=>
Why do women still die in childbirth, asks Emily Watson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2016/may/16/why-do-women-still-die-in-childbirth-asks-emily-watson-video>
Many women’s rights organisations are surviving on a shoestring budget. 
According to the Association of Women’s Rights in Development 
<http://www.awid.org/sites/default/files/atoms/files/WTL_Starving_Roots.pdf>, 
the median annual budget of women’s rights organisations in 2011 was£14,000 
<http://www.awid.org/sites/default/files/atoms/files/where_is_the_money_preliminary_research_eng.pdf>
. Sub-Saharan African organisations survived onjust £8,000 
<http://www.awid.org/sites/default/files/atoms/files/where_is_the_money_preliminary_research_eng.pdf>
. In 2015,this dire situation was exacerbated by the Dutch government’s 
decision to curtail some funds to women’s rights organisations in the global 
south 
<http://www.womenmajorgroup.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/12/Letter-FLOW-concerns-12-December-2015.pdf>
.

The UK’s commitment to spend 0.7% of gross national income on aid 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/09/uk-passes-bill-law-aid-target-percentage-income>
, and DfID’scivil society partnership review 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/civil-society-partnership-review>, 
provide an opportunity to ensure ring-fenced funding for women’s rights 
organisations.

Another option could be to channel money through the Global Fund for Women 
<https://www.globalfundforwomen.org/> or Mama Cash, <http://www.mamacash.org/> 
as well as national and regional funds. Women’s funds are public foundations 
that aim to support and fund women-led solutions to the root causes of social 
injustice. These funds consistentlyreach groups that many other funders do not 
reach 
<http://www.awid.org/sites/default/files/atoms/files/WTL_Starving_Roots.pdf>, 
such as grassroots organisations, as well as ones working on issues that are 
considered controversial.

Funding is not the only thing that makes vibrant women’s rights movements, but 
it is essential for their sustainability, effectiveness and eventual success.

Ensuring that women and girls can live their lives without violence will not 
come for free. The UK must channel more and better resources to women’s rights 
organisations.

 * Bethan Cansfield is acting head of policy for Womankind Worldwide. Kasia 
Staszewska is ActionAid UK’s women’s rights policy adviser
