
I like it when bumblebees go at it with courgette flowers. They come out 
dusted in brilliant yellow pollen, like a sherbet bomb all dazed and confused. 
Sometimes I think this is reason enough to grow courgettes and their siblings, 
summer squashes. That, and all the wonderful fruit that is a byproduct of that 
pollen love-in.

This weekend is the perfect time to sow them if you haven’t already. 
Cucurbits, whether that’s cucumbers or courgettes, squash or pumpkins, resent 
cold, wet weather and are easy targets for slugs. If you have plants on the 
windowsill that can’t hold themselves upright, start again. Floppy seedlings 
will be slug fodder and nothing more.

Plants sown in the next two weeks will catch up quickly with earlier sowings 
and crop just a beat behind. Because the harvest season is short, make 
a further sowing at the end of the month to create a little succession.

Anyone who has suffered a courgette glut knows a healthy plant is prolific. If 
you keep on top of picking, you should get around 20 fruits per plant. Five 
plants is more than enough for a family of four.

It can be pricey to buy five or six different varieties: ask around and see if 
you can swap seeds. Facebook often turns up someone who’s germinated the entire 
packet and is overrun.

Courgettes germinate at about 16-20C and do so fast, regardless of whether you 
sow the seed on its edge or flat. Maintain the temperature at about 15C until 
you have the first adult leaves. These babies love to grow, so turn seedlings 
often to prevent lopsided, leggy growth. When you have two adult leaves, harden 
off outside and plant out when the third leaf is just appearing. Hardening off 
in a cold frame or under fleece will take about two weeks; by that time, any 
fear of frost should have passed.

Courgette plants love to eat and drink, so start feeding from midsummer 
onwards, particularly if growing them in pots. It also worth mulching around 
plants to keep weeds down and water locked into the soil – grass clippings work 
well.

If it is cold in late spring, you’ll find you get lots of male flowers that 
don’t produce fruit. Sometimes the first fruits are misshapen and the ends rot, 
which is due to poor pollination. As more female flowers appear, things will 
sort themselves out.

Related: Alys Fowler: growing sunflowers from seed 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/09/growing-sunflowers-from-seed-alys-fowler-gardening>

There are many varieties to chose from: round, long, bent, pattypan, pale 
green, sunshine yellow and stripy.‘Midnight’ 
<http://moreveg.co.uk/epages/bd0b9b93-06b9-4b49-9efb-f179fdacfbdd.sf/en_GB/?ObjectPath=/Shops/bd0b9b93-06b9-4b49-9efb-f179fdacfbdd/Products/COUMD>
 and‘Patio Star’ 
<http://www.nickys-nursery.co.uk/garden-shop/seeds/kiddies-corner/courgette-patio-star-10-seeds>
 are both compact bush plants, ideal for containers and tiny gardens.

Courgette ‘Tromboncino d’Albenga’ 
<http://www.chilternseeds.co.uk/item_1826c_courgette_tromboncino_dalbenga_seeds>
 likes to climb and has attractive fruits; it’s great for arbours and trellis.
‘Eight Ball’ <https://www.victoriananursery.co.uk/Courgette_Seed_Eight_Ball/> 
is a wonderful one for stuffing.‘Nero di Milano’ 
<http://www.seedsofitaly.com/BIO_COURGETTE_NERO_OF_MILANO/p1834925_8313814.aspx>
 makes a good, open bush plant and has early, dark green fruit.‘Rugosa’ 
<http://www.seedsofitaly.com/COURGETTE_RUGOSA_FRIULANA/p1834925_8313547.aspx> 
(from Seeds of Italy) and ‘Summer Crookneck’ 
<http://www.realseeds.co.uk/courgettes.html> (from The Real Seed Catalogue) are 
summer squash (essentially, they mature to have a harder skin), but, picked 
early, the wonderful, knobbly fruit have a great flavour and can be eaten like 
courgettes.
