
Q I have a beige/nude dress on hold in a shop. I was inspired to buy it by the 
Autumn/Winter catwalk shows. I love flesh tones and think they look really 
sophisticated. But I'm having second thoughts - mostly I'm worried that beige 
will drain my face of colour. Do you have any tips for how to carry beige 
shades?
Gabby

A The problem is, colour is a very personal thing and it's impossible to tell 
without knowing more about your complexion. I'd take a ruthlessly honest friend 
along and get her opinion on this dress. The problem with beige and nude is 
that they encompass so many tones and shades, and they can either flatter or 
drain your natural colouring. Most have either a yellow or pink base - shades 
which do completely different things to your skin. Trial and error is the only 
solution. Personally, I'd start with a nude top which you could team with black 
trousers or a cream skirt (as seen at Versace) rather than going straight for a 
dress. Oh, and prepare yourself for the hefty dry-cleaning bills!

Q I've just bought a black waistcoat to wear with jeans and shorts, but I'm 
now at a bit of a loss as to what I should wear underneath it. What would you 
recommend?
Cat

A The main look to avoid is the swashbuckling pirate - don't wear a flowing 
shirt unless you want to look like a Pirates of the Caribbean fan. You want to 
evoke Kate Moss rather than a costumed Keira Knightley with this look, so go 
for a dressed-down feel. Either pick a collarless, masculine-cut shirt or a 
jersey top. Leave it untucked, and accessorise with a beaded necklace or a 
long, skinny scarf. Ankle boots will make it look a little bit rock'n'roll; 
pumps will give it a cuter finish. A word of warning, though: if you have a 
fuller figure - particularly a large bust - the jeans and waistcoat look can be 
unflattering. If that's the case, pair it with a print dress, heavy leather 
belt and knee-high boots. Personally, I love this Californian New Age look.

Â· If you have a wardrobe question for Jo Jones, email her at 
ask.jo@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.jo@observer.co.uk>
