
According to a big crop of recent studies, you’re sexist and you hate the 
poor. Well, not you personally. Except – quite possibly you personally, 
actually, even if you believe otherwise. In onestudy 
<http://nymag.com/thecut/2015/10/men-intimidated-by-smart-women.html>, men 
liked the idea of dating a hypothetical smart woman, but were less keen on 
actually meeting a real one.Another 
<https://asunow.asu.edu/20151027-study-shows-angry-men-gain-influence-and-angry-women-lose-influence>
 found that both sexes judge women, and only women, to be less credible when 
they’re angry. Athird 
<http://digest.bps.org.uk/2015/09/they-deny-it-but-middle-classes-have.html> 
found widespread subconscious bias in favour of rich people, even among those 
who denied it; a fourthconcluded 
<http://econtent.hogrefe.com/doi/abs/10.1027/1864-9335/a000226> that food 
tastes better in sexist packaging – “big and filling” for men, “light and 
healthy” for women. And as we know from research into “implicitbias” 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2014/12/black-on-black-racism-the-hazards-of-implicit-bias/384028/>
, being on the receiving end of such prejudice (being female, poor or black, 
say) doesn’t mean you don’t also harbour it yourself.

Findings like these typically trigger outrage that such antediluvian attitudes 
persist. But here’s a troubling thought: what if our getting righteously cross 
about them makes matters worse? The psychological pitfall here is known as 
“moral satiation”: the act of calling out others for their prejudice makes you 
feel you’ve done your job, and need do nothing more, whereas in fact you’ve 
probably just solidified your own unwarranted assumption that you’d never fall 
prey to such biases. Something similar happens now that every online hothead is 
fluent in the previously specialist language of cognitive biases and logical
fallacies <https://yourlogicalfallacyis.com/>. There’s no easier way to avoid 
introspection than to accuse someone else of a bias or fallacy – even though 
seeing yourself as less vulnerable to them is another cognitive bias. The 
caller-out glides smugly off into the sunset, confident their morality’s in 
splendid working order.

The deeper problem here is that we think of prejudice and bias as anomalies – 
occasional brain glitches that need stamping out, and from which good people 
can reasonably aspire to be free. Yet all the evidence suggests they’re basic 
tools of human reasoning: wemust make snap judgments, on the basis of various 
shortcuts, or we’d be unable to function. Seen this way, hiring a talented 
teacher over a useless one is still a form of discrimination; the difference is 
that it’s fair and sensible, while discriminating on the basis of skin colour 
isn’t. (We even discriminate among kinds of discrimination!) To be pedantic 
about it, then, “stamping out discrimination” is an undesirable and 
unattainable goal. What matters is discriminating well.

Related: What’s so great about true grit? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/30/oliver-burkeman-grit-is-it-all-its-cracked-up-to-be>

This all sounds like word games, but it really isn’t, as the social scientist 
Adam Sandel shows in his bookThe Place Of Prejudice 
<http://www.hup.harvard.edu/catalog.php?isbn=9780674726840>, which argues that 
prejudices – defined broadly – are how we make sense of the world. If you think 
of prejudice per se as something it’s possible to eliminate, it’s tempting to 
take a further step and imagine you’re immune from it yourself. Which, 
ironically, makes you far more susceptible to bigotry: nobody’s more likely to 
be sexist or racist than the person who thinks they can’t be. It’s a warning we 
should all heed. Well, not me, obviously – I’m fine. I mean the rest of you.

oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com <mailto:oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com>
