
Miss Shepherd had almost reached the end of the road. The residents of 
Gloucester Crescent, in Camden Town, north London, were a liberal lot, but 
tolerance has its limits, and the lady in the van was gradually drifting down 
the street as she outstayed her welcome outside various houses.

Until she parked opposite no.23, the home of playwright Alan Bennett.

“She couldn’t go any further as I don’t think the van worked at that time,” 
Bennett says. “I got used to her being in my eye line as I sat working at the 
bay window.

“She used the loo once or twice, which appalled me, and I think she once used 
the telephone. But she didn’t ever want anything, not food or anything like 
that.”

Camden Council was understanding, painting double-yellow no-parking lines on 
the road as far as the van, then starting again on the other side. But 
eventually the council lost patience too, and Miss Shepherd was told to move on.

Bennett, who had seen her tormented by bullies, offered a temporary solution.

“I said she could put the van in the drive, thinking it would be a few 
months…” he says. “If I’d have known it was going to be for 15 years I would 
never have dreamt of doing it. That happens in life. Things creep up on you.”



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jqkj%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jqkj%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd4334f5950bf0803d528f5b3549fd1039612b835%2F0_46_1400_840%2F1400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20real%20lady%20in%20the%20van&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jqkj%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+real+lady+in+the+van&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jqkj%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd4334f5950bf0803d528f5b3549fd1039612b835%2F0_46_1400_840%2F1400.jpg>
 Production shot of The Lady In The Van Photograph: Nicola Dove/Universal Sony 
Pictures Home Entertainment 
Near but far

Despite their proximity, Bennett and Miss Shepherd didn’t exactly become 
close. “She kept herself very much to herself,” Bennett says.

“Her day would begin with the doors of the van being theatrically flung wide, 
and then various bags, contents nameless, would be hurled out. Two white legs 
appeared and she would come out backwards.

 “I got used to all that, and the sound of the van door. And I was slightly 
accommodating to her in the sense that I didn’t make a row at night if I was 
coming in.

“But I don’t think she accommodated herself to me. She did exactly as she 
wanted.

“People think she was a sweet old lady, but she wasn’t that.”

Despite Miss Shepherd’s cantankerous nature, questionable (to say the least) 
hygiene, and the fact that guests had to squeeze past the van to get to 
Bennett’s door, he insists she didn’t impinge on him.

“I wasn’t bothered about the garden,” he says. “I’m not one of nature’s 
gardeners.”

Writing her story

Bennett used to make note of funny things that Miss Shepherd would say, but 
resisted the temptation to write about her while she was alive.


“I didn’t want people coming to look at the van or coming to look at me,” he 
says.


Shortly after her death in 1989, Miss Shepherd first appeared in a memoir of 
Bennett’s that was published in the London Review of Books.


After that, her brother contacted the playwright, and told him the details of 
Miss Shepherd’s life. She had been a concert pianist before spending an unhappy 
spell in a convent, where music was banned. This troubled her for life, as did 
her involvement in an accident, in which she had fled the scene after blaming 
herself for the death of a motorcyclist.


Armed with this back story, in 1999 Bennett wrote the play, The Lady in the 
Van, in the process overcoming one large stumbling block: how to write about 
himself.


“I couldn’t see how I could tell my own story… it was only when I thought of 
splitting myself in two that I could see how to do it.”

So the play, and the movie, each contain two Alan Bennetts: the one who does 
the writing and the one who does the living.

Making a movie

For the movie of The Lady in the Van, the Bennett who does the writing teamed 
up with director Nicholas Hytner, with whom he had collaborated on numerous 
plays dating back to 1989, as well as movies The History Boys and The Madness 
of King George.


They worked on the script for nine months, constantly revising and improving 
the work, says producer Kevin Loader.


“Alan and Nick have a shorthand and Alan trusts Nick’s judgement so Nick asks 
Alan for things that are missing,” Loader says. “It was a discovery of what had 
worked in the play and would work on film, and a discovery of what had worked 
in the play and wouldn’t work on film.”


With Maggie Smith playing the lead role (as she had on stage 15 years 
earlier), and Alex Jennings playing the two Bennetts,the movie was shot at 
Bennett’s old house 
<http://www.theguardian.com/universal-sony-pictures-home-entertainment-the-lady-in-the-van/2016/jun/01/shooting-the-lady-in-the-van>
, no.23 Gloucester Crescent.

Bennett feels he couldn’t have got to know Miss Shepherd any better when she 
was alive. “As a person she was unreachable,” he says.

“She used to irritate me to a great degree… She was a real pain.”

But he acknowledges that the lady in the van was a gift.

“If you’re a writer anything’s a gift… you just have to play the card next to 
your thumb, as it were.

The Lady In The Van is out now on Blu-ray, DVD and Digital. Find out more 
<https://theviewingloungestore.com.au/title/the-lady-in-the-van/>. 
