
During recent elections across Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, new technologies have been 
harnessed to help monitor elected officials, bolster democracies and liberate 
election information.


These efforts form part of a growing awareness of the value of data which, 
until now, has too often been locked away by governments.

Disputed results in Kenya and Burkina Faso have led to outbreaks of 
post-election violence in recent years. In response, the 2015 elections in 
Burkina Faso saw the governmentembrace open real-time election data 
<http://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2015/dec/04/why-data-was-crucial-to-burkina-fasos-first-election-since-uprising>
 while civil society groups helped reassure citizens of the veracity of the 
polls through transparency. Similar groups played acrucial role 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/jinamoore/these-are-the-people-tracking-what-to-believe-about-nigerias#.ioLee7kQ4>
 in last year’s lauded peaceful presidential election in Nigeria, andother 
countries <https://twitter.com/ZEIC_2016> are now looking to adopt this 
successful “situation room” model to allay fears of vote tampering.

Related: Democrats v autocrats in Africa: is there a winning formula? – podcast
 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/audio/2016/feb/25/democrats-autocrats-africa-winning-formula-uganda-podcast>

Following violence in Kenya, my team at Code for Africa 
<https://www.facebook.com/CodeForAfrica> created Got To Vote 
<http://gottovote.cc/>, an open source toolkit which let anyone send “peace 
messages” as well as finding out via SMS if they could vote and where their 
nearest polling centre was. This toolkit has since been used in Ghana, Zimbabwe 
andMalawi <http://gottovote.malawivote2014.org/> during their 2014 vote, 
helping 300,000 locals 
<http://ijnet.org/en/blog/data-journalism-platform-evolves-voter-registration-system-malawi>
 verify their registration status andshowing the value 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hUdCVzxCt_o> of making data simple and easy to 
interact with.

Publishing government data can lead to unexpected consequences too, as Uganda 
discovered this month when the electoral commissionreleased 
<http://www.ec.or.ug/?q=content%2Fregistration-statistics> nationwide voter 
counts which helpeddata-savvy 
<https://medium.com/@enamara/exposing-voter-register-discrepancies-a-few-days-to-uganda-s-presidential-and-parliamentary-72ebe94263aa#.r41jh7ts9>
locals 
<http://tmsruge.com/ugandadecides-breaking-down-the-eligible-voter-count/> find 
an estimated 20,000 “ghost voters” on the register.

Monitoring politicians’ promises using the Centre for Democracy and Development
 <http://www.cddwestafrica.org/>’s Buharimeter <http://www.buharimeter.ng/> in 
Nigeria and MIT’s mobile-basedPromise Tracker <http://promisetracker.org/> in 
Brazil helps when outrageous commitments are made during election campaigns and 
quickly forgotten by candidates. The media have often done their first 100-day 
report cards but these projects aim to monitor achievements – or 
underachievements – across whole tenures.

The Parliamentary Monitoring Group <https://pmg.org.za/> in South Africa and 
Parliament Watch <http://parliamentwatch.ug/> in Uganda do hugely valuable work 
in this area, helping to makedocuments public <http://www.pa.org.za/> and more 
easily accessible so that citizens are aware of politicians’ work and the 
legislative process.

The efforts to free this kind of information received global backing last year 
with increased data availability and transparency being baked into theUN’s 
sustainable development goals <https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdgs> that 
were signed in New York in September. But there are still huge hurdles to 
overcome on the ground, from poor data quality to resistant governments to 
technological illiteracy about publishing or releasing data online.

Related: Same tech, different result as states use internet to empower and 
control 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/24/technology-states-internet-empower-control-world-bank-digital-divide>

To help these efforts, Code for Africa looks for opportunities where data can 
urgently be made more useful, reliable or actionable for citizens using simple 
technology solutions. Whether it’s unlocking the value ofcensus data 
<http://wazimap.org>, exposing unlicensed <http://health.saharareporters.com/> 
doctors <http://health.the-star.co.ke/> or connecting the dots 
<http://sa.connectedafrica.org/> between politicians and big business, we build 
tools and provide media training to make sure data is used and not just left 
gathering dust.

And with many of these tools freely available for reuse via developer site 
Github fromCode for Africa <https://github.com/CodeForAfrica>, the Sunlight 
Foundation <https://github.com/sunlightlabs/>, Open Knowledge 
<https://github.com/okfn>, DemocracyWorks <https://github.com/democracyworks>, 
mySociety <https://github.com/mysociety> or Democracy Club 
<https://github.com/DemocracyClub/>, the pace of adoption of data-driven tools 
should only accelerate.

Unfortunately, there are worrying counter trends stifling some of these 
efforts and making it ever more difficult to carry out work with official data. 
From the spread of laws that make itdifficult 
<http://www.icnl.org/research/monitor/ethiopia.html> for NGOs 
<http://www.voanews.com/content/uganda-ngo-bill/3104064.html> to operate 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/14/south-sudan-aid-agency-law-risks-catastrophe-warn-ngos>
 orscrutinise official data 
<http://www.theeastafrican.co.ke/news/Tanzania-passes-new-draconian-data-law/-/2558/2667678/-/11ywry9z/-/index.html>
 to increasinggovernment 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jul/08/tanzania-laws-curb-free-speech-social-media-jamii-forums>
surveillance 
<http://qz.com/525946/african-governments-are-stepping-up-surveillance-of-their-own-people/>
 of their citizens’ internet and mobile activity, some governments are cracking 
down ever harder on their citizens, the media and civil society.

Digital tools have their limits. Globally, 4 billion people lack internet 
access, according to the World Bank’s latestworld development report 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2016/01/13/digital-technologies-huge-development-potential-remains-out-of-sight-for-the-four-billion-who-lack-internet-access>
. But mobile connectivity rates are rising sharply and such tools can be used 
by news organisations to tell stories that better inform their offline 
audiences across print, radio or SMS, creating more of an impact.

It is only through the increased awareness and use of data that the value and 
purpose of information can be unlocked to the benefit of society as a whole. As 
the then-Tanzanian president Jakaya Kikwetesaid 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zec29_L8LjE> at the first Africa open data 
conference <http://www.africaopendata.net/>, data “makes change possible”. The 
question is, do governments want to change?

 * This article was corrected on 18 April 2016. Buharimeter is an initiative 
of the Centre for Democracy and Development, not BudgIT.
