
Historically, when eating out, it was rare that anything involving cauliflower 
would stick in your memory. But there is no forgetting the remarkable whole 
fried cauliflower that is currently being served at Ambleside’sLake Road Kitchen
 <http://www.lakeroadkitchen.co.uk>.

A key dish on the restaurant’s tasting menu, it looks less like a cauliflower 
and more like a blackened asteroid that has crash-landed through the kitchen 
ceiling. Were that not dramatic enough, it arrives with a large, wooden-handled 
knife so that you can carve open its contrasting white curds, which are served 
with pressed Scandinavian viili yoghurt and citrusy threads of pine. The 
flavour is incredible.

The cauliflower is cooked whole in a tight pan so that it first steams as 
water is driven off and then, as the butter foams up, it effectively 
deep-fries, so that its exterior develops unusually meaty, caramelised 
flavours. The leaves, in particular, are transformed into awesome crispy 
shards: rich, salty, deeply savoury, like vegetarian crackling.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tazp%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tazp%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67f01973e6702351a219c18f9bcaf2520e286017%2F0_381_5436_3262%2F5436.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cauliflower%20steaks%2C%20anyone%3F%20How%20the%20humble%20cauli%20got%20hip&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tazp%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cauliflower+steaks%2C+anyone%3F+How+the+humble+cauli+got+hip&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tazp%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67f01973e6702351a219c18f9bcaf2520e286017%2F0_381_5436_3262%2F5436.jpg>
 Cauliflower sales have been in steep decline, but, roasted, fried or baked, it 
is now a rising star in many restaurants. Photograph: Alamy 
“The challenge was to give a vegetarian that satisfying, meaty sensation a 
carnivore gets when they eat a piece of perfectly cooked meat,” says chef-owner 
James Cross. “We wanted that salinity you get around the outside of a 
well-seasoned steak and the contrast between the crust and that delicious 
creamy, tender curd texture you get inside a cauliflower. You can cut steaks 
from a cauliflower, but, for me, it’s all about showcasing the cauliflower in a 
hearty, generous way. Putting the whole thing down in front of guests has as 
much impact as an 800g côte de boeuf would.”

As a dish, that cauli symbolises a remarkable change in this humble brassica’s 
fortunes. From 2000 to 2010, cauliflower sales plummeted by 35% as this 
sulphurous culprit, featuring mostly in endless, soggy Sunday roasts, was 
shunned by young shoppers. Today, cauliflower could not be hipper. It is the 
cover-star ofApril’s Olive Magazine  
<https://www.sainsburysentertainment.co.uk/magazines/olive-magazine/MAG-ISSUE-0000125394>
and many restaurants are elevating it to a centrepiece ingredient. It is, for 
instance, served roasted with lobster butter at the two-Michelin starLedbury 
<http://www.theledbury.com> or dressed with romesco sauce at Ox Club 
<http://oxclub.co.uk> in Leeds. Berber & Q 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/may/24/berber-and-q-restaurant-review-jay-rayner>
’s whole barbecued cauliflower, dusted with shawarma spices and slathered in 
pine nuts and tahini sauce, is a cult classic among London foodies. Something 
similar is happening in the US too, where New York’sAldo Sohm 
<http://www.aldosohmwinebar.com/about> serves a baked cauliflower with roast 
chicken salt and New Orleans’Domenica <http://domenicarestaurant.com> famously 
pairs it with whipped goat’s cheese.

Related: The 10 best cauliflower recipes 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/apr/06/10-best-cauliflower-recipes>

At the same time, cauliflower has been embraced by the Deliciously Ella 
brigade as a low-carb, wheat-free, low GI, paleo-friendly food. It contains 
just 23 calories and 4g of carbs per 100g and it can be fashioned into grilled 
steaks, couscous, rice and even “flour” to use in ersatz pizza bases. After 
crowdfunding £700,000, a long-life, quick-cookCauli Rice 
<https://www.caulirice.com/en/home/> product was recently launched in UK 
supermarkets and, after years of decline and stagnation, overall UK cauliflower 
sales are up by 4%. “It’s trending [in restaurants] and in America, so there’s 
some cross-pollination,” says Richard Mowbray, vice-chair of the Brassica 
Growers Association. “It’s on the back of it being a healthy thing, too. People 
who want a low-calorie alternative to rice are looking at cauliflower.”

The cauli’s flexibility is old news to Britain’s best chefs. Last year in G2, 
Neil Rankin featuredwhole “dirty” cauliflower cooked straight on chemical-free 
barbecue coals 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/may/27/dirty-barbecue-dirty-steak-clinching>
. Two years ago, the Dairy’s Robin Gill was extolling its virtues in magazine 
interviews. “If you roast it for a long time, it can go very sweet; raw it’s 
quite nutty. It’s so diverse,”he told me in 2014 
<http://www.olivemagazine.com/restaurants-and-travel/the-best-flexitarian-restaurants-in-the-uk--tony-naylor/4527.html>
. Meanwhile, independently of one another, two Israelis, Yotam Ottolenghi and 
the celebrity chef Eyal Shani, have played a significant role in repopularising 
the cauliflower. In 2009, Ottolenghi pleaded its case on an edition of Radio 
4’s The Food Programme and he has kept up his campaign ever since. Likewise, 
Shani has served whole, wood-roasted cauliflowers in his restaurants in Tel 
Aviv and Paris for a decade. In a recent Haaretz newspaper article (How an 
Israeli chef’s cauliflower recipe took over the world 
<http://www.haaretz.com/jewish/food/1.697196>), Shani was credited with 
inspiring the current whole-roasted cauli trend and, if indirectly, Alon 
Shaya’s version at Domenica.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tazp%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tazp%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a1a2d26453e5c6e40d93572f2319319da6113f7%2F0_149_4134_2480%2F4134.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cauliflower%20steaks%2C%20anyone%3F%20How%20the%20humble%20cauli%20got%20hip&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tazp%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cauliflower+steaks%2C+anyone%3F+How+the+humble+cauli+got+hip&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tazp%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a1a2d26453e5c6e40d93572f2319319da6113f7%2F0_149_4134_2480%2F4134.jpg>
 Yotam Ottolenghi’s roasted cauliflower gigli with pine nuts and currants. 
Photograph: Colin Campbell for the Guardian 
In truth, cooking cauliflowers whole is commonplace in the Middle East (as 
Shani told Haaretz, he got the idea from his business partner’s mum). Stosie 
Madi, chef-owner at Lancashire’sParkers Arms <http://www.parkersarms.co.uk>, 
grew up in West Africa where her Lebanese father and his Maronite Christian 
family instilled in her a deep respect for cauliflower. Friday lunchtimes 
invariably featured deep-fried cauliflower with fish and, during Lent, it 
became a main-course dish in itself.

Madi’s mother would fry off crumbled cauliflower in butter (“The secret is the 
butter. If you’re frugal with it, you don’t get that meaty taste”), and then 
layer that with rice and caramelised onions in a kind of pilaf. She would also 
simultaneously roast (quickly at a high heat, so it remains firm) a butter, 
cumin and sea salt-smothered cauliflower, to serve in lieu of meat: 
“Cauliflower is very sweet and has lovely dark caramel notes when you roast it.”

Related: Cauli gosh: Yotam Ottolenghi’s cauliflower recipes 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/feb/20/cauliflower-recipes-yotam-ottolenghi>

It is a dish that Madi herself serves at the Parkers Arms with rice and 
toasted nuts. The dish is dressed, in a classic Lebanese move, with za’atar 
spices and a tahini-based lemon and garlic tarator sauce. “It takes prime place 
on the menu and we have non-vegetarians coming back specifically for it,” she 
says. “You have to take something satisfying that packs a punch and celebrate 
that vegetable as you would a joint of meat for a Sunday roast.”

The cauliflower, it seems, is uniquely well placed to step into that meaty 
breach. More broadly, it is shrugging off its rep as a mushy chore and 
demonstrating its versatility. You may never eat cauliflower cheese again.
