
Figures showing Ukip gets more cash through state money than from any of its 
private donors individuallyhave highlighted the party’s funding collapse.



Data on donations to political parties for the final quarter of 2015, released 
by the Electoral Commission, show that Ukip received £89,869 from a special 
Electoral Commission policy development fund.

The public funds were slightly more than Ukip’s largest private donation for 
the period: £80,000 from Ko Barclay, the stepson of the newspaper magnate Sir 
Frederick Barclay.

The company Rock Services gave the party a “non-cash” donation of £34,232.69, 
which is believed to be the use of a telephone phone bank.

Related: Ukip MP Douglas Carswell admits 'loyalty to all Eurosceptics' 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/26/ukip-mp-douglas-carswell-admits-loyalty-to-all-eurosceptics>

The donation shows the strong link between Rock Services and Grassroots Out 
(GO), the anti-EU group which is hoping to win “lead” designation from the 
Electoral Commission as the main leave campaign in the referendum onEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.

Arron Banks, the former Ukip donor who is funding GO and the associated 
Leave.EU group, is a director of Rock Services. The phone bank has also been 
used by GO and Leave.EU.

Ukip was funded to the tune of £286,151 in the final quarter of 2015, 
including £196,282 in private donations altogether and £89,869 in Electoral 
Commission funds. This was dwarfed even by theLiberal Democrats 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/liberaldemocrats> who received a total of 
£828,657 after their electoral drubbing.

A Ukip spokesman said there was no surprise in the funding levels because its 
supporters wanted to donate to the leave campaign. “These are campaign donors. 
People give money to Ukip to fight for Britain’s exit from the EU so we can 
hardly complain when they give money to the campaigns fighting for Britain’s 
exit from the EU.”

The Conservatives <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> received 
£5.4m (£5.1m in private donations and £303,740 in pubic funds) while Labour 
received £4.1m (£2.6m in donations) and £1.49m in public funds.

Labour <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> pointed out that the 
Tories raised £2.2m of their overall funding from just 49 members of the 
Leaders’ Group of donors who have access to senior cabinet ministers.

Jon Ashworth, the shadow cabinet minister, accused the Tories of seeking to 
rig the political system with planned cuts to “Short money” and new rules to 
discourage donations by trade union members.

“The Tories are using every trick in the book to keep themselves in power and 
Labour will oppose these moves every step of the way,” Ashworth said.

The Tories pointed out that 80% of Labour’s donations came from unions, of 
which £900,000 came from Unite.

 * This article was amended on February 26 to make clear that the £89,869 Ukip 
received from public funds came from an Electoral Commission policy development 
fund and was not part of the “Short money” paid to parties at Westminster to 
help them with their parliamentary work.
