
For many years, NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> managers and 
corporate staff have been characterised in the press as pointless “pen-pushers” 
or “faceless bureaucrats” – to the point where it has become conventional 
wisdom that tackling waste must require another round of back-office cuts.


Few would disagree that the design and delivery of our health services should 
be led by the needs of people who use them, or that frontline staff should be 
empowered to deliver effective care. But something that gets said far too 
rarely is that this can be enhanced by harnessing the skill and commitment of 
corporate staff in multi-professional teams.


I speak as someone who has worked as an operational healthcare manager, and at 
times I was infuriated by the sector’s hierarchical structures. But I was 
invigorated when I had the opportunity to work in partnership with clinical 
leaders and the people who use our services.


At the Health Foundation <http://www.health.org.uk/> we recognise that 
corporate and support staff – such as HR, estates and IT – can be key to 
boosting quality and efficiency, yet they are an often overlooked resource. So 
a few years ago we started a programme calledShared Purpose 
<http://www.health.org.uk/programmes/shared-purpose> to help clinical and 
corporate teams work together to improve care. We believed that creating a 
platform for collaboration between these groups would improve their impact and 
their ability to sustain improvements over the long term.


Related: In 2016, the NHS must harness the power of staff and patients 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/jan/19/nhs-harness-power-staff-patients>

One of the projects we supported was a team at Northumbria healthcare NHS 
foundation trust <https://www.northumbria.nhs.uk/>, which was seeking to 
transform care for older people.Dignity in practice 
<http://www.health.org.uk/programmes/shared-purpose/projects/dignity-practice-understanding-and-responding-needs-frail-older>
 was ambitious and wide reaching; it aimed to understand and address the 
barriers to dignified care, including a range of initiatives to ensure the 
workforce, environment and clinical care were fit for purpose. This was 
achieved by aligning the work of the trust’s HR and patient-experience staff 
with that of the clinical staff.


The team created eight elder-friendly wards, with nutrition assistants to 
promote more choice, extra snacks and sociable eating. Age UK representatives 
were invited to observe teams and give feedback to help improve services. 
Information resources and a telephone helpline were also introduced.

The staff induction programme was changed to provide an upfront message on 
dignity and the “Northumbria way”. Peer support and resilience training were 
provided to ward managers and a new framework for recruitment based on values 
was introduced. More than 500 managers have now been trained in values-based 
recruitment, and more than 2,000 members of staff selected in this way.

The trust has introduced a live reporting system to track the patient 
experience of dignity and respect, and regularly publishes the ratings of 
senior medical staff. And national survey results show the percentage of staff 
members who believe that high quality care is the number one priority has risen 
from 63% in 2011 to 86% in 2015.

Last week, Northumbria was named the best trust in the country for patient 
experience 
<https://www.northumbria.nhs.uk/news/%E2%80%98top-hospital%E2%80%99-northumbria-named-best-patient-experience>
. In itsrecent report 
<http://www.cqc.org.uk/content/northumbria-healthcare-nhs-foundation-trust-rated-outstanding-chief-inspector-hospitals>
, the Care Quality Commission (CQC) rated the trust as outstanding, only the 
fourth trust to be given this rating. Compassionate care was one of four 
factors behind the rating, with the CQC citing the Shared Purpose programme as 
a contributing factor.


Related: NHS staff survey reveals pressures and positives of work on the 
frontline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/feb/26/nhs-staff-survey-reveals-pressures-and-positives-of-work-on-the-frontline>

This project – and others from the Shared Purpose programme 
<http://www.health.org.uk/sites/default/files/THF%20Celebrating%20Shared%20Purpose%20AW%20v2_0.pdf>
 (pdf) – show just what can be achieved when corporate and clinical teams work 
collaboratively. It was driven by a strong team, inspirational leaders and 
senior executives who understood the impact this work could have on the wider 
organisational culture.


As a result, the team has created the conditions in the trust to allow staff 
members to personalise the care they provide, to celebrate successes and to 
support the intrinsic values and motivations of healthcare professionals – 
whether from a clinical or non-clinical background.

Successes such as these should be held up as examples for others to learn from 
and to counter lazy narratives about back-office waste.


And at a time when there is a renewed push to reduce management and 
administration costs in the NHS – with the recentCarter Review 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/review-shows-how-nhs-hospitals-can-save-money-and-improve-care>
 proposing a 7% spending cap – they should serve as a warning that cutting 
corporate functions in a crude or arbitrary way could hinder our ability to 
reform and improve services in the future.


Libby Keck is a programme manager at the Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Foundation

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
