
So I fell in love with your mother when you were pretty small. It was a deep 
love, and it still is today. I knew nothing would stand in the way of me being 
with your mother from then onwards, and I still feel that way, despite your 
best efforts.

She told me about you on our first date, and I thought I could handle this, 
handle you. She was worried that you would be jealous. Her ex-partner was 
controlling and jealous, and often I think you have picked up on his 
behaviours, as any small child would. So when you make no secret of wanting me 
to be elsewhere, I try not to take it personally. I blame the ex. I blame the 
autism.

When the three of us go for a walk, I wander ahead alone, giving you your 
mother’s attention, which you crave. I can hear you talking at her, about 
nothing in particular, just enjoying the one-on-one time. You’re a child, I’m 
an adult, and adulthood is about compromise.

Picking my battles took me nearly half a dozen years to get close to 
comprehending. I used to rail against the autism when it stopped you wearing a 
certain pair of socks, or had you screaming until the air-con was turned off in 
a boiling holiday apartment. These days, I don’t engage with the conflict, 
mostly by not engaging with you. We are often strangers sharing a home. You 
still scream and shout and cry. I help you, and you don’t say thank you without 
being prompted.

Related: What I’m really thinking: the recruitment consultant 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/aug/29/what-really-thinking-recruitment-consultant>

The future scares me. Will you be able to live your own life one day? Or will 
you always be here, and will your presence eventually dim my love for your 
mother?

• Tell us what you’re really thinking – email mind@theguardian.com 
<mailto:mind@theguardian.com>
