
England’s goalless draw with Slovakia was the most-watched game of Euro 2016 
to date with almost 14 million viewers.


The draw, which secured England’s progress to the knockout stages of the 
tournament, had a match average of 12.8 million viewers on ITV and another 1 
million viewers onITV2 <http://www.theguardian.com/media/itv2>, with a combined 
five-minute peak of 15.1 million.

Related: England come second as Roy Hodgson’s gamble backfires in Slovakia 
stalemate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/20/england-slovakia-euro-2016-match-report>

The game was not shown on ITV in Wales, which broadcast Wales’ 3-0 thumping of 
Russia. It had a match average of 800,000 viewers and had another 600,000 
viewers nationwide on ITV4, a total of 1.4 million.

England’s game against Slovakia was up on the previous highest audience, the 
12.9 million viewers who watched the 90 minutes of England’s opening 1-1 draw 
with Russia 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/13/england-euro-2016-opener-years-most-watched-programme>
, also on ITV.

Overall, ITV’s Tuesday night football coverage had 10.4 million viewers, a 
45.7% share, 9.8 million watchingEngland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> and 600,000 watching ITV Wales.

It was up on the 9.2 million average (43%) for its coverage of the Russia game 
on 11 June.


England’s second game of the tournament, England’s 2-1 win over Wales, had an 
overall average of 6.6 million viewers 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/17/englands-wales-bbc-live-streaming-euro-2016-bbc1>
, lower than the other two games because it was shown in the afternoon on 16 
June. It was also streamed live by a record 2.3 million people on the BBC Sport 
website.

The Wales game was shown on ITV4 for viewers in the rest of the country who 
wanted to watch it. The England game was on ITV2 for viewers in Wales who 
wanted to watch England.

Last night’s football, with a combined average of 10.4 million viewers for 
both the England and Wales games on ITV, just topped the year’s previous 
highest rating show, the 10.3 million viewers who watched the second episode of 
ITV’s Britain’s Got Talent on 16 April.
