
The leaders of the UK's three main political parties have signed a pledge 
<http://www.dailyrecord.co.uk/news/politics/david-cameron-ed-miliband-nick-4265992>
 to give more powers to Scotland if it rejects independence.

The letter, signed by David Cameron, Ed Miliband and Nick Clegg, appears on 
the front page of Tuesday'sDaily Record newspaper 
<http://www.dailyrecord.co.uk/news/politics/david-cameron-ed-miliband-nick-4265992>
. It promises "extensive new powers" for the Scottish parliament "delivered by 
the process and to the timetable agreed" by the three parties, and says the 
Scottish parliament will be made permanent.

The yes campaign said a vote for independence in Thursday's referendum was the 
only way to guaranteeScotland <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> got the 
powers it needed.

In the joint letter, the party leaders agree that "the UK exists to ensure 
opportunity and security for all by sharing our resources equitably across all 
four nations". The letter also states: "Because of the continuation of the 
Barnett allocation for resources and the powers of the Scottish parliament to 
raise revenue, we can state categorically that the final say on how much is 
spent on the NHS will be a matter for the Scottish parliament."

A spokesman for Yes Scotland said: "It's clear that 'project panic' is willing 
to say anything in the last few days of the campaign to try to halt the yes 
momentum – anything except what new powers, if any, they might be willing to 
offer.

"The reality is that the only way to guarantee Scotland gets all the powers we 
need to create jobs and protect our NHS is with a Yes vote on Thursday – so 
that we can use our enormous wealth to create a better and fairer country."

Earlier on Monday, Gordon Brown said new powers for Scotland in the event of a 
no vote would unite the country. The former prime minister said there must be 
three guarantees: new powers to the Scottish parliament; fairness to 
Scotland;and the power to spend more on the NHS if that is the wish of Scottish 
people.

Last week Brown set out his proposed schedule for new powers to be transferred 
north, saying work on it would start immediately after the referendum. The 
Labour, Conservative and Liberal Democrat leaders in Scotland then came 
together to endorse the timetable for a new transfer of powers from Westminster 
to Holyrood.

Scotland's first minister, Alex Salmond, described last week's united front by 
the pro-union parties as a "retreading" and "repackaging" of earlier 
statements. He said at the time: "It's totally inadequate, it's not enough. 
It's nothing approaching the powers that Scotland needs to create jobs, to save 
the health service and build a better society."

• Read the party leaders' letter in full 
<http://i4.dailyrecord.co.uk/incoming/article4265480.ece/alternates/s615b/1.jpg>
