
Slavery, trafficking, murder and corruption at all levels of government still 
pervadeThailand’s billion-dollar fishing industry 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jul/20/thai-fishing-industry-implicated-enslavement-deaths-rohingya>
, activists claim, despite recent arrests linked to human rights abuses and the 
threat of an EU-wide boycott.

The Thai government has implemented measures to crack down on trafficking and 
arrested more than 100 people since the EU issued its “yellow card” last April,
threatening a ban on seafood imports 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jul/23/thai-seafood-products-banned-europe-mep-gabriel-mato>
 unless Thailand cleaned up illegal fishing and labour abuses.

Related: Revealed: how the Thai fishing industry trafficks, imprisons and 
enslaves 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jul/20/thai-fishing-industry-implicated-enslavement-deaths-rohingya>

But activists claim too little has changed in the industry, which is estimated 
to be worth $7bn (£5bn) a year, despite Thai authorities and private businesses 
claiming they are confident they are on the right track to avoid the ban.

“Our investigations at sea and across the Thai seafood sector continue to find 
extensive violence, corruption and abuse,” said Steve Trent, director of the
Environmental Justice Foundation (EJF) <http://ejfoundation.org/>, an NGO that 
has been working with the Thai government on the issue.

“Slaves are still on the boats; nationals of neighbouring states are still 
trafficked in to provide cheap or free labour, and Thai fishing vessels 
continue to fish illegally and unsustainably, thereby reinforcing the economic 
incentives to use bonded, forced and slave labour to keep the costs down.”

Investigations by the Guardian 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/jun/10/supermarket-prawns-thailand-produced-slave-labour>
 over the past two years found that Thai and migrant slaves are used on 
trawlers that catch fish sold in the US, UK and elsewhere in Europe.

In 2014, the US State Department’s trafficking in persons (Tip) report 
<http://www.state.gov/j/tip/rls/tiprpt/2015/> downgraded Thailand to tier three 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/jun/20/thailand-qatar-downgraded-human-trafficking-report>
, the lowest ranking, and the country has remained there.

Since the EU’s yellow card warning last April 
<http://thaiembassy.se/minmapp/News%20and%20Announcement/Unregulated%20Fishing%202.pdf>
, Thai authorities have enactedlegislation to curb trafficking and illegal 
fishing 
<http://www.thaigov.go.th/index.php/en/government-en1/item/99291-99291.html>. 
Measures adopted include an illegal, unregulated and unreported (IUU) fishing 
enforcement act in alignment with EU regulations, and labour laws preventing 
under-18s from working on boats and in seafood processing factories. A command 
centre to combat illegal fishing (CCCIF) has also been introduced, with a remit 
to track every fishing vessel in Thailand’s 42,000-strong fleet through a new 
registration and monitoring system.

Last month, seafood companies signed a memorandum of understanding with the 
command centre pledging to eliminate products in their supply chains that had 
been obtained through illegal fishing, labour or trafficking.Thai Union Group 
<http://www.thaiunion.com/en/home.ashx>, the world’s biggest tuna exporter, is 
among the signatories 
<http://www.seafoodsource.com/news/environment-sustainability/thailand-announces-regulations-to-rid-forced-labor-from-seafood-supply-chain>
.Charoen Pokphand (CP) Foods <http://www.cpfoods.co.uk/>, which the Guardian 
previously exposed 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/jun/10/supermarket-prawns-thailand-produced-slave-labour>
 as having slavery in its supply chain, is also a signatory..

An EU delegation visited Thailand last month  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/21/eu-investigators-to-decide-on-thai-fishing-industry-ban-over-slave-labour>
to reassess the situation, but has not yet commented on its findings.

Thailand, the world’s third-largest seafood exporter, is desperate to avoid 
the crippling effects of an EU-wide ban. A boycott could cost the south-east 
Asian nation $1bn a year 
<http://www.eubusiness.com/news-eu/thailand-fishing.12m8/>.

The military government ruling Thailand, which came to power in a 2014 coup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/22/thailand-army-chief-announces-military-coup>
, says the crackdown on trafficking is a major achievement. “Measures 
implemented since last April have been aimed at halting all illegal fishing, 
installing monitoring systems on fishing boats and eliminating the use of child 
and slave labour,” the CCCIF’s Benjamaporn Wongnakornsawongtold the Bangkok Post
 
<http://www.bangkokpost.com/news/general/825572/cleaner-image-for-thai-fish-industry>
.

“The CCCIF has been working on this issue with the EU’s cooperation for some 
time now. We’re confident we’re on the right track.”

According to independent investigations by the EJF, however, policing of 
fishing boats remains highly erratic; overfishing is rampant, driving the need 
for cheap and/or free labour; crew transfers still take place at sea, allowing 
slaves to remain unseen by authorities; and the number of convictions linked to 
trafficking has decreased – from 206 in 2014 to 169 in 2015.

“The root causes behind these abuses run very deep and to effectively address 
them it will be necessary to address the culture of clientelism and extensive 
corruption, both in the business community and across the statutory agencies of 
the state,” Trent said. “There needs to be a huge effort to build a much wider, 
broadly accepted culture of compliance, along with an effective monitoring and 
enforcement regime that can deal with the worst offenders, criminal elements 
and thugs who have characterised these issues in the Thai seafood sector.”
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F20%2Fthailand-fishing-industry-rohingya-trafficking-slavery-rape-video&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F20%2Fthailand-fishing-industry-rohingya-trafficking-slavery-rape-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F9%2F1436456131246%2FKP_347465_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Thai%20fishing%20industry%20turns%20to%20trafficking%3A%20'We%20witnessed%20girls%20being%20raped%20again%20and%20again'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F20%2Fthailand-fishing-industry-rohingya-trafficking-slavery-rape-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Thai+fishing+industry+turns+to+trafficking%3A+%27We+witnessed+girls+being+raped+again+and+again%27+%E2%80%93+video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F20%2Fthailand-fishing-industry-rohingya-trafficking-slavery-rape-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F9%2F1436456131246%2FKP_347465_crop_640x480.jpg>
Thai fishing industry turns to trafficking: ‘We witnessed girls being raped 
again and again’ – video 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2015/jul/20/thailand-fishing-industry-rohingya-trafficking-slavery-rape-video>
In spite of the ruling junta’s “genuine and serious” efforts to wipe out 
trafficking, the military government may be preventing real progress, said 
Thitinan Pongsudhirak, director of theInstitutes of Security and International 
Studies <http://www.isisthailand.org/>.

“A top-down government with absolute power ironically lacks mechanisms to 
solve human trafficking problems at home, due to both a lack of cooperation and 
corruption from agencies and personnel involved. Rectifying human trafficking 
cannot simply be ordered and delivered from the top – it involves carrots and 
sticks on the ground.”

In an industry that relies heavily on migrant labour – more than 90% of those 
working in the fishing sector 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/jun/10/-sp-migrant-workers-new-life-enslaved-thai-fishing>
 are from neighbouring countries, many of them trafficked – it is up to the 
government to create a framework that protects migrant workers both on the 
ground and at sea. Yet Thailand has failed to implement such a strategy, 
putting millions of workers at unnecessary risk, claims migrant rights activist 
Andy Hall.

“The government migration policy continues to be short term and, in many ways, 
continues to promote the smuggling and trafficking of people irregularly across 
borders and in and out of work whilst undermining formal and safer migration 
channels,” says Hall. “There have also been many kneejerk reactions to public 
pressure in the seafood sector that have impacted negatively on workers in the 
supply chain.”

Wiping out all forms of slavery – from trafficking to bonded work and 
everything in between – is no easy task in an industry that has depended on 
slavery, and profited from it, for decades.

But some local businesses say Thailand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/thailand> has already done enough cleaning 
up to prove the EU – and the world – wrong.

“Thailand can guarantee that as of January 2016, there is no illegal labour in 
the Thai fishing industry,” Thiraphong Chansiri, the president and chief 
executive of Thai Union Group, recently claimed. “The country does not deserve 
such a ban.”
