
When I was growing up we had a rule in our house which explains quite a lot: 
we couldn't say we didn't like something unless we'd tried it at least once. 
While this was generally a rallying cry for life – my mother would probably 
have agreed with Sir Thomas Beecham that everything was worth a go, bar Morris 
dancing and incest – in childhood it mostly pertained to the dinner table. And 
so I was the one who would taunt his primary school friends with stories of 
slurping raw oysters, while they recoiled.

I still try to keep to this rule. For example I once ate salt-fermented sea 
cucumber in a very serious Tokyo restaurant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/nov/21/japan.lifeandhealth>. It tasted 
as you might imagine licking the slime off a fish that has been left to fester 
in a warm room for three days might taste; it had the tang of bilge and 
entrail. I decided I had ticked it off the list; I didn't ever have to do that 
again. Indeed, immediately afterwards, given the choice, I'd have strapped on 
the ankle bells and joined in with the Morris dancers rather than repeat the 
fermented sea-cucumber thing.

However, a new survey has made me question my behaviour. According to the 
website Ask Jeeves, nearly 30% of people in Britain have tried tripe once and 
will never do so again. As a man who cares far too much about his lunch this 
strikes me as a Very Real Tragedy. I know I'm meant to applaud the 30% and 
respect their decision, while rolling my eyes at the others. But I don't 
respect the ones who gave it a go. I simply don't think they were trying hard 
enough.

Tripe <http://tripemarketingboard.co.uk/> is lovely. Admittedly, you have to 
have it cooked by someone who knows what they're doing; someone like the great 
cookery writer Simon Hopkinsonwho once brought me a Tupperware box of his tripe 
stew <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/aug/11/houseandgarden.features11> 
as a thank you for being taken on a review. It had a deep, dark sticky quality 
as of the very best dishes made from the forgotten bits of animals. Yes, there 
was a hint of the farmyard and there was an echo of death. But that's a good 
thing; some of the greatest of foods are like that.

The refuseniks need to try tripe again. And again. And again. Until they 
finally get the point of it. For once can never be enough. I'm not going to be 
dictatorial about this. There has to be a cut-off point. But I do think at 
least half a dozen attempts are in order, which is what I chalked up with the 
bitter thump ofthe campari, gin and vermouth-based negroni 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/aug/18/jay-rayner-grown-up-cocktails>
. And even then I admitted my dislike for negronis was a personal failing.

It's the same with tripe. You can say you don't like it, but you really have 
to have made the effort. Twenty-five per cent of respondents said they had 
tried both Marmite and whisky once and would never again let it past their 
lips; 16% had made the solitary effort with octopus. Really! Octopus! I despair.

Sometimes it's simply about leaving a healthy gap between attempts. As we age 
our tastes change. Long into my 20s I hated salted anchovies and goat's cheese. 
I came back to them again and again. Now I love them. Because that's the only 
proper way to attack the global larder: with conviction. Of course, I do 
recognise what this means. I understand what I have to do, and it doesn't 
involve Morris dancers. Anybody got some salt-fermented sea cucumber?
