
As the car industry works towards its inevitable driverless future, so the 
idea of what a car can be is open to overhaul. In a new era of personal 
transport, the way we travel will change beyond recognition: hours spent 
gripping the wheel in a traffic jam, or spent bored on a long journey, will be 
a thing of the past.

Driverless vehicles may not look hugely different from the outside but, with 
drivers liberated, the interior yields infinite possibilities.


Related: When nature inspires innovation, the results are incredible – gallery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/renault-on-road-revolution/gallery/2016/may/19/when-nature-inspires-innovation-the-results-are-incredible-gallery>

To explore the potential of driverless transport, Renault approached Central 
Saint Martins with a brief for its first-year industrial design MA students, in 
which it asked them to respond on how driverless car interiors will be adapted 
to suit passengers.


With existing cars, interior ergonomics are designed around the driver, but 
driverless cars open up a far greater flexibility. In this unique competition, 
students considered how designers could take advantage of seating arrangements 
that no longer require a driver to be facing forward. They also explored the 
possibilities of using eco-friendly materials and technologies and how time 
might be enjoyed – rather than endured – within a driverless vehicle.

Nine groups of students took part in the project, presenting their first 
tranche of design responses to a panel of judges that included Anthony Lo, 
Renault’s vice president of exterior design, in April 2016. Each group 
presented three interior concepts, using video, sketches, models and 
photography – the judges selected the most exciting response presented by each 
group.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F165898852&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F165898852&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F165898852>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F165898852&media=>
The concepts were diverse and ambitious. Students drew on a range of existing 
technology, including wearable tech, augmented reality, light therapy and 
holograms, to formulate their ideas. This was mixed with conceptual thinking 
that covered everything from cars that could purify air - inand outside the 
vehicle - to a psychedelic, gyroscopic interior design inspired by 1960s pop 
art and lumen technology. One car would “grow” and improve with age; another 
was designed with low-impact materials, including seaweed and mushrooms; one 
vehicle was designed around a portable gym, turning a sedentary commute into an 
opportunity for daily exercise.


“I was blown away by the variety of ideas,” said Lo. “The diversity was 
completely unexpected. Lots of them picked up on personalisation and many 
conceptual ideas were believable. I was particularly pleased to see one group 
thinking about exercise; it made me wonder if we could actually harness kinetic 
energy to power the car.”


 “There are no limits to the potential of a driverless car,” says student 
Calixte Ollagnier, whose group used airbags as the inspiration for an “office 
space” interior with a social seating configuration. “When we’re working on a 
client brief, it’s about freedom of creativity. We’ve got a line to follow, but 
it’s not a constraint. We can manage it how we want.”

“I’m interested in conceptual design and designing for the future,” says 
student Yoori Lee. Her group presented a rental car concept that included a 
robotic hammock and used fingerprint technology to instantly personalise the 
interior. “On our personal projects we rely on instinct, so it was very 
exciting to hear feedback from Renault. I don’t like driving myself, because 
I’m afraid of causing an accident, so I’d be delighted with an autonomous car.”

Nick Rhodes, programme leader on the industrial design programme at Central 
Saint Martins, says the project isn’t just about designing vehicle interiors. 
“It’s thinking about what those spaces are actually going to be. We’re so used 
to the car and have a certain idea of what it should be: the autonomous vehicle 
is changing that completely. When we’re no longer in control, it isn’t a symbol 
of potency or freedom in the same way. It changes the meaning of the space.


“This project is challenging because the students have had to think and work 
through that change, crystallising their ideas so they look compelling, have 
originality and respond to the way humans will want to engage in a space that’s 
in transit.”


Now in the final stages of that challenge, each student group will develop its 
final concept and, after another consultation with the judges in May, the three 
most exciting proposals will be displayed at Clerkenwell Design Week (24-26 
May). The overall winner of the competition will also be announced at the 
festival.





This article was amended on 26 May 2016 to correct the spelling of Calixte 
Ollagnier
