
It is a truth grimly acknowledged that mental health services are the 
Cinderella chapter of the modern-dayNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> tale, albeit one where Prince Jeremy 
proves to be a disappointing suitor and there’s no happy ending in sight.

NHS England’s pledge to transform mental health services with an extra £1bn a 
year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/15/nhs-vows-to-transform-mental-health-services-with-extra-1bn-a-year>
 is greeted with scepticism with those of us at the coal face, reachingbreaking 
point 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/feb/01/mental-health-care-pushed-breaking-point-lack-beds-psychiatrists-nhs-hospitals>
after years starved of funding.

I work as a bed manager for an NHS provider of in-patient, specialist and 
community mental health services. There is a national bed crisis: every day bed 
managers at the acute end of services up and down the country juggle constant 
demands from multiple agencies. I’m often faced with harried community mental 
health professionals, struggling to manage a newly-detained unwell individual 
while surrounded by exasperated police and ambulance workers, collectively 
waiting for the private sector to decide whether they’ll provide a bed halfway 
up the M1.

Given the absence of NHS beds, coupled with community services that are often 
ill-equipped to support individuals who might once have been hospitalised, we 
rely increasingly on the private sector to fill the gaps. But private provision 
tends to favour the worried well, neatly excluding the more challenging 
candidates who actually need admission. It’s also costly andoften located 
several counties away 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/dec/05/nhs-mental-health-care-2000-people-sent-away>
 from a patient’s home.

Once you’ve been dissed by a lord on Twitter and then shamed on local radio, 
it’s time to clear your desk

Patients and carers are understandably angry when a local bed can’t be sourced 
at point of admission. We can’t even give a commitment that patients will be 
transferred back during their treatment, since any local bed that becomes 
available is snapped up by someone who needs it – such as those breaching A&E 
time limits, or agitatedly cluttering up police cells, or detained in 
incommodious hospital “section 136 suites”, or, worst of all, caged in fear in 
the back of a police van.

Achieving admission to an acute mental health unit is more complicated than 
you might imagine. A vacant bed is often the end result of a series of actions: 
if one link in the chain snaps, the whole thing buckles. An untimely outbreak 
of diarrhoea and vomiting on a ward; staff sickness or a no-show by agency 
staff; discharge medication not dispensed in time for the bed’s current 
occupant; or family concern that discharge of their relative is premature – all 
these scenarios will scupper a planned admission at the last moment.

And beds are frequently blocked due to inadequate community support or a lack 
of suitable accommodation. Even when beds are available, some units are in no 
fit state to admit patients. Many wards are bleeding permanent staff who’ve had 
enough, resulting in under-staffing and transient agency workers (when they can 
get them) who are often expected to manage disturbed behaviour and even 
physical aggression, thus rendering the acute ward environment unsafe for both 
patients and staff.


The beleaguered bed manager can expect to field regular crisis calls from 
police officers exercising their powers to convey vulnerable individuals from a 
public place to a designated place of safety. Recently, I’ve seen disgruntled 
police, and even a Lord, take to Twitter to complain about bed managers unable 
to produce a suite not already occupied (and with a queue forming). I also 
heard a discussion on the radio about an incident involving a lack of local 
beds, during which the presenter added for good measure, “and the bed manager 
apparently wasn’t very helpful”. Once you’ve been dissed by a lord on Twitter 
and then shamed on local radio, it’s time to clear your desk.

Related: I wish I could do more to protect your loved ones in mental health 
crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/jan/23/mental-health-crisis-hospital-bed-suicide>

Bed management has given me an insight into the less savoury aspects of police 
conduct; many officers are courteous and sympathetic, but others have been 
known to resort to bullying and intimidation. One female officer insinuated 
that my failure to provide a suite rendered me personally culpable for any 
offence that might be committed by the individual on the loose; in case I was 
in any doubt, she helpfully referred to a recent notorious murder.

Bed managers, unloved and misunderstood, are the forgotten workers of the NHS. 
Perhaps every organisation needs a scapegoat, and faceless bed managers are 
easy to blame. Frequently expected to produce a bed out of thin air, we swiftly 
acquire protective skills, such as how to argue pointlessly with complete 
strangers. At the start of each new shift we sit, smiling bravely and bracing 
ourselves for the usual tsunami of demand for beds that don’t exist and 
probably never will. And every day we wonder: how much longer can this go on?

This series 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/series/public-servant-my-letter-to-the-public>
 aims to give a voice to the staff behind the public services that are hit by 
mounting cuts and rising demand, and so often denigrated by the press, 
politicians and public. If you would like to write an article for the series, 
contacttamsin.rutter@theguardian.com <mailto:tamsin.rutter@theguardian.com>.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
