
The demographics of Oxbridge are regularly discussed in the media. Are 
sufficient numbers of state school students being admitted? Are ethnic 
minorities proportionally represented? Is there sufficient diversity? But there 
is far less discussion about whether equity of opportunity extends to Oxbridge 
staff, and the implications this could have on the quality of teaching and 
research.

Having been educated and now employed in the Oxbridge system, I know there are 
at least some opportunities for academics with unconventional backgrounds. I 
was the first member of my family to attend university, so my path to Oxbridge 
was somewhat unusual. But there are growing numbers like me; I regularly meet 
young academics from humble beginnings, who have broken through the 
800-year-old glass ceiling into competitive academic and managerial posts.

We have overcome many obstacles to achieve faculty positions here. But I wish 
someone had informed us that the challenge was not getting in, but actually 
sustaining a life at Cambridge or Oxford.

After many years of misjudged optimism, I no longer believe that early-career 
positions at Oxbridge universities are viable for individuals without 
independent financial means. There are three key factors that have led me to 
this decision:

Related: Oxford and Cambridge outperformed on employability 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/jul/04/oxford-and-cambridge-outperformed-on-employability>

Salary

I can think of few professions where you are financially penalised for 
securing a job at the most prestigious employer in your sector, but this is the 
case at Oxbridge universities. Compared with staff at other English Russell 
Group universities, Oxbridge academics are paid rather poorly.The average 
non-professorial academic salary for all universities in the UK is £48,460 
<https://www.timeshighereducation.com/sites/default/files/Attachments/2015/03/30/d/p/v/average-salary-full-time-staff-2013-2014.pdf>
 (pdf); for English Russell Group universities this figure is £50,000 (or 
£54,000 if you restrict to the London Russell Group). Yet the median 
non-professorial academic salary at Oxbridge is £45,000.

I am not arguing that we deserve higher pay than our Russell Group peers, but 
I do question why our salaries dip so far below those paid by other 
institutions, especially given the combined wealth and success of the Oxbridge 
institutions.

Cost of living

Few academics are called to the profession by a dream of becoming wealthy. 
That does not mean, however, that we are prepared to be impoverished by it. 
Although it is well known that Cambridge and Oxford are almost as costly as 
London when it comes to buying and letting property, only London salaries 
account for the significant costs of living in one of the UK’s most expensive 
cities.

According to figures from the Office for National Statistics 
<http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/publications/re-reference-tables.html?edition=tcm%3A77-411659>
, in 2014 the average house prices in other English Russell Group cities ranged 
between three and four times the local median academic salary in each city. For 
Cambridge and Oxford this figure ranged between 6.8 and 7.7 times the median 
academic salary at Oxbridge universities – equivalent with London.

Related: Tug of war won't topple universities, says Oxford professor 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2014/feb/25/university-tug-of-war-policy-guardian-university-forum>

As anyone who knows anything about mortgages will tell you, this makes buying 
a house on a typical Oxbridge academic salary impossible without a considerable 
down payment. Aspiring to own your home is further complicated by the 
exorbitant price of rent – when bills and other unavoidable expenses are added 
to the cost of my modest accommodation, just keeping my bank balance in the 
black is a considerable challenge.

Workload

Oxbridge academic positions come with extremely high expectations. 
World-leading research, inspirational teaching, big-money grants, frequent 
high-impact publications and effective administration are not aspirations but 
conditions for promotion. To be an academic is to have a collection of jobs, 
all of which you are expected to excel at.

In my first few years as an Oxbridge academic, I regularly worked in excess of 
75 hours a week, just to keep on top of things. When I explain this to people 
of my parents’ generation, I’m told stories of the days when it was necessary 
to get a second, weekend job in order to save for a house or a child. However, 
the key difference is that these jobs tended to pay at the same (or similar) 
hourly rates. This was an opportunity to earn more money and reduce financial 
pressures by working a little bit harder.

This opportunity does not exist for many young academics, whose 
responsibilities encroach on their evenings and weekends — there is no option 
to top up earnings in your spare time.

And so...

Addenbrookes hospital in Cambridge was placed in special measures earlier this 
year as a result of serious staff shortages, which some have suggested could be 
a knock-on effect of spiralling living costs. As basic services fail in 
Cambridge and Oxford, so too will their ability to attract and retain young 
academic superstars. These universities will need to find a way to ease the 
strain if they hope to compete with international institutions and the London 
schools.

Related: Academics Anonymous: why I'm leaving academia 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2014/may/01/academic-anonymous-leaving-academia>

The Oxbridge name does open many doors but other opportunities, like home 
ownership and quality family time, are closed to me as long as I am here. In 
years gone by, a young academic with a permanent contract at one of these 
institutions could look forward to a financially comfortable life and a 
fulfilling Oxbridge career.

But this is no longer the case, as both cities have become expensive to the 
point of being unliveable and salaries have not kept pace. Junior academics, 
like junior doctors, are now looking abroad for employment opportunities — 
where academic salaries are higher and living costs more manageable.

My advice to talented young academics and scientists is to look elsewhere at 
this early stage of your career. Oxbridge is an attractive brand, but how much 
can you afford to pay for it?

This week’s anonymous academic works at an Oxbridge University.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. Email article 
pitches to us at highereducationnetwork@guardian.co.uk
