
I was born in the idyllic Taunus area in Hesse in the 1970s, and subsequently 
moved to various places all over Germany and abroad. Just recently I fulfilled 
my biggest wish and came back home to Frankfurt. I am quite happy and content 
near my family and friends, living in the most liberal town in Germany.

I am a partner at an international law firm and focus on a niche area: patents 
and employee inventions. Whenever I attend a meeting I am usually the only 
woman, or one of two, present.

I love music, both as a member of the audience and as an active musician. Ever 
since my school days, I have been playing the bassoon in several orchestras and 
chamber music ensembles. Needless to say, I was delighted when I read about the 
“Save the bassoon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/01/save-the-bassoon-campaign-endangered-instrument>
” campaignin the Guardian last year 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/aug/03/cursive-writing-music-education-museums>
.

I first came across the paper in 1999 while studying at Edinburgh University. 
At the time, I was looking for a newspaper that took a more balanced approach 
towards Europe. Back in Germany I continued to read the Guardian and often 
shared it with my late father. I have fond memories of discussing articles from 
the World and Review sections with him.Will Self 
<http://www.theguardian.com/profile/will-self> and Simon Callow 
<http://www.theguardian.com/profile/simon-callow> were among our favourites.

When my father passed away I stopped buying the Guardian for a short while, 
but missed the paper too much. My weekend now begins with the download of the 
Saturday edition. I specifically purchased an e-reader so I can get paper 
online wherever I happen to be. Not bad, is it, considering that I avoid 
unnecessary gadgets and therefore do not own a car or a TV set.

• If you would like to be interviewed in this space, send a brief note to 
good.to.meet.you@theguardian.com <mailto:good.to.meet.you@theguardian.com>
