
How good are you at reading other people’s minds? To find out, answer this one 
question: how often do you read literary fiction? Defining ‘literary’ versus 
‘popular’ fiction is not straightforward. Here are examples:

Literary fiction The Runner by Don DeLillo, Blind Date by Lydia Davis, 
Chameleon by Anton Chekhov, The Round House by Louise Erdrich, and The Tiger’s 
Wife by Téa Obreht.

Popular fiction Gone Girl by Gillian Flynn, The Sins of the Mother by Danielle 
Steel,Cross Roads by W Paul Young, and Too Many Have Lived by Dashiell Hammett.

Answer: (a) Never; (b) Maybe once a year; (c) Often, I usually have one on the 
go.

If you said “(c) Often”, you are probably adept at reading others’ minds, and 
understanding how they feel. The study in question randomly assigned 
participants to read one of the literary or popular fiction stories above, 
before giving them a number of tests. These included guessing the emotion being 
portrayed by an actor in a photograph, and guessing which of a number of 
possible people or objects the character in a visual scene is thinking about, 
wants, or dislikes.

Reading just one literary fiction book improved performance on these tests, 
whereas popular fiction and non-fiction did not. The authors suggest that 
literary fiction offers a safe space in which to practise understanding and 
interpreting others’ experience, without the risk of causing offence. More 
generally, the increase in literacy could have been one of the driving forces 
behind the decline of violence in society.

For a fully referenced version of this article, go to benambridge.com 
<http://pcwww.liv.ac.uk/~ambridge/links.htm>. Fancy some more quizzes? Order 
Psy-Q by Ben Ambridge (Profile Books, £8.99) or £6.99 from
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/305948/s/psy-q/>
