
Snake gourd, bitter gourd, ash gourd, I can barely write these names without 
grimacing. For the past few days I have been unraveling their jungly tendrils 
to attach them to a Tamil Nadu dwelling. They have most reluctant; homesick for 
their heated glasshouse in the heart of the Fens, being ably tended byDelfland 
Nurseries <http://www.delfland.co.uk/>’ owner John Overvoorde.


They are finally “planted” in our Chelsea flower show 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/chelseaflowershow> exhibit, but boy, 
have they been trouble. They arrived all carefully trained onto a bamboo 
trellis and needed to appear to be colonising our building. The chillies, 
aubergine, tomatoes, amaranthus went in without a fuss, and as for the 7m tall 
palm tree: it was a piece of cake. But as I ran out of time, arranging the 
gourd vines was rather like trying to untangle a kite on a windy beach.
 A detail from the Lifeworks Global garden by Tom Hoblyn. Photograph: Tom 
Hoblyn 
Last November, Lifeworks Global <http://lifeworks.global/> asked if I would 
help with theirChelsea exhibit <http://lifeworks.global/rhs-chelsea-2016/>, and 
when they told me the story, I was only too keen. Rural parts of Tamil Nadu are 
in trouble; overcropping using using unsavoury farming practices has left areas 
with lifeless and polluted soil. Vegetables are scarce and families are not 
getting a balanced diet. Lifeworks are assisting Tamil Nadu charitySCAD 
<http://www.scad.org.in/> (Social Change and Development) in providing free 
seed, subsidisedGrif-Aid <http://www.grifaid.org/> water filters and teaching 
families how to heal their soil using organic techniques. It is working well. 
Families are selling excess vegetables and ridding the need for moneylenders; 
families are also planting trees to improve the microclimate.

One fascinating technique to help heal the soil is the use of inoculated 
compost. Similar tomycorrhizal <https://www.rhs.org.uk/advice/profile?pid=633> 
recipes for the establishment of trees here in the UK, this compost contains 
all the beneficial fungi and bacteria that kickstart soil life once again. I 
have been trialling it at home with great success.


Owing to the short build time allowed, I have relied heavily on the film set 
industry to provide my Tamil Nadu-inspired dwelling, with skilled artists 
transforming a plywood structure into an authentic-looking building. 
Reassuringly, anyone who has been to Southern India has been extremely 
complimentary.

Related: ‘We had massive shed envy last year’: secrets of the Chelsea flower 
show revealed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/21/behind-the-scenes-chelsea-flower-show>

The budget has been tight and lots of favours have been called in. Even my 
offspring have been planting. Thankfully all the plants have homes for after 
the show, and the set will no doubt become another dwelling for a film. It has 
been been fun and rewarding for such a worthy cause. I do hope that if you’re 
visiting Chelsea, you’ll come and see us: if you can’t make the show in person, 
look out for us on the BBC’s coverage to find out more, or visit theLifeworks 
Global site <http://lifeworks.global/rhs-chelsea-2016/>. 

