
The SEAT 600 put Spain on the road, not just physically, but also 
psychologically. The country was entering a period of growth after the 
devastation of the civil war two decades earlier, and nothing more illustrated 
better times ahead than the increase in mobility that the little SEAT brought 
with it.

Related: SEAT unveils the Ateca - in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/inside-seat/gallery/2016/mar/11/seat-unveils-the-ateca-in-pictures>

Built under licence from Fiat – almost 30 years before SEAT became part of the 
Volkswagen Group – the 600 was a minimalist machine, simple and affordable. 
Larger than the iconic Fiat 500, the SEAT 600 was powered by a four-cylinder 
water-cooled engine, instead of the former’s air-cooled two-cylinder engine, 
which meant that it was quieter than the 500 and felt a little bit more 
sophisticated.


But people weren’t fussy – the SEAT 600 was affordable, more comfortable than 
a motorbike, it could carry the family and was made in Spain. That it was a bit 
short on creature comforts was of no concern to most customers. If it could get 
the family to church on Sunday and to the market during the week, it had done 
its job.


That there was no radio fitted was of no consequence, it was probably the 
family’s first car and possibly the first car that many young family members 
had been in. If the mood was for music, someone could sing or whistle.


How our expectations have changed over sixty years. Most of us would not 
consider buying a car that isn’t fitted with digital radio (what, no 
uninterrupted test match coverage?) or a satellite navigation system.

Obviously the owner of a 1957 SEAT 600 would be stunned by the dashboard on 
SEAT’s latest model, the Ateca, and the capabilities of the system displayed on 
it – but then so would we have been just a couple of years ago.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j3kx%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j3kx%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe276e014e3833b13987c24f2bf286d0eaed8b2f2%2F0_185_2800_1680%2F2800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20singing%20in%20the%20backseat%20to%20smartphone%20integration%3A%20in-car%20entertainment&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j3kx%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From+singing+in+the+backseat+to+smartphone+integration%3A+in-car+entertainment&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j3kx%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe276e014e3833b13987c24f2bf286d0eaed8b2f2%2F0_185_2800_1680%2F2800.jpg>
 The SEAT 600 brought mobility to the people of Spain. Photograph: SEAT 
Today, the Ateca comes with “infotainment” and “connectivity”. The difference 
between the two? It’s simple: infotainment refers to systems within the car; 
connectivity refers to the car’s ability to communicate with the outside world.


And the new Ateca is equipped to do both, with state-of-the-art safety 
equipment as well as information and entertainment technology. At the heart of 
the Ateca’s system is an 8in colour touch screen. Through this master control 
you can mirror your smartphone (calledFull Link 
<http://www.autoexpress.co.uk/seat/leon/93669/seat-full-link-in-car-infotainment-review>
, which incorporates MirrorLink smartphone connectivity) to the system to show 
your phone’s homescreen and apps – and the system is compatible with Apple 
CarPlay and Android Auto, making it highly versatile.

The Ateca’s infotainment and connectivity system brings more than 
entertainment and directions to your favourite restaurant, it keeps you safe 
while chatting to friends and family. Text messages are read out and Facebook 
and Twitter messages, too. Better still, they can be replied to via the voice 
activation facility.

The system allows you to control functions, such as music volume, by 
configuring a customised touch gesture. You can also have specific widgets, 
such as weather, or direct access to other menus, or even personalise the 
background of your display via the SEAT connect app.


Six decades apart in time and a world apart in sophistication they may be, but 
the SEAT 600 and Ateca have one thing in common: they fit perfectly in with 
their time, giving customers exactly what they want in 1957 and 2016.
