
If photographs define a person then I don’t really exist. Aside from a photo 
of my mother pregnant with me in the 1970s and the odd baby snap there are 
almost no photographs of my early life. Even later documentation is scarce. No 
graduation photographs, no 18th birthday. To conjure the past, I have to resort 
to that most unreliable of sources: memory.

The reason for this is twofold. Up until I was 11, my parents were members of 
a cult that encouraged its members to ditch material possessions. Later on, my 
parents became disillusioned and drifted from that lifestyle and each other. In 
the fall-out of a dissolving marriage, the accumulated matter of family life – 
toys, books, vinyl records and school clobber – was given away, sold or lost. A 
suitcase of photographs did exist once, full of the usual: bridesmaids, 
birthdays, Kodachrome back gardens and caravan holidays on the Isle of Wight. 
When our council house was taken away because we no longer constituted a 
“family”, forcing us all into decades of near unaffordable rented 
accommodation, the suitcase fell into the bottomless hole of transient living 
and nobody knows where it is now.

Over the years, this lack of photographic history has on occasion made me feel 
melancholy or a little unanchored. Visual images of the family unit are 
powerful symbols showing exactly where the child fits within the pattern of her 
own heritage. The child can see that she exists, belongs, is cherished and is 
cared for and kids love looking at photographs, at the miracle and strangeness 
of seeing parents once young, or great-grandpas in uniform.

Some years ago, without making a conscious connection to my own family 
photographs, I began collecting photos from car boot sales and charity shops. 
It started when I found a box of letters in Deptford market in south-east 
London that included photographs from the life of a woman from Calcutta who had 
moved to London in the 1950s. I became obsessed with figuring out the puzzle of 
her story from the documents in front of me. I then found a biscuit tin full of 
photographs of soldiers from the first world war and I haven’t stopped 
collecting since. I am particularly drawn to honeymoon albums from the 40s and 
50s (they pop up in charity shops with surprising regularity if you tune in to 
them). I also like packs of estate kids, or matriarchs in fabulous glasses. 
These albums have so much pathos, full of untold stories and ghost lives. As if 
the dead are calling out through the medium of light and paper to be 
remembered, objecting to be thrown away or unwanted.

The odd thing is, while I accumulate the paraphernalia of other lives, it 
occurred to me recently that throughout the decade of my married life and 
bringing up two young children, I have neglected to create family albums of my 
own, digital or physical. My son was born in 2008 and my daughter in 2010. Like 
most people I have taken a gazillion photographs of them across all manner of 
devices, mostly digital. The images exist in the file they download into, which 
is automatically dated. Everything on my phone is backed up on my laptop, 
everything on my laptop is backed up on one external hard drive, but otherwise 
they land where they fall. Occasionally I have a rash of printing a few out 
with a view to doing something with them, only to shove the packets into a 
drawer.

It was only when my daughter came home with a scrapbook lovingly made by her 
childminder – a journal outlining their time together from 18 months to four 
years old – that I was felled with grief and self-hate at never getting myself 
together to produce something similar. My daughter loves this book and pores 
over it, fascinated at the pictures of herself as a baby. Now six, it helps her 
to bridge the link between photographs and memory, to understand who she is and 
how she has changed. After seeing this, I vowed to become organised and act, 
but I didn’t; nothing changed. The digital images of birthdays, holidays and 
first days at school have piled up in a chaotic mess of pixels and I don’t know 
if they will ever be extracted from my laptop.

Why so casual and remiss, despite acutely feeling the lack of photographs from 
my own life? The truth is, looking at pictures of people I love makes me 
unbearably sad. I don’t know if it’s the passing of time, or self-reflection, 
or the heaviness of love. My response is to shove images under virtual rugs 
while at the same time constantly snap away with my phone camera.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jafn%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jafn%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe9a3c48898132b10505bd5f3e2fa2b5dc6483e4%2F0_200_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20if%20you%20had%20no%20family%20photographs%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jafn%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What+if+you+had+no+family+photographs%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jafn%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe9a3c48898132b10505bd5f3e2fa2b5dc6483e4%2F0_200_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
 Some of the photographs Suzanne has collected from car boot sales and junk 
shops. 
I spoke to a few friends about their personal relationship with family albums 
and photographs. One lost his family photographs dating from 1901 to the late 
1990s in a flood. He said the loss was devastating, akin to bereavement. 
Another friend’s teenage daughter makes a history of her life with physical 
family photographs on the wall in her room while at the same time enjoying 
editing digital photos. I’ve noticed that keepers of family archives are often 
(though of course not always) mothers. I know several who are diligent about 
filing, archiving and backing up their digital photos and who previously used 
to keep physical photographs in supreme order. It seems to me these admirable 
women display something I don’t: an assertive, secure sense of their own 
central and unshakable role in the heart of the family. It’s as if they have a 
grip on the past and are responsible for clearly defining everyone’s place in 
the scheme of things; the centre of their own familial universe as exemplified 
by the photographs.

Looking at the picture of my mum pregnant with me (the hesitancy and confusion 
in her eyes, I’m guessing about impending childbirth), I can see that along the 
line, domestic family photographs have become integrated with a precarious 
insecurity about motherhood for me. I have a contradictory resentment at my own 
mother for not caring for our photographs while I repeat the behaviour 
hypocritically. They have become signifiers of a psychological minefield 
instead of simply a picture of my daughter’s fifth birthday.

This is why photographs of strangers are easier to hold. There is nostalgia, 
history, a sense of trespass and wonder, but there isn’t the same 
shot-to-the-heart that comes from looking at photos of family. Pictures made 
from pixels differ fundamentally from those made from emulsion and paper, but I 
believe they trigger emotional responses equally. Whether it’s accidentally 
coming across an image of a dead person on a phone, or opening a forgotten box 
in an attic, photographs can crush a person. We are devastated if we mislay 
them yet are shoddy in our care for them. As if we secretly want to lose them.

The time has come for me to stop buying up pasts that don’t belong to me and 
concentrate on documenting the life of the people I love the most, who would 
benefit from the reassurance that someone in their life cares enough to create 
order out of the endless tide of frozen shots of time.

I need to put a picture of my children up on the wall in a statement frame 
that says “I love you” and “You belong here” and not leave it for the rainy 
Sunday that will never come. I don’t want to let floods and fires and 
bereavement wash everything away so that a stranger at a car boot sale will 
pick up a picture of my grandmother or me or my daughter and think, “I wonder 
who this is, wearing the yellow dress looking up at the sky? I wonder what her 
story was?”

• The Photographer’s Wife by Suzanne Joinson is published by Bloomsbury, 
£16.99. To order a copy for £12.99, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/395031/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min. p&p of £1.99.
