
News about Age UK selling insurance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/feb/04/age-uk-denies-pushing-customers-to-expensive-energy-tariffs>
 came as a surprise to many and raised a number of questions, including what 
was a charity doing selling things, and what is the difference between a 
charity and a business?

However, for most of us working in charities, trading has long been an 
accepted source of income. It generates unrestricted cash that, unlike grant 
funding, is flexible and enables a more dynamic approach, without having to 
wait months for grant approval from a funder. Here are some great examples of 
the ways in which charities are making their own money.

Related: Change the world and make money: how to start a charity business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/may/27/how-to-start-charity-business-fundraising-sustainability>

Painting and decorating

One great example is Bounce Back <http://bouncebackproject.com/>, a charity’s 
painting and decorating business that competes with companies across London. 
Bounce Back trainees are former offenders who are later employed in the 
business. Training and qualifications are funded through grants and donations, 
but a job in the business provides trainees with experience and references for 
future employment. As a charity, any surplus generated goes back into the 
organisation to support future trainees.

Letting agents

Charities must be clear about how trading contributes to their core charitable 
mission and the best examples strike a balance between making money and meeting 
a charitable need. I worked withThe Bond Board 
<http://www.thebondboard.org.uk/tenants/> when I was at Crisis 
<http://www.crisis.org.uk/?gclid=CML0q6i9wswCFYidGwodL7kLVw> and was impressed 
by its thoughtful approach to this.

The Bond Board set up Letting Out, a social lettings agency, to help more 
young people in Rochdale find decent rented homes. It spotted an opportunity to 
run a high-quality letting service, using landlord fees to cover costs and 
support tenants, but was aware that this may risk the charity’s mission as a 
supporter of vulnerable tenants. To be successful, The Bond Board listened to 
the needs of customers (landlords) as well as clients (tenants) to develop an 
attractive offer for both.

Selling to potentially vulnerable service users needs to be done with 
integrity, but can be an opportunity for both charity and beneficiary. I am a 
trustee of theNovus Homeshare <http://www.novus-homeshare.org.uk/> charity, 
which matches home owners in need of low-level support or companionship with 
would-be renters who can’t afford London rents. The charity’s charges for both 
parties are less than they would pay for equivalent services/lodgings, but 
cover Homeshare’s running costs.

Apps

Charities know the problems that need solving, and have access to the market 
for sales, but do not always have the resources to develop commercial 
solutions. Some charities address this through partnerships. I recently 
encountered Carers UK’sJointly <https://www.jointlyapp.com/#welcome> app, which 
helps carers to coordinate caring responsibilities. The app is aimed at working 
carers juggling multiple commitments who don’t use conventional carers’ 
services, and sales are targeted at individuals and companies supporting carers 
in their workforce. The app was developed with tech partners and is simple and 
affordable.

Related: Public prefer charity shops to eBay and Gumtree, study shows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/feb/27/public-prefer-charity-shops-online-marketplaces-ebay-gumtree>

Community amenities 

Another fascinating example is Westway Trust <http://www.westway.org/about-us>
, a large Kensington charity, that looks after the land under the Westway Road. 
The trust uses the land for commercial activities that generate funding for 
other community projects. The charity has funded projects and businesses that 
are entrepreneurial, including subsidised office space for charities in pricey 
Ladbroke Grove, highly regarded supplementary schools, a community gym, 
apprenticeships in creative industries, and funding for a programme of health 
and wellbeing work.

There are many examples in the sector of trading that combines bringing in the 
cash with operating in an ethical way, and when charities do trade we are able 
to capitalise on our sector’s creativity, knowledge and flexibility to develop 
great products that enhance our charitable cause.

For more news, opinions and ideas about the voluntary sector, join our 
community <https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/>.
