
When I was being interviewed to get my medical registration to practise as a 
doctor in Botswana, I was surprised to be given a stern warning: “There are 
only three circumstances when a patient may have an abortion: in cases of rape 
or incest, where there is a risk of life to the mother, or foetal abnormality, 
but only before 16 weeks.” I found it revealing that out of all the possible 
medical issues in Botswana, this was the one thing that was highlighted.

Botswana has restrictive abortion laws, but compared with many other countries 
they are pretty liberal. In many parts of the world, abortions are only allowed 
in extreme circumstances, if at all, and practicalities – for example, needing 
two police reports as proof of rape – often prove insurmountable barriers at 
the very time a woman needs the most sympathy and practical help.

Related: Why do a million women still suffer the treatable condition of 
fistula? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/23/why-do-a-million-women-still-suffer-the-treatable-condition-of-fistula>

In developing countries, the maternal mortality rate is a staggering 239 per 
100,000 women <http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs348/en/>, with an 
estimated 303,000 women dying in 2015. One in 10 of all maternal deaths are
caused by unsafe abortions 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2709326/>; an estimated 20m unsafe 
abortions 
<http://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/topics/unsafe_abortion/magnitude/en/> 
are performed every year.

We know that providing access to legal terminations would stop women dying, 
but this remains an issue that provokes huge debate.Women 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> who can’t access them legally 
still have abortions, but they have to pay bankrupting sums, often risking 
their lives.

Backstreet abortions are usually done in an unclean and unsafe environment. If 
they don’t kill women, they often put them in hospital with horrific 
complications, leaving them infertile, facing major abdominal surgery and 
enormous medical bills.

The US has a ban on any of its funding being spent on terminations for women

A walk around any gynaecology ward in Africa reveals women with the horrifying 
complications that result from an unsafe abortion. These can from use of the 
right medications at the wrong doses in an unclean environment to toxic 
substances or foreign bodies inserted into the uterus to disrupt the pregnancy.

What is stopping women from accessing safe abortions? The first is restrictive 
laws in their own countries, which can extend to a ban. The UK has an important 
role to play here and should put pressure on countries that receive its aid to 
change these illiberal laws. Ludicrously, this problem is compounded by the 
fact that countries with the most restrictive abortion laws often have the 
poorest family planning provision.

Related: Six of the best sex education programmes around the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/20/six-best-sex-education-programmes-around-the-world>

The second barrier is the tight regulation governing donor aid. The US has a 
ban on any of its funding being spent on terminations for women. TheHelms 
amendment 
<https://www.plannedparenthoodaction.org/community/planned-parenthood-global/helms-amendment-hurts-women-worldwide>
, a 43-year-old law, stipulates that abortions cannot be funded as a method of 
family planning. This means that no US foreign aid is spent on the provision of 
abortions or even advising or promoting abortion services for women. Recent 
headlines suggest that the US will not even allow its funds to be used to 
provideterminations for women who have been raped by Isis fighters 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2015/11/30/how-a-42-year-old-law-prevents-the-us-from-aiding-women-raped-by-isis/>
.

The US spends large amounts of its money on family planning 
<https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1864/fp_overview.pdf> 
(pdf) and this should be applauded. But family planning and the safe provision 
of abortions go hand in hand. They are two key components of women’s 
reproductive rights.

There is a hugely damaging knock-on effect of this policy. The US prohibits 
all organisations in receipt of its fundsfrom advising or providing abortion 
services 
<http://www.npr.org/sections/goatsandsoda/2016/05/02/467247415/should-the-u-s-reconsider-its-stand-on-foreign-aid-for-abortion-clinics>
. This means restrictions are also placed on donor aid from any other other 
countries that are also fellow funders in the same programmes. The only 
exception is where organisations can specifically segregate their funds in a 
way that isn’t usually practical.

This is not an issue of resources and funding, but a value judgment on what 
women may or may not do with their lives

We know that abortions, when performed legally, are cheap and safe. Yet the 
grim reality is that tens of thousands of women who die in the developing world 
each year from unsafe abortions do so because policymakers have decided their 
lives are not worth saving.

With changes in this policy, maternal mortality could be reduced for a low 
cost. The technology exists and is affordable. A misoprostol pill that induces 
an early stage abortion costs less than a dollar. This is not an issue of 
resources and funding, but a value judgment on what women may or may not do 
with their lives.

We will not reduce the world’s appalling rate of maternal mortality until we 
are clear about a woman’s right to choose. We have a key role in the UK to help 
US policymakers change this and ensure that donor aid is no longer subject to 
these counterproductive stipulations.

Related: My career’s biggest lesson: no women, no development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/apr/03/my-careers-biggest-lesson-no-women-no-development>

The sustainable development goals including a commitment to reduce maternal 
mortality. All countries across the world must look at their legislation and 
customs to ensure that illiberal abortion laws are not preventing the most 
vulnerable women from getting the help they so desperately need.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter. Join the conversation with the 
hashtag#SheMatters <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23SheMatters&src=typd>.
