
Spam doesn’t exactly conjure up images of culinary delights in most people’s 
mind, but in South Korea it’s an essential ingredient inbudae jjigae, a fusion 
stew made up of Korean instant noodles, Spam, hotdogs and kimchi. This 
US-influenced combination might not sound much like a traditional Korean dish, 
but it’s one that dates back to the Korean war, when people had little to eat 
and meat was a luxury.

The US army was stationed in Uijeongbu, an hour north of Seoul, and after the 
war surplus food stocks from the military base began to make their way into the 
surrounding areas. Creative Koreans concocted budae jjigae by taking unfamiliar 
American processed meats and boiling them up with Korean instant noodles, 
garlic, kimchi,gochujang (Korean chilli paste) and anything else they could get 
hold of (including baked beans and processed cheese) to create a spicy, hearty 
stew.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yeyk%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yeyk%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba4b37524f41c5f5aff14f4ef6adf35cd110f279%2F0_106_6016_3611%2F6016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gettin'%20jjigae%20with%20spam%3A%20a%20US%2FSouth%20Korean%20fusion&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yeyk%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gettin%27+jjigae+with+spam%3A+a+US%2FSouth+Korean+fusion&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4yeyk%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba4b37524f41c5f5aff14f4ef6adf35cd110f279%2F0_106_6016_3611%2F6016.jpg>
 Shopping at a market in Busan, South Korea. Photograph: Ben Weller 
Budae jjigae is still loved all over Korea, and is often enjoyed as the 
perfect partner to a few glasses ofsoju (Korean rice spirit). One of the best 
places to try it is theSim Seun Tang 
<https://ko.foursquare.com/v/%EC%8B%AC%EC%8A%A8%ED%83%95/4d4be5132d0d8cfaf0e0c825>
 restaurant in the Hongdae area of Seoul. Not only is the budae jjigae here 
rich and delicious, but they also give you extras of garlic, soy sauce and 
butter to mix with your rice – an old way of eating rice that was also born in 
Korea’s poor, post-war past.

Other great places to eat it in are Odeng Sikdang 
<http://www.odengsikdang.com/index.php> (Uijeongbu), Bada Sikdang (Itaewon, 
Seoul) andDaewoo Sikdang 
<https://ko.foursquare.com/v/%EB%8C%80%EC%9A%B0%EC%8B%9D%EB%8B%B9/4b8a4a0ef964a520246732e3>
 (Yeoksam, Seoul).

Da-Hae West, co-author of K Food: Korean Home Cooking and Street Food, 
published by Mitchell Beazley (£20)
