
Green, white and purple sashes, powerful placards and large-scale marches – 
these are the hallmarks of feminist protest from days gone by. But while the 
suffragettes, and other activists, might have firmly etched such images on the 
public consciousness, a new wave of protesters are taking up the fight in 
inventive and surprising ways.


Marches are still important – and effective – of course, but with protests 
that don’t always involve rallies or banners, women around the world are also 
finding their own unique ways of making their point.

To celebrate International Women’s Day 
<http://viewer.gutools.co.uk/world/international-womens-day>, here are a 
collection of recent and varied examples that might inspire you to take your 
own stand. Some are individuals, who have reported their actions to theEveryday 
Sexism Project <http://www.everydaysexism.com/>. Others have hit the headlines 
with their unconventional and startling techniques for disrupting gendered 
oppression. Whether deeply personal or very public, all of them are finding new 
ways to stand up to inequality.


When media outlets in the Indian state of Kerala reported that 45 female 
employees had been strip-searched after a used sanitary towel was found in a 
factory toilet, feminist activists didn’t take it lying down. Campaign group 
Kiss of Love launched an action calledRed Alert 
<https://www.facebook.com/events/1016428895039650/> in January last year, 
calling on women to send sanitary towels (“used or unused”) to the marketing 
director of the company where the incident occurred.


Related: International Women's Day 2016 – live! 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/live/2016/mar/08/international-womens-day-2016-iwd-live>

Meanwhile, at the beginning of this year, a group of women in Mexico City 
calling themselves “Las Hijas de Violencia” (Daughters of Violence) found a 
novel way to tackle street harassers,using confetti guns and punk rock 
<http://www.refinery29.com/2016/01/102093/mexico-city-hijas-de-violencia-fight-catcalling-confetti>
. The group told online news channelAJ+ 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0ze4AH_5kJw>:

“When we are walking down the street and someone harasses us in any way … we 
run after this person, we grab our confetti guns, we shoot once, we turn on the 
speakers and we sing Sexista Punk.”

Their song <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0ze4AH_5kJw> includes the lyrics, 
“What you’ve done to me is called harassment,” and explains how these women are 
choosing to “respond” to such provocation rather than accept it as the norm.


Young people around the world have also been finding new and 
attention-grabbing ways to protest against sexist school dress codes, which 
enforce societal gender stereotypes, and often send the message that girls’ 
bodies are sexual and dangerous. In the most insidious cases, girls are told 
the reason they asked to cover up is that they risk distracting male peers from 
their studies. So when girls at a middle school in Illinois werebanned from 
wearing leggings in March 2014 
<http://www.thenation.com/article/girls-speak-out-against-sexist-school-dress-codes>
, they turned up to protest bearing placards that read “Are my pants lowering 
your test scores?”


When a transgender student in Brazil was fined because she chose to wear a 
skirt to school later that year, her male classmates supported her by turning 
up for lessons wearing skirts themselves. Aphoto of the students in their skirts
 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/09/22/boys-skirts-protest-transgender-brazil-voudesaia_n_5863920.html>
 went viral, causing the school to announce it would consider a change in 
uniform policy.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hbkk%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hbkk%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb18963428da8c3abac25564ba691ba2d2b0ea92%2F0_357_5360_3218%2F5360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=IWD%202016%3A%20how%20women%20are%20finding%20new%20ways%20to%20fight%20inequality&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hbkk%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=IWD+2016%3A+how+women+are+finding+new+ways+to+fight+inequality&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hbkk%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb18963428da8c3abac25564ba691ba2d2b0ea92%2F0_357_5360_3218%2F5360.jpg>
 Will of steel … Kubra Khademi with her body armour. Photograph: Massoud 
Hossaini/AP 
 In Afghanistan, performance artist Kubra Khademi made a powerful statement 
about women’s bodies in public spaces last year when shewalked through the 
streets wearing metal body armour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/12/afghan-artist-armour-street-harassment-walk-kubra-khademi-kabul>
 specially designed to emphasise her breasts, crotch and bottom. The 
performance, designed to highlight the discomfort caused by men groping and 
harassing women in the street, drew leers, thrown stones and death threats – 
perfectly proving Khademi’s point.

Gender equality remains a hot topic and something that women continue to 
strive for at every level. Entries to the Everyday Sexism Project suggest there 
are also thousands of individual women finding their own, personal methods of 
protest. Here are just a few:

 * One woman decided she had had enough of cold-callers demanding to speak to 
the “man of the house”, so she started putting them on to her six-year-old son. 
He would sing themI’m Sexy and I Know It 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wyx6JDQCslE> until they hung up.

 * A swimming coach who heard one of the boys on her team taunting another 
student saying: “You swim like a girl,” sent all her students a message about 
sexism by turning around and loudly telling him: “So could you one day, if you 
practise hard enough.”

 * A woman who was asked: “Where’s the coffee?” by a male colleague when she 
walked into a meeting (at which it was not her job to provide the 
refreshments), answered: “I don’t know, but when you find it, mine’s black with 
one sugar.” 
 * Shocked and angered by a man catcalling her from the roof he was working on 
as she walked down the street, a woman decided to stop and confront him. But 
when her arguments against street harassment only led him to shout worse abuse, 
she gently removed the ladder and walked away, leaving him stranded and 
presumably giving him plenty of time to think about gender politics.

Whether it’s coordinated collective action, a personal stand or even an 
unplanned instance of bystander intervention, there is something each of us can 
do to tackle the widespread normalisation of gender inequality. You don’t even 
have to go looking for opportunities to take part in the movement, because – 
unfortunately – sexism is likely to cross everybody’s path at some point; 
whether it’s witnessing street harassment, overhearing workplace 
discrimination, or seeing the impact of gender stereotypes on a young person 
you know. So the next time you come across the problem, let these women be your 
inspiration to get stuck in and become part of the solution.
