
Lunch with Mary Portas presents something of a sartorial challenge. You hardly 
want to turn up for the Queen of Shops wearing a dodgy outfit hauled from the 
back of the wardrobe; then again, dress too sharply and you might find yourself 
becoming an unwitting philanthropist. We meet for lunch in theGreenberry Café 
in London’s Primrose Hill, <http://greenberrycafe.co.uk> just a few doors up 
from one of Portas’s Living & Giving charity shops 
<http://www.savethechildren.org.uk/get-involved/charity-shopping/marys-living-and-giving>
, which she and Save the Children set up in 2009. There are now 20 of them, and 
Portas will go along and open new additions to the chain, recalling an occasion 
when her wife, journalist Melanie Rickey, came too. The couple were having 
lunch at a nearby cafe afterwards when a woman came up and congratulated Portas 
on the shop. Alas, Rickey recognised her very own Burberry mac. Portas concedes 
that she should have asked before donating it – though, she adds, she hadn’t 
seen her wearing it for ages.

I’m not 100% convinced she’s learned her lesson, given that her daughter 
Verity recently spotted her Clarks Wallabee shoes in the basement of a branch – 
though her mother did let her reclaim them and furnished the shop with a 
replacement. She tells me she spent the previous day doing nothing, although 
that turns out to be a Portas kind of nothing – listening to opera, making an 
apple crumble and clearing out a cupboard in the house she shares with Rickey, 
their son Horatio, nearly four, and, when they’re home from university, her 
older children, Mylo and Verity. “We have too much stuff in this world!” laughs 
Portas. I shift my jacket to another chair.

This is Portas’s local, and local is one of her favourite words. “That looks 
stunning!” she cries, as a colourful salad arrives. “Look, it matches my hair! 
This is our local caff!” In all truth, you might struggle to find a proper 
fry-up along this chi-chi street, home to long established restaurants such as 
Limonia and Odette’s and all manner of upscale boutiques, but Greenberry is 
popular, filled to bursting on a Monday lunchtime, with punters from architect 
Ron Arad in his trademark upturned brim hat to tiny-totted families.

Over herrings and quinoa and pomegranate seeds, Portas and I fall to talking 
about the food she grew up eating; it’s a theme that runs through her memoir, 
Shop Girl, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/09/shop-girl-mary-portas-breezy-memoir>
 in which she describes growing up as Mary Newton, the fourth of five children 
in an Irish family in Watford. The book is written in a series of sketches, and 
dinners range from the salvaged steak that was distributed throughout the 
neighbourhood following a fire at a butcher’s factory to the advent, in 1974, 
of Vesta curry, which Portas’s mother serves with a bowl of mash, prompting her 
daughter to ask, “Is it supposed to be crunchy?”

But period nostalgia is only one aspect of the book. When Portas was 16, her 
mother – misdiagnosed as menopausal and prescribed antidepressants – died 
unexpectedly of meningitis. Portas stepped into the domestic breach, helped by 
shopkeepers who would advise her on cuts of meat and vegetables. Their role in 
her life has informed her commitment to the importance of retailers to 
communities; many of them, she explains, “are what kept me rooted in the day, 
and guided me, and I don’t think you can overestimate that”.

Her traumatic introduction to housekeeping stunted any early enthusiasm for 
the kitchen. “I had it sort of thrust upon me, being a cook,” she says, “and so 
those early days weren’t very much fun.” What was it like, I ask her, to bring 
to life years in which her father also died and she found herself adrift? “The 
weird thing is,” she replies, “because I didn’t really go into the public eye 
until my mid-40s, you don’t ever really articulate that pain, or have to, 
unless to your partner, or you have memories, where you’re in those intimate 
situations where you can reflect on those times.”

But things shifted when, in 2010 – by now, a columnist and TV presenter – 
Portas went onDesert Island Discs, <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00pn40m> 
and started to talk about her childhoodand family. “I came out of recording and 
I rang Melanie, and I couldn’t speak. It had uncovered it in the most wonderful 
way – stuff that I hadn’t really dealt with. And so I decided to write these 
little vignettes down.” Aside from her own recollections, she gathered together 
her siblings, “and it was joyous. Did I cry? Yes. And I remember the day I was 
looking at Mylo and Verity, who were 16 and 14, and that was me, and that was 
Lawrence [her younger brother]. And I was running the home. And I think I just 
grieved for that, really, and I don’t mean in any ‘poor me’ sense ... I put a 
shell round myself to get through life, and actually I wanted to protect that 
girl and write about her, and at the end of it, I liked her.”

To hear her speak about the fear she felt following her parents’ deaths – “you 
were an orphan. So there was nobody to go home to on a Sunday. There was no 
home” – chimes, unsurprisingly, with Portas’s forthright, no-nonsense persona. 
If you’ve reached the other side of such a profound loss still standing, you 
might well be inclined to grasp what life has to offer. Portas got a job 
dressing windows at Harrods, and later joined Harvey Nichols as creative 
director, joining the board before she was 30, by which point she also had two 
children with her husband, Graham Portas. She left when she couldn’t get a 
bonus for a hard-working colleague: “I thought, GOODBYE,” she remembers, handed 
in her company Mercedes, got the tube home and started her own agency. She and 
the family lived out of a tin of money kept in the kitchen.

Portas still has her agency, plus media work, charity shops and lecturing. But 
she has also had some fairly mixed experiences working with politicians – both 
as the public face of the “Portas Pilot” towns earmarked for investment, and as 
the author of a review into the future of the high street commissioned by the 
government in 2011. Suffice to say she has little time for the manipulations 
and manoeuvres of political life. At the same time, she has an undimmed 
enthusiasm for imagining what communities could and should look like. Her 
current thinking is that town centres need to deliver what online spaces can’t, 
via “anchors” – yoga centres, libraries, creches – that extend beyond retailing.

Related: Mary Portas: 'I'm one of the best in the world at retail' 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/may/17/mary-portas-im-one-of-the-best-in-the-world>

Like many, she bemoans London’s increasing unaffordability, and the narrowing 
it’s likely to have on cultural life, arguing that government should identify 
spaces in all parts of the capital in which to build housing with capped prices 
for the under-35s. We are, she says, “the most creative country in the world, 
and undoubtedly, the greatest creativity comes out of this city”. Would she 
ever want to be mayor of London? “Be an amazing job to do, wouldn’t it? But no, 
because of all that… it’s politics… and it’s a shame because I do realise there 
are some politicians who genuinely care. And you look at Obama – he’s been 
unable to be Obama because of the system. And so we are actually looking at the 
thought that some shredded wheat, vile, hideous individual, could possibly take 
over from him. It is beyond shocking.”

In the middle of all this activity, Portas, now sipping tea, meditates, reads 
philosophy and walks to calm her mind; “I’m very thinky,” she says. And she 
also spends a great deal of time ensuring that her own family enjoys the 
stability that she herself did until it was abruptly interrupted. “One of the 
worst things that ever happened when Mum died,” she tells me, “was coming home 
to an empty house. It was just the worst – from coming home never having a key, 
opening the gate, opening the back door, the smell of cooking, your mum there, 
there might be someone chatting with her – but it was home. To opening the 
front door – just, dead. Grey, nothing. Nothing moved since you left that 
morning, you’d left your dirty dishes because you were in a hurry, nothing 
smelt clean because you hadn’t been there during the day.”

She recalls the tussle between her and Lawrence – “both of us wanting to get 
there first so at least one person would say hello when you got in” – which led 
to what she calls an obsession with her own children never having to come into 
an empty house. She laughs. About four years ago, her daughter casually 
mentioned that her favourite time was when she got home and the house was empty 
– she could get what she wanted out of the fridge, put some music on, normal 
teenage stuff. Portas was shocked: “Sorry? Did you say your fav–… and then I 
thought, because you’re safe. And I’ve given you that safety.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tpky%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tpky%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62cdaed900f942fbb9f17d0287549e436c65c97a%2F0_71_5206_3124%2F5206.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mary%20Portas%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20put%20a%20shell%20round%20myself%20to%20get%20through%20life%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tpky%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mary+Portas%3A+%E2%80%98I+put+a+shell+round+myself+to+get+through+life%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tpky%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62cdaed900f942fbb9f17d0287549e436c65c97a%2F0_71_5206_3124%2F5206.jpg>
They ate (Alex) Pickled herrings, beetroot, horseradish relish, sourdough 
toast, £8; (Mary) wild rice, quinoa, sweet potato, feta, mint, spring onion, 
pomegranate salad £10.25; (shared) Greenberry salad. Photograph: Antonio Olmos 
for the Observer 
Shop Girl is out now (Black Swan, £7.99). Click here to buy a copy from 
Guardian Bookshop for £6.39 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/391585/>
