
The mayor of Liverpool, Joe Anderson, has criticised the shadow home secretary,
Andy Burnham <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/andyburnham>, for making 
comments that were “ignorant and insensitive” towards local government leaders.

Anderson, who has been mayor of the city of Burnham’s birth since 2012, 
described theLabour <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> frontbencher’s 
assertion that the role of metro mayor was a “cabinet-level job requiring 
cabinet-level experience” as “the most ignorant and insensitive comment anybody 
could actually make because it is disrespectful to every local government 
leader who has worked hard for their area”.


Related: Joe Anderson, Liverpool mayor: ‘It’s not about big hitters, like Andy 
Burnham’ | Susanna Rustin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/01/joe-anderson-liverpool-mayor-big-hitters-andy-burnham>

Burnham made the remark while launching his bid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/18/andy-burnham-to-stand-for-mayor-of-greater-manchester>
 to be Labour’s candidate for mayor of Greater Manchester last month. He argued 
that Labour should field its “biggest names” for mayoral jobs and said the 
party’s failure to do the same when devolution came to Scotland was a mistake.

“Let me say to Andy Burnham and other shadow cabinet members, whether they’re 
standing or not: a Labour government should have pushed on this agenda of 
devolution,” said Anderson inan interview with Society Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/01/joe-anderson-liverpool-mayor-big-hitters-andy-burnham>
.

“It’s a sad reflection on the Labour party that we’re having to do business 
with a Tory government who are cutting and bludgeoning us on the one hand, but 
at least they’re moving in a pragmatic way to devolve power.”


A spokesperson for Burnham said: “The mayor of Greater Manchester 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/greater-manchester> is a very different job, 
including running the NHS and police. The mayor needs in-depth knowledge of the 
NHS – something that Andy Burnham has from his time as health secretary.”

Anderson announced his intention to stand to be the mayor of the Liverpool 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/liverpool> city region last month, a role that 
comes with considerably more powers than the current mayoral role.

He was first elected as a Liverpool city councillor in 1988, became leader of 
the Labour group on the council in 2003 and leader of the council in 2010. He 
was elected into the current mayoral role in 2012.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F18%2Fandy-burnham-mayor-manchester-video-interview&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F18%2Fandy-burnham-mayor-manchester-video-interview&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andy%20Burnham%3A%20could%20an%20Evertonian%20be%20mayor%20of%20Manchester%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F18%2Fandy-burnham-mayor-manchester-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andy+Burnham%3A+could+an+Evertonian+be+mayor+of+Manchester%3F+%E2%80%93+video+interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F18%2Fandy-burnham-mayor-manchester-video-interview&media=>
Andy Burnham: could an Evertonian be mayor of Manchester? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/may/18/andy-burnham-mayor-manchester-video-interview>
Anderson faces a battle with Luciana Berger, MP for Liverpool Wavertree and 
shadow minister for mental health, and Steve Rotheram, the MP for Liverpool 
Walton, to secure the Labour nomination in the city region. In announcing her 
candidacyon Tuesday 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/31/luciana-berger-liverpool-mayor-should-be-global-ambassador-for-city-says-labour-hopeful>
, Berger became the second member of the shadow cabinet to launch a bid for a 
northern English mayoralty.

Labour’s dominance of the area means that whoever wins the party’s nomination 
is likely to win the overall competition. Ten thousand party members across 
Merseyside and Halton will vote for their preferred candidate later this year 
before mayoral elections in May 2017.

Anderson said he was proud of the fact that senior MPs were showing interest 
in doing a job that he had campaigned for years to create, but said it was “up 
to them and their consciences” whether they wanted to stand against experienced 
local government candidates.

“We’ve been dealing with cuts. It’s Labour leaders in local government who 
have been delivering progressive policies. We’ve built 15 new schools that I’m 
proud of and I don’t need anyone to come and tell us what to do,” said 
Anderson, adding: “If we were 25% ahead in opinion polls nationally, I wonder 
whether we would have the same interest [in this role].”

On Berger as a candidate, he said: “I welcome Luciana Berger being in the 
race, as a woman. [She and Rotheram] feel they’ve got something to offer and 
it’s not for me to say they haven’t.”

