
If it wasn't for the fact that I've been wide awake for hours, I'd swear that 
I am dreaming. Here I am, lying in a room made of ice, when in walks a strange 
man with a backpack and a head torch. His spotlight arrives a few seconds 
before he does, puncturing the pitch black as he bursts through the curtain; 
I'm reminded of one of the bad guys in the scene from ET, where Elliott and his 
extra-terrestrial friend are being experimented on. Luckily, this chap is armed 
with nothing more sinister than a cup of hot lingonberry juice - just what I 
need after a night spent lying on a block of ice.

While the Icehotel, in Jukkasjarvi, Sweden had looked very pretty when I'd 
popped my head through the door the previous day, to ooh and aah at the 
impressive sculptures, sleeping here is a different story. I'd booked into one 
of 30 unique "Art Suites", where the rooms are individually crafted by 
different artists who are commissioned to come up with new designs each year. 
Mine had a nautical theme, with a little hovercraft for a bed. At 3am I woke up 
with my head caught underneath its rear aerofoil, my nose so cold that I 
thought it had snapped off.

This was the opening night of my great Arctic Adventure. Fly-drives have been 
all the rage in hot countries for years but now British tour operator Discover 
the World has teamed up with Saab to offer winter road trips in the icy wastes 
of northern Sweden and Norway. The journey is spread over seven days, covering 
a total distance of around 700 miles, with pre-arranged stopovers along the 
way. After the initial night at the Icehotel, I was to make my way to the ski 
resort of Bjorkliden for two nights, before continuing on to Henningsvaer - a 
tiny Norwegian fishing village in the Lofoten islands - for another three and 
eventually making my way back to Jukkasjarvi.

Navigation should be easy - the brand new, four-wheel-drive Saab waiting 
outside the Icehotel had a full tank of fuel and a pre-programmed sat nav. All 
I had to do was start the engine and follow the directions, which mostly 
consisted of "continue straight ahead". There aren't many bends in this part of 
Sweden, especially once you leave the sanctuary of its towns. With the heating 
cranked up full I made my way out of Jukkasjarvi and headed west. Although 
Bjorkliden is only 75 miles away, it takes around two hours in the icy 
conditions - especially when you're tempted to stop and gawp at the scenery 
every five minutes.

Almost immediately outside Jukkasjarvi, vast stretches of white space opened 
up, interrupted only by whale-backed hills and colossal frozen lakes. It felt 
like a scene from Fargo, except that the dead body I found beside the road in 
the icy wastes was that of a reindeer, rather than a cop.

This was the first (and only) reindeer I saw on the whole trip, and I couldn't 
resist stopping for a closer look. I wished I hadn't. After taking a few snaps 
of the morbid scene, I got back in the car only to discover that it was beached 
in the snow. Panic set in as it dawned on me that I could be stuck out here for 
a while. Sweden is one of the most sparsely populated countries in Europe and 
it could be hours before another car came past. Luckily, it wasn't that long 
before a couple of Swedes pulled up to find me lying face down in the snow, 
attempting to dig the Saab out with my bare hands.

A quick tow was all it took to get me going again and in another hour or so I 
was making my way up the mountain to Bjorkliden. This is one of Europe's 
tiniest ski resorts, with one hotel, one ski rental shop, five lifts and just 
24 runs. It's also one of the most northerly on the planet, lying 150 miles 
inside the Arctic Circle.

From the restaurant at the back of the hotel, you get a cracking view of the 
Tornetrask - a vast lake where the surrounding mountains rise straight up out 
of the water - and Lapporten, a U-shaped rock formation known as the "gateway 
to Lapland". Beyond lies a great stretch of untouched wilderness: just you, the 
trees and the odd Sami reindeer herdsman.

The good thing about this place being so small and isolated is that you get 
the pistes to yourself. A quick, ski-booted shuffle across the car park from 
the hotel takes you straight on to the slopes, which, although short, are 
reassuringly wide. Always a good thing when you're taking to skis for the first 
time.

For someone who normally snowboards, this was a big step into the unknown - 
which I marked with several embarrassing wipeouts. After going through the 
basic turns on the baby slope I joined the grown-ups on the blue run next to 
the hotel, which resulted in more public humiliation. It was worth it, though: 
there's a fabulous view across the lake as you ski down. With its epic views of 
unspoilt back country and deserted slopes, Bjorkliden feels more North American 
than European. Once you've conquered the slopes here, you can always graduate 
to the nearby resorts of Narvik (14 runs; five lifts) and Riksgransen (16 runs; 
six lifts). Both lie within 30 miles of Bjorkliden, making them easily 
commutable when you've got your own wheels.

If skiing's not for you, there are plenty of other activities that make it 
worth sticking around here for a few days. One thing you should do is take a 
dog-sled up to Laktatjakko mountain station - Sweden's highest at 1,228 metres 
- from where you can see all the way to Norway on a good day. There are no 
lifts to get up here so it all feels rather intrepid.

Not quite so edgy, however, as my drive from Bjorkliden to Henningsvaer. 
Leaving the resort, I set off on the five-hour drive across to Norway, on roads 
that thread their way between lakes and mountains, often coming within a few 
metres of the sea. This 285-mile drive is apparently one of the most scenic in 
Europe. When it isn't dark and blowing a gale that is.

Unfortunately, I spent the entire journey trying to keep the car on the road 
as Arctic storms engulfed the area.

I made it to the Finnholmen Bryggehotel in Henningsvaer to find the owner, 
Roger, serving up home-made fish stew. This place is exactly what you need 
after a long, arduous drive: the restaurant is decked out like the inside of a 
fisherman's cottage, with sturdy wood beams and seafaring bric-a-brac lining 
the walls.

Scattered across a series of tiny islets connected to the mainland and each 
other by bridges, Henningsvaer is a bona fide fishing community that's changed 
little in the last 100 years. Olive-green, mustard-yellow and cocoa-painted 
houses line the harbour front, adding splodges of weather-beaten colour that 
stand out against the snow-sprinkled backdrop of Mount Vagakaillen. Until the 
bridges were built in the early Eighties, the only way of getting between the 
islands was by boat, so Henningsvaer has retained much of its bleak charm.

To get a true taste of Lofoten life you can head out with one of the local 
fishing crews to watch whales or catch cod that can be brought back to the 
hotel and transformed into dinner. All that was to come, however. In the 
meantime, a howling gale outside was blowing the boats in the harbour all over 
the place.

For the second night that week, I had a feeling that I wouldn't be getting 
much sleep.

Essentials

Discover the World (01737 218800; discover-the-world.co.uk 
<http://www.discover-the-world.co.uk>) offers a seven-night Saab Lapland 
Explorer package from Â£1,640, based on two sharing, including return flights 
from London to Kiruna, two nights' accommodation at the Icehotel, two nights in 
Bjorkliden and three nights at Finnholmen Bryggehotel, all on a B&B basis. It 
also includes five-day rental of a four-wheel-drive Saab 9-3 Turbo.
