
Newspapers <http://www.theguardian.com/media/newspapers> are price sensitive 
as we discovered way back in 1993 when Rupert Murdoch launched the national 
newspaper price war.

In a declining market, his strategy has helped to shore up the sales of his 
daily titles. The £1 Times has benefited by selling at a discount to the £1.20
Daily Telegraph <http://www.theguardian.com/media/dailytelegraph>, £1.40 
Guardian and £1.20 Independent.

And it's surely noticeable that the 20p i <http://www.theguardian.com/media/i> 
title has been growing sales ever since its launch in October 2010.

In the red-top market, the story is more complex. While The Sun (now 40p) has 
been cheaper than theDaily Mirror 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/daily-mirror> (now 50p) for years, its 
circulation decline has been greater than the Mirror's for some time.

And the even cheaper Daily Star <http://www.theguardian.com/media/dailystar>, 
which has been selling recently at 35p, has seen its sales slip away faster 
than the Mirror's and roughly in line with The Sun's.

Similarly, in the middle market, the 60p Daily Mail has enjoyed greater sales 
success than the 50pDaily Express 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/dailyexpress>.

In others words, price is not the only determining factor for buyers. 
Editorial quality, the quantity of content and, for want of a better phrase, 
brand recognition, play key roles too.

Which is best - price cuts or price rises?

The publishers of local and regional newspapers have been altogether more 
reluctant to indulge in price-cutting, partially because most of them have 
virtual monopolies in their circulation areas so there was no competitive 
advantage over a rival.

Some have tried going free, or partially free (such as the Manchester Evening 
News and Birmingham Mail). Several use multiple (aka bulk) sales, such as 
Trinity Mirror's Birmingham Post, Independent News & Media's Belfast Telegraph, 
Johnston Press's Yorkshire Post and Archant's Norwich and Ipswich titles. Most 
are very modest users.

Across-the-board price-cutting has rarely occurred. But maybe it is about to 
make an entrance, courtesy of Local World, the company chaired byDavid 
Montgomery <http://www.theguardian.com/media/david-montgomery>, who witnessed 
the effects of cuts at first hand during his time at the helm of the Mirror 
Group.

HoldTheFrontPage reports  
<http://www.holdthefrontpage.co.uk/2013/news/daily-slashes-cover-price-by-50pc-in-one-day-experiment/>
 that Local World's Derby Telegraph reduced its cover price from 43p to 20p for 
a single day, Friday 21 June, and saw sales increase by around 13%.

The paper is now considering whether to extend the one-day experiment with 
possible help from a commercial sponsor.

Managing director Steve Hall told HoldTheFrontPage: "We're encouraged by the 
lift we experienced and will reflect on the opportunities that this might 
present."

Though it is unlikely to herald a change to the paper's budget plans, which 
foresee a 2p increase later this year, variable pricing might be used in future.

Meanwhile, Newsquest/Gannett has adopted a very different strategy. Ever since 
summer last year, it has been gradually introducing substantial increases to 
cover prices at its titles.

Three more go up from today - the Oxford Mail, Worcester News and South Wales 
Argus all rise from 45p to 65p. Readers are promised bulkier papers as a lure 
to continue buying.

The Newsquest initiative is bound to cause sharp sales falls (as evidenced at 
the Brighton Argus 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/greenslade/2013/jun/12/newsquest-mediabusiness>
) but could result in improved revenue. Could is the operative word.

By contrast, price-cutting does tend to imperil overall revenue despite 
relatively modest sales uplifts. And it is clear that, in this mature market, 
hanging on to new buyers is often difficult.

Of the two strategies, I prefer the latter. It seeks to extend print audiences 
and therefore engage more people in the reading of journalistic content (though 
I accept that many more are doing so online anyway).

Price-cutting may not turn around the overall trend but it seems altogether 
less suicidal than implementing price rises that will surely antagonise 
readers, making it unlikely that they will return even if the rises are 
reversed.
