
‘Just have fun,” Arta Dobroshi’s parents would say to her and her brothers as 
they were growing up. “Every day they said it: don’t worry about things – just 
have fun.” What made their attitude extraordinary was that they were living in 
a war zone. But alongside dodging bullets, and being forced out of their home 
into refugee camps, her parents never stopped being happy, positive and full of 
hope for the future.

“Whatever we were faced with, my parents knew that the most important things 
you have to give children are hope, laughter and joy.”

But it wasn’t easy – and it isn’t easy now for the millions of refugees who, 
like Arta’s family in Kosovo in the 1980s and 1990s, were either living with 
constant danger or fleeing from it. “Life would be normal for a while and then, 
suddenly, we’d be running down the road, chased by the police. Or there would 
be teargas coming into the classroom. Several times we had to leave our home to 
live elsewhere because it was too dangerous to stay. When we were really up 
against it, I remember thinking: if only the people who live in freedom knew 
what we were going through, they would certainly help us.”

Today Arta is an acclaimed film actor but she has never forgotten how it felt 
to be caught up in a war, or how sure she was that if people only knew, they 
would act. Which is why she’s madeHome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/jun/08/jack-oconnell-trailer-for-refugee-film-home-video>
, a short film that premieres in London this weekend and is designed to do the 
thing Arta always believed would make all the difference: to put the lucky 
people into the unlucky people’s shoes.
 Arta Dobroshi. Photograph: Matt Carr/Getty Images 
The film follows the fortunes of a family with two young children who are 
forced to leave their home. They have to pay people smugglers to take them in 
car boots – the kids in one, the parents in others. There’s fear and violence. 
The couple are forced at times to carry their traumatised children across 
fields and through battle-ruined buildings and at one point have to run for 
cover when they find themselves in the middle of fighting, before eventually 
winding up, dirty and frightened and hungry, sitting around a fire in a refugee 
camp.

It’s a familiar tale, but here’s the twist: the family isn’t Syrian or Afghan 
– it’s British. This is a family just like yours or mine, putting their kids 
into the boot of a car, carry them past soldiers firing guns, making them walk 
miles across the open countryside and scavenging for food and clothes to keep 
them warm. Like theSave the Children film that went viral a couple of years 
ago, which portrayed everything happening in Syria against the backdrop of 
London <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RBQ-IoHfimQ>, it’s amazing how 
disturbing it is to see all this happening to people whose mother tongue is 
English.

It couldn’t happen to you? Oh yes it could, says Arta, who is the film’s 
executive producer: we would all do everything we could to keep our children 
safe. The difference between a refugee family and my family or yours can be 
summed up in one word: luck.

“No one wants to leave their home – we never wanted to leave our home,” Arta 
says. “We stayed in Pristina as long as we possibly could. We stayed through 
all the unrest and the fighting, but in 1997 things became really hard – people 
were being massacred and my parents thought it was really dangerous; more 
dangerous than ever before. We didn’t want to leave – it was so hard. In the 
end, I went with my two brothers and my mum, and my father stayed with my uncle 
and grandmother, who was 80. We went to Macedonia and lived in a camp for a 
while and couldn’t wait to get home.

“After a few months we got back and I remember it was still really dangerous. 
For a while we couldn’t move around and my father was in a different place. 
When we eventually got to meet up again, it was one of the most emotional 
experiences of my lifetime. We didn’t know what had become of him.

“This is the kind of thing that happens in war. It’s not something anyone 
would choose. It becomes normal for refugees, but not because they are somehow 
different as human beings – they are not! They’re just like you and me … in 
fact, that was me.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y47y%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y47y%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52958ca421506d51100d5a9e8cf2157ec2922886%2F0_60_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%20was%20a%20refugee%20%E2%80%93%20nobody%20wants%20to%20leave%20their%20home&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y47y%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I+was+a+refugee+%E2%80%93+nobody+wants+to+leave+their+home&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y47y%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52958ca421506d51100d5a9e8cf2157ec2922886%2F0_60_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
 Arta Dobroshi, aged five at her grandmother’s. Photograph: courtesy Arta 
Dobroshi 
Arta, who is 36, says that it was her experience of life on both sides of the 
fence that led her to make the film. “I lived half my life as a refugee, half 
as a person like you, living in freedom. So that’s why I had this idea of 
putting both sides together.”

Her heartfelt belief, she says, is that human beings want to help one another. 
“If you saw someone on your street who needed help, you’d do what you could to 
help – it’s natural. It’s our instinct as human beings. If you look at 
children, you see they do it very easily. And I think we grow up to learn fear, 
and fear takes over and stops us from following that basic instinct of wanting 
to help.”

What refugees need more than anything, says Arta, is empathy and compassion. 
“They need to know that people care about them, and that there are good things 
coming to them – they need to have hope. It’s hard to explain what a difference 
it makes when you’re in a camp to know that people are thinking about you and 
want to help you. Once, in our camp, Richard Gere came to visit. I remember 
running towards where he was. I missed him because it was so crowded, but do 
you know what? Just knowing he had been there gave me the energy to survive for 
another week.

“People who live in freedom don’t realise how much impact their thoughts and 
their care have for refugees – it literally saves lives because it makes you go 
on with hope in your heart.”

Arta remembers how, as a child in Kosovo, she and her family watched movies 
all the time. She thought this was normal, but when she grew up she realised 
her family were film junkies. “I asked my mum why and she said, ‘It was to 
distract you. We didn’t want you worrying about the fighting all the time.”

But from all those films grew a love of acting that was to propel Arta into 
her acting career, and one of her brothers is a director. “My parents never 
said you can’t do it,” she says. “In the midst of the toughest of times they 
always said yes, of course you can be a Hollywood actress – of course that’s 
what you will be one day.”

The biggest privilege of the career she now enjoys, she says, is the 
opportunity it gives her to tell the refugees’ story and make it meaningful and 
relevant. “My greatest hope now,” she says, “is that in maybe 10 or 20 years, 
or even 40, our children or grandchildren will say, can you imagine? There were 
actually times in the past when the people who lived in freedom wouldn’t help 
the refugees. There really were those times.”
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fjack-oconnell-trailer-for-refugee-film-home-video&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fjack-oconnell-trailer-for-refugee-film-home-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jack%20O%E2%80%99Connell%20in%20the%20trailer%20for%20refugee%20film%20Home%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fjack-oconnell-trailer-for-refugee-film-home-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jack+O%E2%80%99Connell+in+the+trailer+for+refugee+film+Home+%E2%80%93+video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fjack-oconnell-trailer-for-refugee-film-home-video&media=>
Jack O’Connell in the trailer for refugee film Home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/jun/08/jack-oconnell-trailer-for-refugee-film-home-video>
• Home is released in cinemas on World Refugee Day, 20 June. Will you stand 
#WithRefugees? Visitwithrefugees.org <http://www.unhcr.org/refugeeday/>
