
It’s difficult to figure out what is going to happen in this country,” Cuban 
designer Idania del Río tells me. We’re chatting in her first-floor studio in 
Old Havana, above the design shop she opened just over a year ago. Sporting a 
Superman T-shirt on which Lois Lane is pictured rescuing the superhero, del Río 
propels herself across the room on her office chair every time the phone rings. 
“Some people have had a mental switch. Young people are very energetic: they’re 
seeing what the future can be and are really enthusiastic about it, but they 
are focused on the present.”

Del Río is too modest to admit it, but her description of the energy building 
up in Havana also applies to her shop – it’s the first independent design 
outlet in Cuba – and to the growing number of independent, outward-looking 
people and projects springing up in the city.

Her shop, Clandestina <http://clandestinacuba.com/> (Villegas 403) sells 
posters, T-shirts, bags and more designed by a team of predominantly young 
women while fostering a community that hopes to push young Cubans on to the 
radar on their own terms.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkvp%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkvp%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9558c3171e758ae3c945d0e772871fab4c2a8a8%2F0_329_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Havana%20rising%3A%20the%20millennials%20pushing%20Cuba%20forward&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkvp%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Havana+rising%3A+the+millennials+pushing+Cuba+forward&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkvp%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9558c3171e758ae3c945d0e772871fab4c2a8a8%2F0_329_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Iidania del Río at Clandestina. Photograph: Will Coldwell 
This is the concept behind several other Havana startups, from A La Mesa 
<http://www.alamesacuba.com/en/>, a dining app that helps visitors find the 
best restaurants around the country, toLa Marca 
<https://www.facebook.com/LaMarcaBodyArtGallery>, Cuba’s first formal tattoo 
parlour.

And this is all happening while interest from the west has reached fever 
pitch. In March, Barack Obama made ahistoric visit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/20/barack-obama-cuba-visit-us-politics-shift-public-opinion-diplomacy>
, a kind of “we’re cool now, yeah?” milestone in diplomatic relations. He met 
del Río and asked for a couple of tees for his daughters. Equally important 
(for young Habaneros at least) was the arrival in the same month of theRolling 
Stones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/26/rolling-stones-enjoy-historic-cuba-gig-havana-obama>
, who played a free gig to 450,000 people. The island is experiencing a huge 
spike in tourism, particularly from the US, with American visitors in 2015 up 
77% on the previous year.

None of these visits has yet resulted in any literal changes to the way the 
country is run – though I’m told the roads were fixed for Obama’s motorcade – 
but this is an exciting time for the country. I wanted to hear from young 
Cubans who are doing what they want to do, within the small amount of leeway 
they have been given. I find this spirit in tattoo parlourLa Marca 
<http://lamarcabodyart.com/> (Obrapía 108c), which opened last year in Old 
Havana. Obama might not have stopped by, but the Stones’ roadies did, getting 
tattoos featuring a Cuban interpretation of the band’s iconic tongue logo.

The shop, which is also an art gallery and venue space, is a good example of 
the underground scene emerging into the open. Tattoo artists in Cuba used to 
work out of their homes, would struggle to find equipment and faced raids from 
the authorities. By opening a shop, the team have started a cultural exchange 
with other visual artists, and provide a venue for those who wouldn’t get the 
opportunity to show at the city’s mainstream galleries.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkvp%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkvp%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc17d01aea32d9f02f33ff184b6e6b9b2f4b23391%2F0_339_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Havana%20rising%3A%20the%20millennials%20pushing%20Cuba%20forward&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkvp%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Havana+rising%3A+the+millennials+pushing+Cuba+forward&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkvp%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc17d01aea32d9f02f33ff184b6e6b9b2f4b23391%2F0_339_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Leo Canosa in his tattoo parlour, La Marca. Photograph: Will Coldwell 
But there’s still no such thing as an official tattooist’s licence in Cuba, 
and even La Marca finds it hard to source supplies. The studio’s owners are 
able to travel, so they bring kit from abroad.

“The idea was to legitimise the tattoo industry here,” says Leo Canosa, who 
opened the shop with his wife, Ailed Duarte, over the buzz of a chisel-faced 
man getting his back tattooed behind us. “It’s not legal, but its not illegal 
either, it’s a limbo.”

Like Clandestina, the shop acts as a community hub. As I leave, Canosa shows 
me his library of art books: everyone is welcome to drop by to read them – and 
make free copies using the shop’s photocopier. He hopes this will encourage new 
artists in the city.

Another creative entrepreneur is 24-year-old Susu Salim, who has spent much of 
the past two years working forVistar <http://vistarmagazine.com/>, the 
country’s first independent culture magazine. It launched in March 2014 and is 
the best place to find out what’s going on in the city.

Independent publications are still not allowed in Cuba (Vistar is available 
online and as a PDF) but, as in a growing number of cases, the government seems 
to be taking a tolerant approach.

“It’s not illegal; it’s irregular,” Salim says. You hear this a lot in Cuba. 
We’re drinking Cristal beer in Azucar (Mercaderes 315), a glitzy modern bar in 
Old Havana with a view over the historic Plaza Vieja. Over the past few years 
the city has seen a new wave of nightlife venues open, she tells me.Sarao’s 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Saraos-Bar/437352393108063> (Calle 17 between E 
and F) is popular with celebs including Katy Perry, andEspacios 
<http://www.espacios-habana.com/> (Calle 10 513) is like a Latin frat house, 
full of teenage Habaneros dancing to reggaeton.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkvp%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkvp%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ceb170a213ca83126d635b75038bd2546d7f402%2F0_312_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Havana%20rising%3A%20the%20millennials%20pushing%20Cuba%20forward&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkvp%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Havana+rising%3A+the+millennials+pushing+Cuba+forward&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkvp%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ceb170a213ca83126d635b75038bd2546d7f402%2F0_312_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Susu Salim, who helped bring independent culture magazine, Vistar, to the 
masses. Photograph: Will Coldwell 
Salim herself has several jobs: running events at a nightclub, managing two 
music groups and teaching at the university. This is not uncommon among young 
people trying to make a creative living here. She tells me her parents’ 
generation were proud supporters of the government, whereas hers just fight for 
their dreams. “We want to put our art into something we believe in and make 
money from that, not just do whatever job the government gives us.”

The country’s tech scene has been active too, with other apps joining A La Mesa
 <https://www.alamesacuba.com/en/la-habana/>, which launched in late 2015. Cuba 
isn’t the most tech-friendly place: internet is mostly only available at public 
Wi-Fi hotspots. (I found myself buying Wi-Fi cards from a guy in a park who 
operated from a shelled-out laptop perched on a dustbin and stuffed with 
illegal access codes.) News from the outside world – as well as entertainment 
listings and the latest issue of Vistar – is distributed viaEl Paquete Semanal 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/El_Paquete_Semanal> (the weekly package), a hard 
drive loaded with content usually delivered by hand to people’s homes. So when 
I meet Yondainer Guitérrez, A La Mesa’s 28-year-old co-founder, at one of the 
city’s cool new restaurants – HM7 on Calle Paseo 7 – he has to make do with 
showing me the offline version.

“At the end of 2010,” he says, “some restrictions were disappearing and more 
private restaurants and cafes were opening, and no one was talking or writing 
about it. There’s almost nothing here in this field, so there are a lot of 
opportunities.”

The app, which works offline (though download it before you leave for Cuba), 
is a great way to discover new restaurants in a country not renowned for its 
food. As well as HM7, where chefs cook contemporary dishes in a modern kitchen 
behind a big glass window, there are more casual spots in the Old Town.El 
Chanchullero <http://www.el-chanchullero.com/> (Teniente Rey 457) is a tapas 
bar that serves delicious salad lunches and pokes fun at an old Havana cliche: 
a plaque in the doorway states: “Aquí jamás estuvo Hemingway” (Hemingway never 
came here).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkvp%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkvp%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c330a1103e103ee811610abb7903a9381db1ef1%2F0_1819_3456_2074%2F3456.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Havana%20rising%3A%20the%20millennials%20pushing%20Cuba%20forward&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkvp%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Havana+rising%3A+the+millennials+pushing+Cuba+forward&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkvp%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c330a1103e103ee811610abb7903a9381db1ef1%2F0_1819_3456_2074%2F3456.jpg>
 Isnay Rodríguez, aka DJ Jigue, at home in Havana. Photograph: Will Coldwell 
One Cuban scene known for its independent spirit is, of course, music. And 
this, too, has been reflecting and responding to the ideas and feelings 
circulating in the humid air. Tipped to be the country’s next big star is 
22-year-oldDaymé Arocena 
<http://www.gillespetersonworldwide.com/artist/dayme-arocena/>, who mixes 
traditional Cuban sounds and rhythms with American jazz influences; it’s not by 
chance that her debut album, released on Gilles Peterson’s Brownswood Records, 
is named Neuva Era. Havana also has a growing electronic music scene. It has 
been boosted over the years by Peterson and producers like London dubstep 
pioneer Mala, but there are also popular nights with homegrown DJs Wichy de 
Vedado, Djoy de Cuba and DJ Kike. The country will get its first festival 
fusing electronic sounds with folkloric traditions, whenManana 
<http://www.mananacuba.com/> (see below) launches in Santiago de Cuba.

I drop in on Isnay Rodriguez <https://www.facebook.com/djjigue> (aka DJ 
Jigue), who, as well as working on the festival, is a member ofGuampara 
Productions <http://www.guamparamusic.com/>, an art, film and music collective. 
I knock on his door in a typical crumbling Havana terrace. After a moment, it 
clicks and rolls open all on its own, completely startling me. Rodriguez has 
pulled the latch with a string rigged up from the first floor and is laughing 
at me from the top of the stairs. This isn’t unusual in these tall Havana 
buildings, where stuff is delivered to upper floors via buckets on pulleys.

In his flat, (which is also home to a salsa school 
<https://www.facebook.com/chsalsaclub/timeline>), he tells how all the 
attention – and boom in tourists – Cuba has seen has fed into the atmosphere on 
the ground: “On one hand we’re super happy because cool people are coming that 
we can exchange ideas with, specifically young Americans, are able to come now. 
But at the same time there are people coming with a different mentality – to 
exploit Cuba. We’re not down with those people.”

Rodriguez tells me about a new song by Guampara artists Niño Fony, entitled 
The Swing of Son (son is traditional Cuban music as popularised by Buena Vista 
Social Club). “It’s a metaphor for how everything is changing,” he says. “A 
wake-up call.”

Just as we begin talking about Wi-Fi and how it is helping people connect, a 
sudden power cut snaps off the music and plunges us into silent darkness, a 
reminder of the practical obstacles still facing this country.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkvp%2Fsfb%23img-6&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkvp%2Fsfb%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9bb2a88798dbcf2384fd3cf0fce89f753cacf6fd%2F0_914_3329_1998%2F3329.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Havana%20rising%3A%20the%20millennials%20pushing%20Cuba%20forward&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkvp%2Fstw%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Havana+rising%3A+the+millennials+pushing+Cuba+forward&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkvp%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9bb2a88798dbcf2384fd3cf0fce89f753cacf6fd%2F0_914_3329_1998%2F3329.jpg>
 La Fabrica de Arte Cubano 
Later that week I head to the seafront Vedado district and one of Havana’s 
flagship arts venues,Fabrica de la Arte Cubana <http://www.fac.cu/>, or FAC 
(Calle 26), where Guampara is putting on a party. Set up two years ago by Cuban 
rocker X Alfonso, it houses art galleries, a theatre, a cinema, a restaurant 
and club and music spaces within a converted factory. It feels distinctly 
European but is still very Cuban, with everything mixed together. You can 
wander from art show to rhumba band with mojito in hand, though I mostly get 
sucked into a smaller venue where Rodriguez is spinning party hip hop for 
vigorously dancing locals. “Less hands, more hips,” is the advice one shirtless 
guy gives me on the dance floor, while another person attempts to grab my 
crotch before passionately making out with a passing girl.

Whoever you end up dancing with, the significance of FAC is that it’s a 
collaboration between government and independent projects. The building is 
owned by the state; the boutique shops and bars inside are not. It’s an 
experiment in public/private co-operation that has to date been a big success, 
pulling in 800,000 visitors so far. It’s popular with foreigners, but even more 
so with Habaneros: the mix is more international than at any other club in the 
city I visited.

FAC brilliantly showcases the country’s productivity and energy, and is the 
embodiment of something people keep telling me: that Cubans want the government 
to ease up, but are also very proud of their identity.

“I hope we will keep some of the things we have achieved, but some things will 
have to change,” del Río told me at Clandestina. “There’s no way you can keep 
young people here without giving them a chance for a good job, a good way of 
life. But if people can do that here, it’s better.”

• Flights were provided by Cheapflights.co.uk <http://www.cheapflights.co.uk/>
, which has direct flights from London to Havana with Virgin Atlantic from £674 
return. To search for the best prices at times that suit, download the 
Cheapflightsapp <http://www.cheapflights.co.uk/cheap-flights-apps/>. 
Accommodation was provided by Cañaveral House (cubaguesthouse.com 
<http://www.cubaguesthouse.com/canaveral.home.html?lang=en>) and Casa 1932 (
casa1932.com <http://www.casa1932.com/>) see below

Hasta Manana: Cuba’s new fusion festival
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkvp%2Fsfb%23img-7&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkvp%2Fsfb%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F401b10503dfb84db4ad4183830d62626d040a64a%2F53_0_1093_656%2F1093.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Havana%20rising%3A%20the%20millennials%20pushing%20Cuba%20forward&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkvp%2Fstw%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Havana+rising%3A+the+millennials+pushing+Cuba+forward&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkvp%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F401b10503dfb84db4ad4183830d62626d040a64a%2F53_0_1093_656%2F1093.jpg>
 Alain Garcia Artola, co-founder of Manana 
The result of a UK/Cuban collaboration and built on the “deep love and mutual 
respect we all have for rhythm”, Manana, a new festival connecting Afro-Cuban 
folkloric music with the world’s electronic music community, launches next 
month. Brought to life by hip-hop artist Alain García Artola (pictured above) 
and Londoner Harry Follett, with the help of £50,000 raised through 
Kickstarter, the festival will take place in Santiago de Cuba, which is on the 
opposite side of the island to Havana and revered as the spiritual heartland of 
the country’s music traditions.

The lineup features renowned electronic/tropical producer and composer 
Quantic, Chilean-American musician Nicolas Jaar and Peruvian electronic party 
crew Dengue Dengue Dengue. They will collide with bands from Santiago, 
including Son del Batey and Rumba Aché, one of the city’s top rhumba and dance 
groups, as well as Cuba’s leading electronic and hip-hop acts, such as the 
political husband-and-wife rap duo Obsesión. Half festival, half musical 
experiment, it’s as much about the cultural exchange as it is about the party.

• Tickets £115, 4-6 May, mananacuba.com <http://www.mananacuba.com/>

Cool places to stay in Havana

City base: Casa Alta-Habana
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkvp%2Fsfb%23img-8&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkvp%2Fsfb%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe09d3760b2206bfeaabbe1789b4bd427e8f90800%2F91_0_837_502%2F837.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Havana%20rising%3A%20the%20millennials%20pushing%20Cuba%20forward&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkvp%2Fstw%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Havana+rising%3A+the+millennials+pushing+Cuba+forward&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkvp%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe09d3760b2206bfeaabbe1789b4bd427e8f90800%2F91_0_837_502%2F837.jpg>
This boutique guesthouse just behind one of the best-kept squares in old 
Havana, Plaza Vieja, opened two years ago, with large, light rooms opening on 
to a courtyard, attractive wooden furnishings and retro details. The highlight 
is the roof terrace, for breakfast or an evening mojito with views over the 
city.
• Doubles from £27 a night, +53 5341 4873, casaaltahabana.com 
<http://www.casaaltahabana.com/>

Playa peace: Canaveral House 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkvp%2Fsfb%23img-9&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkvp%2Fsfb%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F98bb4f020c7a35f62bafea25971b5b8f1df3c049%2F0_80_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Havana%20rising%3A%20the%20millennials%20pushing%20Cuba%20forward&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkvp%2Fstw%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Havana+rising%3A+the+millennials+pushing+Cuba+forward&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkvp%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F98bb4f020c7a35f62bafea25971b5b8f1df3c049%2F0_80_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
You’ll have to get taxis to the centre, but Canaveral House makes up for that 
with tranquil luxury. A 1949 hacienda in the Playa district, the house, let as 
a whole, has a small pool, period furniture and art by young Cubans. It’s great 
for families or groups; the owner also hasa penthouse (doubles £54) 
<http://www.cubaguesthouse.com/penthouse.home.html?lang=en> in more central 
Verdado.
• Sleeps up to six, £240-£340 a night, +53 5295 5700, cubaguesthouse.com 
<http://www.cubaguesthouse.com/canaveral.home.html?lang=en>

Period joy: Casa Habana 1932
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkvp%2Fsfb%23img-10&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkvp%2Fsfb%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1220240b4435a3b853407595d5830b700efb3d6%2F0_50_750_450%2F750.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Havana%20rising%3A%20the%20millennials%20pushing%20Cuba%20forward&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkvp%2Fstw%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Havana+rising%3A+the+millennials+pushing+Cuba+forward&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkvp%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1220240b4435a3b853407595d5830b700efb3d6%2F0_50_750_450%2F750.jpg>
Staying here is like pitching up in an antiques shop. The courtyard is filled 
with period signs, and bedrooms with mid-century furniture and artefacts. Even 
breakfast is eaten with art deco cutlery. It’s very popular, but if it’s full, 
owner Luis Miguel will connect you with partner B&Bs nearby.
• Doubles from £20, +53 7863 6203, casahabana.net <http://www.casahabana.net/>
