
In a world with a universal basic income for all, what would you do about 
housing costs?

UBI – also known as citizen’s income or negative income tax – is a seductive 
idea that is now gaining ground, with support spanning the political spectrum 
from the Green Party to the ideas of the late US economist Milton Friedman. The 
hope is of a welfare system that would empower people rather than penalise 
them, offer freedom in place of sanctions and enable us to adapt to a rapidly 
changing labour market rather than being at the mercy of Google and Uber.

But where will we live – and how will we pay for it? These are questions 
housing and social security experts have been asking ever since the blueprint 
for the welfare state was laid out by Sir William Beveridge in 1942.

Related: The problem of rent: why Beveridge failed to tackle the cost of 
housing 
<http://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2012/nov/22/beveridge-problem-rent-welfare-reform>

His system combined benefits at subsistence levels and others based on 
insurance contributions with action by the state to create the NHS, family 
allowances and full employment. But he admitted there wasone problem even he 
could not solve 
<http://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2012/nov/22/beveridge-problem-rent-welfare-reform>
: “The attempt to fix rates of insurance benefit and pension on a scientific 
basis with regard to subsistence needs has brought to notice a serious 
difficulty in doing so in the conditions of modern Britain. This is the problem 
of rent.”

Rents vary from place to place. If you pay a flat-rate allowance for housing, 
people in expensive areas will not have enough to pay the rent, while those in 
cheaper places will have a surplus. If you make it part of the insurance 
benefit, what is to stop people moving to an expensive house the moment they 
retire?

Beveridge hoped his new system of social security would mean the end of the 
hated means test. He tried to “make the most of a difficult situation” by 
proposing a flat-rate housing allowance on top of contributory unemployment 
benefit. After the war the government decided to meet actual housing costs but 
means test claimants.Housing <https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing> 
benefit (soon to be absorbed into universal credit) did improve matters but it 
costs £25bn a year, is costly to administer and relies on means testing and 
steep withdrawal rates.

So what can supporters of UBI do? Many proposals simply ignore housing costs 
(and the equally difficult area oflong-term sickness and disability 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/10/finland-universal-basic-income-ubi-social-security>
) but that means retaining a means-tested allowance that undermines the 
simplicity that is meant to be one of the main points of the idea.

Related: Rate-your-landlord or more prefabs? Four visions for the future of 
housing 
<http://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/apr/20/landlord-prefabs-future-housing-crisis-shelter>

Another option is to include a flat-rate allowance for housing, possibly on a 
regional basis to reduce the worst anomalies. But that would still mean some 
people receiving more than their rent, while leaving others unable to pay for a 
decent home and at risk of homelessness. As Donald Hirsch argued in a report 
for theJoseph Rowntree Foundation 
<https://www.jrf.org.uk/report/could-citizens-income-work> last year: “It seems 
unlikely that a government would walk away from providing targeted support to 
those unable to afford acceptable housing, risking a return to slum conditions 
that were largely eradicated in the UK in the post-war years”.

A report published by the Royal Society of Arts 
<https://www.thersa.org/discover/publications-and-articles/reports/basic-income/>
 in December floated the idea of a “basic rental income” granted to everyone 
who rents rather than owns a property, and with the additional costs incurred 
by central government paid for through a land value tax. It certainly seems a 
neat solution to use one idea fashionable across the political spectrum to fix 
the problems with another one – but is it a bit too neat?

The truth is that the “problem of rent” is an even bigger headache today than 
it was for Beveridge. At the time he produced his report there was strict rent 
control in the private sector, and Britain was about to embark on a massive 
programme of council house building. Now rents vary even more from place to 
place and the government is more intent on selling social housing than 
building, at the same time as it complains housing benefit is “out of control”.

Join the Guardian Housing Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/housing/register/> to read more pieces like 
this. Follow us on Twitter (@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/GuardianHousingNetwork/?ref=hl> to keep up with the 
latest social housing news and views.
