
Henry has taken to his bed. He’s 52, and drinking himself to death. Having 
been on detox programmes in the past, he’s decided he doesn’t want to go 
through it all again this time.

He’s been formally judged to have mental capacity, but the core problem – the 
punishing result of his drinking – remains unaddressed. He’s now been referred 
twice to the rapid response team (a multidisciplinary, acute healthcare agency 
whose aim is to cut down on inappropriate hospital admissions).

The first time he was referred to us we went in over the course of a month, 
making him meals three times a day, struggling to keep his meds in order, 
helping him to the toilet or changing his pads, cleaning him up, monitoring and 
treating his developing pressure areas and taking blood now and again. His 
judgment was impaired, but not to the point where it was affecting his ability 
to understand his situation.

Related: GPs like me can't help mental health patients in 10 minutes – it's 
cruel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline/2016/may/16/gps-cant-help-mental-health-depression-patients-10-minutes-cruel>

At one point a carer was put in to keep him safe overnight. Meanwhile, his son 
Malcolm continued to provide the vodka, taking away the empty bottles scattered 
on the carpet by the bed and replacing them with full ones.

Eventually Henry deteriorated to such a point that an ambulance was called and 
he went into hospital. However, because he still had the mental capacity to 
refuse treatment, he was discharged after a couple of days, and we were back to 
square one.

The issue of mental capacity is fraught with difficulty, and the interplay 
between theMental Health Act 1983 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1983/20/contents> and the Mental Capacity 
Act 2005 <http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2005/9/contents> is often hard 
for healthcare professionals to understand and put into practice.

This was illustrated in the case of “C”, a woman who refused dialysis 
<http://gu.com/p/4emfa/stw>, and whose case was taken to the Court of 
Protection in November 2015. Mr Justice MacDonald upheld C’s right to refuse 
treatment, saying: “Society may consider C’s decision to be unreasonable, 
illogical or even immoral within the context of the sanctity accorded to life 
by society in general.”

However, he did allow that the health service should: “... engage with C in an 
effort to persuade her of the benefits of receiving lifesaving treatment in 
accordance with their duty to C as their patient.”

There was no mention of the practical implications of that continued 
engagement. Presumably, it meant palliative support as C deteriorated. With 
Henry, it will mean a high level of support at home, while his son passes him 
the bottle.

Related: Rapid response: a fear of litigation means I often treat patients I 
shouldn't 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline/2015/nov/30/rapid-response-a-fear-of-litigation-means-i-often-treat-patients-i-shouldnt>

It’s hard not to think about the wider social cost of this support. If Henry 
was compliant and engaged with the substance abuse team, not only would his 
prognosis be better, but the overall cost and impact on services would be 
improved, too.

Social support is now stretched to the limit. Figures show that up to 160,094 
bed days were lost to the NHS last October becausepatients were medically fit 
to be discharged but lacked the support at home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/dec/10/number-fit-patients-stuck-hospital-hits-all-time-high-nhs>
 that would make it possible.

Henry has been judged to have capacity. He understands the consequences of his 
actions. He understands that his debilitated state, his incontinence, weight 
loss and susceptibility to infection and pressure sores – all of these things 
are the result of his decision to carry on drinking and refuse treatment.

Everyone has Henry’s best interests at heart. Everyone understands the 
problems of addiction, the fact that it’s an illness as much as anything else. 
And certainly no one would disagree with Justice MacDonald when he said: “Over 
his or her own body and mind, the individual is sovereign.”

But in the context of shrinking resources, just how far can the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> afford to go in supporting 
non-compliant patients like Henry?

 * Names and personal details have been changed to protect privacy. 
If you would like to write a blogpost for Views from the NHS frontline 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline>, 
readour guidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2014/aug/12/highs-lows-nhs-write-guardian>
 and get in touch by emailinghealthcare@theguardian.com 
<mailto:healthcare@theguardian.com>.


Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
