
It probably seemed like a great idea at the time: a dash across the world to 
explore a jungle or help carry out charity work in a developing country in your 
spare months between finishingA-levels 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/alevels> and starting uni.

But now you’ve trekked through the jungle to find Wi-Fi, or logged into Ucas 
from the only computer in the village, and found out exams didn’t quite go 
according to plan. How do you doClearing 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/clearing> when you’re far from home?

The first piece of advice is to keep calm. Hopefully you’ve prepared ahead of 
time with the key phone numbers and documents. So, first things first: call the 
admissions tutor at your first choice university.

If there are places available and you only just missed your grades (or have 
special circumstances, like ill health confirmed by a doctor), they might still 
let you in.

Related: University league tables 2016 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/ng-interactive/2015/may/25/university-league-tables-2016>

If not, it’s time to look at Clearing – go online to find course options and 
then hit the phones.

“Staff will be super jealous that you’re on the other side of the world having 
the time of your life, but make sure they know exactly where you’re located, so 
any technical glitches or signal dropouts can be preempted beforehand,” says 
Jeremy Rowe, head of admissions at London South Bank University.

“Have mum or dad on call back home in case you need additional information or 
documents to be sent to the university, and take screenshots of your chosen 
courses on your phone in case your internet cuts out and you need to get 
information about your course.”

Don’t forget about different time zones: make sure your alarm is set for the 
right time. “And if you’re travelling through a remote area where you have 
intermittent access to the internet, buy an internet dongle so you’re always 
connected,” Rowe adds.


Related: Six hopeful students count the hours till A-level results day 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/aug/06/six-hopeful-students-count-the-hours-till-a-level-results-day>

Julian Lovelock of the University of Buckingham warns students not to accept 
the first thing they’re offered in desperation. “Clearing is rather like an 
end-of-season sale. Some of the courses on offer are excellent – perhaps even 
better than the one that turned you down. But when others are piled high, you 
need to ask why.”

“In the Clearing sale the prices, usually £9,000 a year, usually stay the 
same,” Lovelock adds. “So you need to be quite sure you don’t waste your money 
on a course that offers little in the way of quality or prospects just so you 
can go to university. Do your research and don’t accept any second-rate 
options. There are other paths to success.”

 * Lucy Tobin is the author of A Guide to Uni Life 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/guide-to-uni-life.html> (Trotman, £7.99) 

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
