
The Vatican’s daily newspaper, L’Osservatore Romano, has criticised the new 
Stars Wars film, The Force Awakens, on the grounds thatits villains are not 
evil enough 
<http://www.latimes.com/entertainment/herocomplex/la-et-hc-the-vatican-star-wars-force-awakens-review-20151220-story.html>
.

The reviewer complains that bad guys Kylo Ren and General Snoke are less 
effective representations of evil than their predecessors in earlierStar Wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars> films, Darth Vader and Emperor 
Palpatine.

Related: Which philosopher would fare best in a present-day university? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/30/which-philosopher-would-fare-best-in-a-present-day-university>

Perhaps the reviewer would have been happier with Stephen King’s new 
collection of short stories,The Bazaar of Bad Dreams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/04/the-bazaar-of-bad-dreams-stephen-king-review-dark-stories-magic>
, and in particular its story called Bad Little Kid. The child in that story is 
the embodiment of pure evil: when he appears, usually out of nowhere, it is 
only to ruin live.

King says he is “just bad for bad’s sake, bad to the bone”. Exactly the kind 
of evil character missing from the new Star Wars film, according to the Vatican 
reviewer.

The bad guy who is just plain evil is a stock character of Hollywood films and 
works of literature. An entertaining villain, albeit an unrealistic one. Behind 
that kind of bad guy is a very unsophisticated understanding of what evil is, 
and why people do terrible things.

When it comes to analysing villains, an earlier episode of Star Wars, the 
much-maligned Episode III: Revenge of the Sith, is actually better and far more 
complex. In this episode, good guy Anakin Skywalker finally transforms into bad 
guy Darth Vader.

The trigger for this is not a desire to be bad, but love for his pregnant 
wife, Padme. Knowing that she is about to die, Anakin joins forces with the 
Sith lord, Emperor Palpatine, who promises to save her by discovering the 
knowledge of how to cheat death. In doing so, Anakin turns away from the Jedi, 
who have ignored his desperate pleas for help.

In a battle scene near the end of the film, Jedi Obi-Wan Kenobi tells Anakin 
that Palpatine is evil, to which Anakin replies: “From the Jedi point of view! 
From my point of view, the Jedi are evil.”

The Star Wars universe ceases to be black and white: we see the uncomfortable 
truth that an individual’s own perspective determines who or what qualifies as 
good and evil.


Related: Think about it: why budding philosophers shouldn't sit exams 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/dec/16/think-about-it-why-budding-philosophers-shouldnt-sit-exams>

What’s more, the storyline makes evil entirely comprehensible: we have here a 
distraught and desperate man who, unable to control his passions, makes a bad 
choice for what seems to him like the best of motives. In other words, Anakin 
is not thinking clearly.

Philosophers explain evil in ways that are just as straightforward. Socrates 
claimed 2,500 years ago that no one deliberately acts in an immoral way. Those 
who commit immoral actions are not bad, he said, but simply lack knowledge of 
what is good, or right.

Likewise, in the 18th century, Gottfried Leibniz argued that people who do bad 
things are not truly evil in the sense of having a bad will, but are simply 
ignorant of what is good. He claimed that people always follow the course they 
think is best, but because of limitations of knowledge, they are often mistaken 
and make bad choices, thinking that they are good. Since bad actions stem from 
ignorance, the way to tackle them, he said, is through education, illuminating 
people’s understanding.

More recently, the political theorist Hannah Arendt offered a different 
explanation for evil. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/aug/29/hannah-arendt-adolf-eichmann-banality-of-evil>
 When covering the trial of the Nazi Adolf Eichmann for his part in 
orchestrating the Holocaust, Arendt tried to understand why Eichmann had become 
involved in the genocide of the Jews.

Although it was widely believed that Eichmann, like all Nazis, acted with a 
malevolent desire to do evil, Arendt reached a different conclusion. She found 
that Eichmann harboured no great hatred of Jews, and was neither malevolent nor 
bloodthirsty. His failing had been that he did not think about what he was 
doing. He had been unthinking not in the sense of being unconscious, but in the 
sense of failing to reflect on the implications of his actions.

Related: Why aren't there more university graduates on Coronation Street? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/nov/19/why-arent-there-more-university-graduates-on-coronation-street>

Arendt found that Eichmann was a man who dutifully carried out his orders 
without giving a second thought to the effects they would have on other human 
beings. He treated the processing of Jews for deportation to extermination 
camps no differently from any other bureaucratic task.

The mechanical nature of Eichmann’s actions is surely more horrific than the 
actions of any Star Wars villain, and is so precisely because it was carried 
out without the malevolence we have come to expect of our bad guys.

The Vatican might (understandably) like its villains to be truly devilish in 
nature, but in reality, most bad guys tend to be those who do not think 
clearly, or who just do not think at all.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
