
What is housing benefit?

Housing <https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing> benefit pays for all or 
part of the rent of people on low incomes in England and Wales. The benefit is 
means tested, taking into account earnings, how many people you care for, your 
rent and whether anyone in the household is sick, disabled, or a full-time 
carer. Private renters can apply for housing benefit using the local housing 
allowance calculation, and different rules apply if you are under 25, a 
student, or under 35.

How many people get housing benefit?

The most recent statistics from the Department for Work and Pensions 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/housing-benefit-caseload-statistics>, 
to February 2016, report 4,731,241 housing benefit claimants in England, 
Scotland and Wales. In London, 807,024 households claim housing benefit; 
Scotland, 451,358; Wales, 242,076.

How much does housing benefit cost?

The amount paid varies by tenure and geographic region: the overall average is 
£95.77 a week. The lowest sum paid on average is to people in local authority 
homes – £82.76 a week, compared with private tenants, paid on average £110.34 a 
week.

In 2014-15 the government spent a total of  £24.313bn on housing benefit 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/benefit-expenditure-and-caseload-tables-2016>
 – more than on any other benefit apart from the state pension, which at 
£86.516bn a year costs more than three times more than housing benefit.

Where do people on housing benefit live?

A total of 3,235,679 claimants in England and Wales live in social rented 
properties and 1,492,861 live in private properties.

Several areas have significantly more housing benefit claimants in private 
rented accommodation than social housing: three outer London boroughs (Harrow, 
Enfield and Barnet) and five coastal towns (Blackpool, Bournemouth, 
Castlepoint, Tendring and Torbay).Analysis by the Office for National Statistics
 
<http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20160105160709/http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/regional-trends/area-based-analysis/a-profile-of-deprivation-in-larger-english-seaside-destinations--2007-10/sty-seaside-destinations.html>
 in 2013 found levels of deprivation well above the national average in larger 
seaside resorts, as local economies have declined because of dwindling 
popularity among holidaymakers. Here, the demand for low cost housing far 
outstrips the supply, and with few jobs, housing benefit is needed to 
supplement rent in both the private and social sector.

How old are they?

The age group claiming the most housing benefit is the over-65s, with the 
under-25s representing the smallest number. Most people claiming housing 
benefit have dependent children, and more than half of those under the age of 
34 claiming housing benefit are single mothers.



There is a huge spike in claimants over the age of 65, which highlights 
women’s relative poverty: twice as many single women claim housing benefit 
compared with men in the same age group.
Housing benefit claims by age 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/may/2016-05-11T17:01:45/embed.html>
This shows two things: first, having children limits both your earning 
potential and ability to afford your rent. Second, women are more likely to be 
in poverty because of lower earnings when in work; longer periods out of work; 
and the fact they do not contribute to pensions while caring for dependents. 
Therefore, more women need housing benefit in retirement.

Join the Guardian Housing Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/housing/register/> to read more pieces like 
this. Follow us on Twitter (@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/GuardianHousingNetwork/?ref=hl> to keep up with the 
latest social housing news and views.
