
Toni greets me with a nod before slipping his arm beneath the flowery cloth 
that covers the steaming wicker basket on his street stall. He rummages around 
before extracting a ribbon of something yellow and squidgy. He chops it into 
bite-size folds, sprinkles it with pepper, drenches it with lemon juice and 
proudly hands me the warm parcel.

In Sicily, breakfast is less about cappuccino and more about frittola – 
leftover scraps from a calf carcass, boiled then fried until crisp. It’s what 
I’m now clutching in my hands and it is surprisingly delicious, reminiscent of 
the skin of a roast chicken.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t5v3%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t5v3%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22ba145f9155afe37bd95c71f903fba30580e174%2F469_514_2795_1677%2F2795.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Frittola%20%E2%80%93%20a%20gutsy%20breakfast%20on%20the%20streets%20of%20Palermo&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t5v3%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Frittola+%E2%80%93+a+gutsy+breakfast+on+the+streets+of+Palermo&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4t5v3%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22ba145f9155afe37bd95c71f903fba30580e174%2F469_514_2795_1677%2F2795.jpg>
 Pizza cart in Palermo. Photograph: Hannah Summers 
You won’t find this snack elsewhere in Italy. Here in the country’s street 
food capital, typical eating is not a long, lingering lunch, or a pizza on a 
sunny terrace. This is a gritty port city, where locals devour a historical 
mishmash of ingredients while walking the cobbled streets – and in the culinary 
footsteps of the island’s conquerors, which include Arabs, Spaniards and 
Normans.

On offer in the crumbling 1,200-year-old alleys near Toni’s stall in Il Capo 
market arepani câ meusa (bread rolls stuffed with veal spleen and ricotta), 
arancine (risotto rice balls stuffed with ragù) and oil-drenched hunks of 
sfincione (tomato pizza).

“The spleen sandwich is for professional foodies,” Marco Romeo, owner of 
StrEatPalermo tours, tells me, “but thefrittola is for the veterans.” Across 
the street, a line of flat-capped elderly men are waiting their turn at Toni’s 
basket. Breakfast is served.
• A three-hour Palermo street food tour with StrEat Palermo 
<http://www.streatpalermo.it/en/> costs €30pp



