
Two-thirds of students in England do not feel their degree represents good 
value for money, with overall satisfaction levels particularly low among 
students from black and minority ethnic (BME) backgrounds, a survey has found.

The 2016 student academic experience survey, published on Thursday, shows 
satisfaction levels among undergraduates in terms of value for money have 
fallen sharply in the past four years since the introduction of £9,000tuition 
fees <http://www.theguardian.com/education/tuition-fees>.

Just 33% of students in England who took part in this year’s survey felt they 
were getting “good” or “very good” value for money, compared with more than 
half of students (52%) surveyed in 2012.

Related: Less than half of students confident their degree will pay for itself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jun/03/less-than-half-of-students-confident-their-degree-will-pay-for-itself>

Of the rest, 35% believed they were getting “poor” or “very poor” value for 
money, while 32% thought it was neither good nor poor.Students 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/students> of Asian, Chinese, African and 
African-Caribbean ethnicities were the least satisfied with their academic 
experience.

Three-quarters of the students polled felt they were not being given enough 
information about how their fees were being spent.

The survey also revealed students were overwhelmingly opposed to government 
plans, outlined in its recenthigher education bill 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/higher-education-and-research-bill-to-deliver-choice-and-opportunity-for-students>
, to allow universities to raise their fees further, with 86% of the 15,000 
students who took part in the survey against any further hike and just 8% in 
favour.

The survey, published by the Higher Education Policy Institute 
<http://www.hepi.ac.uk/> (HEPI) and the Higher Education Academy 
<https://www.heacademy.ac.uk/>, comes at a time of renewed debate over tuition 
fees. Last month, a letter written bygraduate Simon Crowther  
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/25/simon-crowther-loan-grew-by-1800-a-year-says-government-misled-students>
to his MP complaining that his student loan had grown by more than £1,800 in 
the year since he left university due to interest went viral.

At the same time a petition started by Durham engineering student Alex True 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/04/government-under-pressure-over-student-loans>
, against the government’s controversial retrospective change in the cost of 
loans, has surpassed the 100,000 signatures required to trigger a parliamentary 
debate.

“Universities and the government both want to see tuition fees increase, but 
students are strongly opposed to this,” said Nick Hillman, the director of the 
HEPI, adding that it was up to universities to “show how any extra fee income 
will directly benefit their students”.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kyqx%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kyqx%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63d1fff005a9cf26d2274571468ccedd6bc0cc67%2F0_154_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Two-thirds%20of%20students%20in%20England%20'feel%20degree%20cost%20is%20not%20good%20value'&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kyqx%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Two-thirds+of+students+in+England+%27feel+degree+cost+is+not+good+value%27&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kyqx%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63d1fff005a9cf26d2274571468ccedd6bc0cc67%2F0_154_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 Durham student Alex True, whose petition against the government’s 
retrospective change in the cost of loans has been signed by more than 100,000 
people. Photograph: None 
The survey also addressed mental health among students, a key concern among 
those working and studying in higher education. It revealed high anxiety levels 
among students – just 21% of those surveyed reported the lowest anxiety levels, 
compared with 41% of the general population. They also scored significantly 
lower on wellbeing measures compared with the national population.

“The high levels of anxiety among students show that having to stand on your 
own two feet as an independent learner – combined with financial, workload and 
future career worries – is a combustible mix,” said Hillman.

Ali Milani, the president of the students’ union at Brunel University, which 
has one of the highest proportions of BME students, said he was not surprised 
that student wellbeing was suffering.


Related: If you think the market is ruining higher education, think again | 
Rafael Behr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/01/market-ruining-higher-education-think-again-tuition-fees>

“The tripling of tuition fees did not just have an economic impact, it had a 
psychological and cultural impact on students. We should take very seriously 
how the marketisation of higher education and the hike in fees has had an 
impact on wellbeing.”

Milani agreed with the report’s authors that one of the reasons BME students 
may report lower satisfaction levels is because many live at home due to 
financial constraints and caring responsibilities.

In addition, he said a lot of BME arts and humanities students felt the 
curriculum was unrepresentative of the students on the course. “Often it’s very 
difficult for BME students to engage with a course academically that’s very 
Eurocentric. A lot of students would like there to be greater diversity in 
their curriculum.”

Prof Les Ebdon 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2012/feb/20/les-ebdon-university-access-tsar>
, the director of watchdog Fair Access to Higher Education, expressed concern 
about lower satisfaction levels among BME students. He pointed to research by 
theHigher Education Funding Council for England <http://www.hefce.ac.uk/> that 
showed students from some ethnic minority groups were also significantly less 
likely to gain a good degree or find graduate-level employment.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kyqx%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kyqx%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0234c50f335ea0962ab12f26aff5a449250a9d87%2F144_31_4690_2813%2F4690.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Two-thirds%20of%20students%20in%20England%20'feel%20degree%20cost%20is%20not%20good%20value'&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kyqx%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Two-thirds+of+students+in+England+%27feel+degree+cost+is+not+good+value%27&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kyqx%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0234c50f335ea0962ab12f26aff5a449250a9d87%2F144_31_4690_2813%2F4690.jpg>
 The LSE’s Saw Swee Hock student centre, which opened in 2014. Of the students 
surveyed, 49% said universities could save money by spending less on new 
buildings. Photograph: Jeffrey Blackler/Alamy 
 “An unexplained gap in attainment is unacceptable,” said Ebdon, “and this 
survey on student experience shows why it is vital that universities and 
colleges consider how best to support their BME students to achieve their full 
potential.

“Universities should also consider how best to work with BME students to make 
sure courses are engaging and accessible, so that everyone with the talent to 
benefit from higher education has the opportunity to excel.”


Sir Peter Lampl, the chairman of the Sutton Trust education charity that 
promotes social mobility, said: “It’s no surprise that students’ perceptions of 
their degree being ‘good value for money’ are falling.


“Our research has shown that English university graduates face extremely high 
debts on graduation, more than double their American counterparts. Increasing 
fees even more will only leave students in more debt and feeling even more 
short-changed.”

Related: The knowledge economy is a myth. We don’t need more universities to 
feed it | Andre Spicer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/18/knowledge-economy-myth-more-universities-degree>

Value for money apart, the HEPI-HEA survey showed 85% of full-time 
undergraduates were satisfied with their course. It also revealed that students 
value quality of teaching over smart new facilities. Asked about their 
preferences as to how universities could save money, 49% suggested spending 
less on buildings, while only 9% were in favour of reducing support to improve 
academics’ teaching.


Sally Hunt, the general secretary of the University and College Union 
<https://www.ucu.org.uk/> (UCU), which represents university workers, said: 
“Despite limited knowledge about where their fee money goes, it is interesting 
that students have little time for building projects at the expense of teaching.

“It is encouraging they value substance over style and have so overwhelmingly 
rejected fee increases linked to controversial plans to measure teaching 
quality.”

A separate report by the Office of the Independent Adjudicator 
<http://www.oiahe.org.uk/> for higher education – the students’ ombudsman – 
showed the number of complaints it received fell to the lowest level since 
2011, with 1,850 new complaints in 2015, compared with 2,040 in 2014.

The majority of complaints (64%) were issues affecting a student’s academic 
status, such as assessment marks or final degree results, while 15% concerned 
complaints relating to facilities, course content, processing of visa 
applications, teaching hours or research supervision.
