
So here we are, hurtling towards the end of January, the month of 
self-flagellation and resolutions to do things better. How many of us declared 
that this year – no, honestly! – this year will be the one in which we finally 
lose the extra weight and save some money?

Related: Cheer up, my academic colleagues! We're so lucky to do this job 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jan/08/cheer-up-my-academic-colleagues-were-so-lucky-to-do-this-job>

But what about the academy itself? Universities could certainly benefit from a 
health check and a good look at their finances, but they should also consider a 
third popular resolution: to drink less. We know the damaging effect that booze 
can have on our students, but what about us faculty members?

It’s no secret that academics drink a lot. Evening seminars, book launches, 
special lectures – all are invariably accompanied by booze; normally after the 
event, often beforehand and sometimes even during the proceedings. At the 
richer universities, one can easily get by without ever getting a round in, 
thanks to the near-endless stream of free wine (it always seems to be wine) 
during the week.

Other workplaces – and I write as someone who took several years out to work 
in those famously restrained industries, media and publishing – generally save 
it for the Christmas party, closing a deal, or an occasion of note, such as a 
good financial quarter or payday.

But in academia, alcohol is ever-present. We don’t just partake at night: I’ve 
been to many seminars starting at 5pm, offering wine from the start. If you 
want to take part fully in the research culture of a university – talks, 
seminars, events, panels – it’s hard to avoid drinking while doing so.

There are plenty of benefits to having drinks at these events, of course. As a 
PhD student, I find it much easier to approach big-name professors during 
relaxed wine receptions than in front of hostile audiences at conferences. 
Striking up a conversation seems far less intimidating when each of us has a 
glass in hand, seemingly on a level playing field despite the difference in our 
career progress. Without this psychological prop, I worry that I might fall 
into the category of “pushy PhD” rather than “genuinely curious new entrant to 
the field”.

Related: Yes, let's discuss lad culture – but don't let university leaders off 
the hook 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2014/dec/05/lad-culture-sexism-university-leaders>

 Booze is the reward at the end of a long day of papers – you can feel the 
prickle of anticipation as the caterers clatter and jingle in the background of 
a mediocre presentation. For some this is a social pleasure, but others seem 
desperately in need of a fix, like smokers just off a train, cigarette in hand 
before they get to the ticket barriers.

We know that young people, including students, are drinking less than they 
used to 
<http://uk.businessinsider.com/ons-statistics-young-adults-in-the-uk-are-drinking-less-alcohol-2015-6>
. But at the same timeolder, middle-class drinkers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jul/23/harmful-drinking-among-middle-class-over-50s-is-a-hidden-phenomenon>
 are accidentally consuming too much, one relaxing glass of wine at a time.

I’m not suggesting that academia forces people into alcoholism. But since 
starting my graduate studies at a Russell Group institution, I’ve been struck 
by the effects of the regular small amounts that add up to more than I’d like 
to think. I actually lost weight during the early days of my PhD, thanks to the 
“two glasses of wine and a handful of crisps” menu offered at these functions.

There are many problems in academia, including stress, long hours, isolation, 
bullying and a variety of mental health issues. Drinking too much can 
exacerbate these and have lasting negative effects.


Then there’s the personal and professional fallout. When drink plays a 
prominent role in departmental socialising, there’s a clear risk of favouritism 
among those who share a tipple on a regular basis.

Related: Academics Anonymous: the inside stories of universities in 2015 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2015/dec/31/academics-anonymous-university-staff-revealed-the-inside-stories-in-2015>

Early career researchers who wish to drink less often – maybe for personal 
reasons, maybe because socialising is one of the first things to go in the 
publish-or-perish culture of many universities – can find themselves out of the 
loop, socially and otherwise, as the lines between personal and professional 
become blurred.

Most of us drink at manageable levels, just a couple of glasses at a time. The 
problem is that we do it so often. But why is there so much alcohol in 
academia? And why isn’t there the same amount in other, similarly stressful 
sectors?



Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
