
The influential Conservative MP Dr Sarah Wollaston 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/sarah-wollaston> has revealed that she is 
defecting from the campaign for a leave vote in this month’s referendum and 
will be casting a vote for Britain to remain in the European Union.

Related: Sarah Wollaston gets the Brexit diagnosis right this time | Michael 
White 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/09/sarah-wollaston-gets-the-brexit-diagnosis-right-this-time>

Just over four months after announcing that her clear preference was for the 
UK’s withdrawal from the union 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/10/influential-backbencher-delivers-blow-to-david-cameron-by-backing-brexit>
, the MP said on Wednesday night that she no longer felt comfortable being part 
of the Vote Leave campaign and said its claim that a Brexit would unlock up to 
£350m a week for the NHS “simply isn’t true”.

“For someone like me who has long campaigned for open and honest data in 
public life I could not have set foot on a battle bus that has at the heart of 
its campaign a figure that I know to be untrue,” said Wollaston, who is a 
former GP. “If you’re in a position where you can’t hand out a Vote Leave 
leaflet, you can’t be campaigning for that organisation.”

In an interview with the BBC, Wollaston said that she had undergone a change 
of heart after her postal vote arrived and she started to think how she would 
feel on the morning of 24 June if the result of the referendum turned out to be 
a victory for the leave campaign. “I realised I would feel a sense of loss, 
that we had lost something, and I am now actually going to vote to remain,” she 
said.
Brexit explained: Can I still register to vote? 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/05/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=website_crash#>
Wollaston said she thought there would be a “Brexit penalty” for the NHS 
because leaving the EU would hit Britain’s economy. “The consensus now is there 
would be a huge economic shock if we voted to leave,” she said. “Undoubtedly, 
the thing that’s most going to influence the financial health of the NHS is the 
background economy. So I think there would be a Brexit penalty.”

Wollaston is MP for Totnes and was chosen as a Tory candidate in Britain’s 
first full open primary selection 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/aug/04/tories-totnes-mp> in 2009. She 
agreed that some colleagues who had come out for the leave campaign were now 
wavering, adding: “I think any politician who is not prepared to have second 
thoughts should not be doing the job.”

Wollaston wrote in a blog post <http://www.drsarah.org.uk/sarah's-blog/> in 
February: “So why am I heading towards the door? I am in love with the 
possibilities of the EU but can no longer ignore the grinding reality of the 
institution.”
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fhow-would-brexit-affect-you-eu-referendum-video-explainer&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fhow-would-brexit-affect-you-eu-referendum-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20would%20Brexit%20affect%20you%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fhow-would-brexit-affect-you-eu-referendum-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+would+Brexit+affect+you%3F+%E2%80%93+video+explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fhow-would-brexit-affect-you-eu-referendum-video-explainer&media=>
How would Brexit affect you? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jun/07/how-would-brexit-affect-you-eu-referendum-video-explainer>
Her defection will come as a boost to the prime minister after polling painted 
a picture of an extremely close race. It also came as Vote Leave maintained its 
offensive in the form of a letter from the chairman of JCB, the machinery 
company, in which he told its employees why he was endorsing a Brexit. “I 
believe that JCB and the UK can prosper just as much outside of the EU, so 
there is very little to fear if we do choose to leave,” Lord Bamford said.
