
 Sir Paul Christopher Jenkins is exactly the sort of man you would want to 
help navigate the labyrinthine complexity of English devolution. As the UK 
government’s principal legal official adviser from 2006 to 2014, he has managed 
many thorny transformations within Whitehall. And in chairing Browne Jacobson’s 
recent roundtable discussion on austerity and devolution, he simplified a 
subject characterised by confusion.

One year ago, he noted, there was a considerable amount of scepticism about 
whether devolution was going to occur at all in England. Today, there is only 
acceptance. The question now is how it will unfold.

If devolution is to happen at scale, it is essential that there’s sufficient 
buy-in across Whitehall
Richard Barlow, Browne Jacobson 
That, in effect, is the billion dollar question. Or the £6bn question in the 
case of Manchester – the heart of George Osborne’s so-called northern 
powerhouse – which became the first combined authority to go full “devo” in 
2014. Since then, the multi-authority has taken control of regional spending on 
skills, transport, housing, economic development, and a £6bn social care and 
health budget.

While other local authority devolution measures will follow suit – albeit 
likely on a smaller scale – Manchester is leading the way in England, and is a 
clear potential test bed for success. (Wales and Scotland may also provide some 
learnings – but as their devolution was driven by separate legislation, it’s 
harder to draw comparison.)

A lack of clarity from central government

For Browne Jacobson, the public sector lawyers who convened the roundtable 
discussion, English devolution is now in a period of transition – and this 
applies as much to local authorities, as it does to government departments.

“If devolution is to happen at scale, it is essential that there’s sufficient 
buy-in across Whitehall,” says Richard Barlow, head of public sector at Browne 
Jacobson. “Right now, there are still doubts about the manner in which 
agreements are being reached – and the differing agendas of parts of central 
government.”

Browne Jacobson’s latest report 
<https://www.brownejacobson.com/training-and-resources/resources/legal-updates/2016/04/the-realities-of-austerity-and-devolution?utm_source=public-sector&utm_medium=advertising&utm_campaign=devolution-thought-leadership-2016---guardian---embed-2016-04-15>
 notes that there will inevitably be tensions between local and national 
priorities. Devolution will affect central government departments in many 
different ways: not only their future sizes but also roles required.

“Greater transparency and clarity of what is ‘on and off the table’ [from 
central government] would help deliver deals, and allow frameworks for 
governance, scrutiny and operations to develop,” conclude its authors.

Another significant reason for the current lack of clarity around devolution 
is that there simply is no standard model for devolution – meaning it is highly 
likely to unfold in a non-uniform way.

The Cities and Local Government Devolution Act 2016 provides a starting point, 
but it leaves many questions unanswered on major issues, such as accountability 
of local authorities, finance and funding, and how public sector bodies can 
share services effectively. The government’s resistance to any substantial 
fiscal devolution – seemingly a red line for the Treasury – creates another 
potential fault-line in the structure.

“The Act is a first paving stone towards creating the capacity required to 
devolve further,” says Barlow, “[but] you couldn’t regard it as comprehensive.”

The problem with combined authorities

Nowhere are the grey areas more apparent than on the question of combined 
authorities. The 2016 Act appears to have been written on the provision that 
local authorities would enter into devolution arrangements as single tier 
authorities. In reality, devo deals are on offer to dual tier counties in 
addition to unitary authorities.

In the race not to “miss out” on devolution opportunities, many local 
authorities have scrambled to create larger multi-authority procurement and 
delivery vehicles. At a time when local authorities are facing a period of 
unprecedented austerity, these could deliver vital cost efficiencies.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tthq%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tthq%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F055be94a9626aa311aca6ad3ee13df96c339de38%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20will%20English%20devolution%20deals%20unfold%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tthq%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+will+English+devolution+deals+unfold%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tthq%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F055be94a9626aa311aca6ad3ee13df96c339de38%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 In 2014 Greater Manchester agreed to gain control of regional spending on 
skills, transport, housing, economic development, and health and social care. 
Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
And yet for every Greater Manchester – which brought together 10 local 
authorities under a single city-region – there are less successful stories 
emerging. For example, a number of local authorities in the North Midlands – 
facing pressure to agree devolution deals in time for the last budget – dropped 
out at the last moment.

To date, says Barlow at Browne Jacobson, the main driver for successful 
multi-authority agreements appears to be regional identity, such as with 
Manchester, Sheffield and Cornwall. Where this “geographical togetherness” is 
less compelling, it seems to be harder for local authorities to make the case 
for devolution.

“The reality is that each local authority has to decide how they take forward 
their own arrangements locally,” he explains. “It comes down to the strength of 
their local enterprise partnerships and the political connections they can 
broker across regions and areas.”

Conflicts of interest

And yet, even where local authorities can successfully overcome these hurdles 
to create combined authorities, this immediately presents a potential challenge.

If members wear two hats – representing their local authority and wider region 
– they will sometimes need to make decisions that cannot be in both parties’ 
interests.

This conflict of interest points to a wider, additional risk around the 
joining up of local authorities – that, far from simplifying the English local 
government landscape, they could in fact create an additional layer of 
bureaucracy: the exact opposite of what devolution is designed to achieve.

The goal of Browne Jacobson’s roundtable was to bring together people from 
central and local government, and a range of related stakeholders, to discuss 
and unpick these challenging issues. And even if there are many obstacles 
ahead, Barlow sounds a cautious note of optimism.

“We are quietly positive about devolution,” he says. “It will need very 
careful crafting but if local authorities have a range of powers and 
responsibilities in place, they will be in a position to find innovative and 
cost-saving solutions.”

You can download the full Browne Jacobson round table report on English 
devolutionhere 
<https://www.brownejacobson.com/training-and-resources/resources/legal-updates/2016/04/the-realities-of-austerity-and-devolution?utm_source=public-sector&utm_medium=advertising&utm_campaign=devolution-thought-leadership-2016---guardian---embed-2016-04-15>
.

Content on this page is paid for and provided by Browne Jacobson 
<https://www.brownejacobson.com/>.
