
One of England’s largest and most successful academy chains is seeing hundreds 
of teachers leave its schools each year, to be replaced by new staff, Education 
Guardian can reveal.

More than 1,000 teachers have left schools in the Harris Federation over the 
past three academic years, according to afreedom of information request 
<https://www.dropbox.com/s/hd57gww1f6ff9op/harristurnoverfoi.pdf?dl=0> provided 
to Bridget Chapman, chair of the Anti Academies Alliance.

The data shows 465 teachers leaving Harris schools in 2014-15, 422 in 2013-14 
and 375 in 2012-13.

Precise calculations as to what proportion of Harris teachers leave each year 
are difficult. Cross-checking with Department for Education statistics on the 
number of teachers in each school suggests the figure could be as high as 30%, 
though this is disputed by Harris. Latest DfE data records that Harris schools 
employed 1,116 teachers as of 2013-14.

By contrast, the most recent data 
<https://mail.google.com/_/scs/mail-static/_/js/k=gmail.main.en_GB.ImGAt4BezdM.O/m=m_i,t/am=PiPeQMA_GfcHscY4oF36CoW998bPLlL85MOruhMmgGSvAP5v9v8Afg_ai7eYAQ/rt=h/d=1/t=zcms/rs=AHGWq9BoYiQV9IVSmcakmJf3F2uJnnUREQ>
 on teacher turnover suggests that schools across the country see only 11% of 
teachers leaving each year. Harris says the figure is higher in London, at 19%, 
though has not provided the source of that number.

The FOI figures show large numbers leaving particular secondary schools in 
2014-15: for example, 34 from Harris Falconwood, in Welling, Kent; and 32 from 
Harris’s flagship school in Crystal Palace, south London. Some 18 teachers are 
revealed as having left Harris primary academy Benson, also in south London.

The figures come amid repeated claims to us by sources close to Harris schools 
that the chain works its largely young staff very hard, although there may be 
other explanations for many teachers leaving particular schools, such as 
teachers moving schools within the growing Harris empire.

Chapman says: “In the community schools where I have worked, this kind of 
turnover would really ring alarm bells.”

Harris itself did not wish to respond further, except to say that its 
teacher-leaving data included supply staff and student teachers.

Federation trustees look on the Bright side


An academy chain that last year had only two schools paid two of its governing 
trustees £300,000 between them for their work for the year, it has emerged.

Stockport-based Bright Tribe, run by the multi-millionaire venture capitalist 
and philanthropist Michael Dwan, also paid another member of staff £70-£80,000 
and a further two £60-£70,000.

The figures are set out in annual accounts for the year 2013-14, at which time 
the chain <http://brighttribe.org.uk/>, which describes itself as “a new breed 
of academy trust”, had a single secondary school and one primary, with 1,353 
pupils between them.

The two trustees include David Hopkins, a former chief adviser on school 
standards to the Labour government, who is billed as the chain’s director of 
education and was paid £140,000-£145,000. Joe Smith, at the time the chain’s 
chief operating officer and also a trustee, was paid £155,000-£160,000.

The chain also forked out £238,745 in payoffs to 12 people in 2013-14, the 
accounts show, with two individuals receiving £30,000 each.

In the past year, Bright Tribe has taken on a further five schools. In a 
statement, the Bright Tribe Trust says six of its seven schools had been 
“failing” when taken over, and all were now in line to improve. “The trust 
converted its first academy in January 2014. As a result the first year of 
trading should be viewed as a start-up period.”

It adds: “During this period the trust received £3m of sponsor support,” 
suggesting, perhaps, that this donation – presumably from Dwan – helped to fund 
the directors’ salaries.

Free school discovers limits to freedom


Remarkably, these details in Bright Tribe’s accounts 
<http://brighttribe.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/8144578-Bright-Tribe-Trust-1314-FinStat.pdf>
 (pdf) were brought to our attention by the founders of a free school, Grindon 
Hall Christian school in Sunderland, which fears the Department for Education 
is set to impose Bright Tribe on it as a sponsor.

Grindon Hall failed an Ofsted inspection in January. The DfE says it has also 
been given two financial notices to improve, so action had to be taken. The 
school’s founders, however, say 350 parents have backed its claim to be given a 
choice of sponsor.

Readers of this column have become familiar with the concept of “forced 
academies”. This may be the first case of a “forced free school”.

Two little time, too many Ofsted judgments


Colin Richards, Ofsted’s former head of primary inspections, says school 
inspection is now “totally and absolutely impossible” because inspectors are 
instructed, by the handbook that governs their work, to make at least 102 
different judgments on a school’s quality in just two days of an inspection. 
Will Ofsted take up a challenge to explain how this can be done?

“School inspection is impossible under the current inspection regime because 
of the sheer bewildering number of highly complex and interrelated judgments 
that inspectors are required to make in a very limited period of time,” 
Richards writes on the websiteSchools Improvement 
<http://schoolsimprovement.net/guest-post-on-ofsted-inspections-believing-and-acting-the-impossible/>
.

“No one short of the Almighty (no, not even [chief inspector Sir Michael] 
Wilshaw!) could manage it.”

Richards has written to Sean Harford, Ofsted’s national director for 
education, seeking guidance on how inspectors should do their job.

Ofsted tells us that Harford will respond to Richards “in due course”, and 
that it is “never the intention” that inspectors consider “all of the elements 
identified in the school inspection handbook”. Richards responds: “That’s not 
what the handbook says.” We suspect this will run and run.
