
Greece has featured several times in George Osborne’s narrative about the UK’s 
public finances. He likened Britain’s rising debt levels to those ofGreece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> in his 2010 budget and repeated the 
same warning in his latest budget speech.

Related: George Osborne lures voters towards glimmer of light in budget speech 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/mar/18/george-osborne-lures-voters-towards-glimmer-of-light-in-budget-speech>

But while it was possible in 2010 to mention both countries in the same breath 
after they both had annual public spending deficits in double digits, the 
situation now is quite different.

Debt

Athens has accumulated a debt mountain of 175% of GDP compared with a UK debt 
total that is expected to hit 80% of annual income, which is comparable with 
France and Germany.

GDP

Britain’s GDP has recovered to a point where it is higher than in 2010, 
whereas the Greek economy remains 25% below where it was before the financial 
crash.

Unemployment

Unemployment <https://www.theguardian.com/society/unemployment> in Britain and 
Greece was rising in 2010. However, the rate has since come down to 5.5% in the 
UK against a stubbornly high 25% in Greece and a youth unemployment rate of 51% 
that compares with 16% in the UK.


Interest rates

Greece cannot raise money on the international markets to finance its debts 
because if it tried, and let’s just say the current crisis is solved, the 
interest rate would be too high – at 20% or more. Britain’s status as a safe 
haven means it can raise 10-year bonds at an interest rate of about 2%.

Currency

Greece must rely on the European Central Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/european-central-bank> to print euros if 
it runs short. Athens has found out the hard way that the support of the ECB 
can be limited when times are tough. Britain has its own central bank, which 
can be called upon to print money to get out of a sticky situation. The Bank of 
England has spent £375bn buying UK government bonds and is a key reason the UK 
is considered a safe haven.
