
There is no getting around it: it has been a week when the showbiz world has 
seemed awfully black. Yet we haveRupert Murdoch 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/rupert-murdoch> to thank for a valiant 
attempt to take the mind off things, with the stories alleging that his ex wife 
had a crush on former British prime minister Tony Blair, providing a ray 
of light when all around is dark.

In fact, how apt that the entire hilarious business should call to mind a 
Philip Seymour Hoffman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/03/philip-seymour-hoffman-great-modern-american-cinema>
 movie – or rather, a movie in which the late actor gave one of his short but 
typically indelible performances. As the faultlessly obsequious manservant 
Brandt inThe Big Lebowski <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0118715/?ref_=nv_sr_1>, 
he is forced into action when an elderly billionaire is made a fool of by his 
young trophy wife.

Now I ask you: who is Wendi Deng <http://www.theguardian.com/media/wendi-deng> 
in this noirish mystery, as comical as it is complex? Is there not a fantasy 
whiff of Bunny Lebowski, the little madam whom the movie finds mixed up in all 
kinds of unsavoury shenanigans? And how long will it be before someone in the 
News Corp executive suite unwraps a parcel containing a green-lacquered Chinese 
toe?

All of which brings us to the latest issue of Vanity Fair, which in the course 
of chronicling the end of the Murdoch marriagereproduces two notes the magazine 
claims were written by Wendi 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/society/2014/03/wendi-deng-note-tony-blair>, to 
herself. One is alleged to concern Google boss Eric Schmidt, and begins with a 
dismissive reference to Mr Schmidt's girlfriend. "Lisa will never have my 
style, grace," opines the erstwhile Mrs Murdoch after some function or other. 
"I achieved my purpose of Eric saw me looking so gorgeous and so fantastic and 
so young, so cool, so chic, so stylish, so funny and he cannot have me. I'm not 
ever feel sad about losing Eric … Plus he is really ugly … I'm soooo happy I'm 
not with him."

Thanking you, Wendi, 45.

The other note allegedly relates to former prime minister Tony Blair 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair>, who apparently visited Wendi 
when Murdoch was out of town on occasion, though he has previously denied 
suggestions that the two became romantically involved.

"Oh shit, oh shit," Wendi opens. "Whatever why I'm so missing Tony. Because he 
is so charming and his clothes are so good. He has such good body and he has 
really really good legs Butt … And he is slim tall and good skin. Pierce blue 
eyes which I love. Love his eyes. Also I love his power on the stage … and what 
else and what else and what else …"

Well. According to Vanity Fair, this material came to light after Rupert took 
the painful step of having to interview devoted staff at his Californian ranch 
in Carmel as to how Wendi had been keeping herself busy in his absence. 
Incidentally, please don't think of this as intrusion into private anguish – at 
every step of his career, Murdoch has made clear his passionate interest in the 
justice of other people's marital difficulties being exposed, and you can only 
think that he must at last feel honoured to contribute to the canon.

Alas, even allowing for Vanity Fair's always-omniscient prose style, one has 
to fill in the dramatic blanks to some extent. And given the timing, in this 
week of all weeks, Lost in Showbiz can only picture Seymour Hoffman as Brandt, 
wearing a fawningly pained  expression in the wake of the discovery of the 
notes, and telling a visitor: "We've had some terrible news. Mr Murdoch is in 
seclusion in the west wing."

And there we must imagine the News Corp tycoon sitting, rug over his knees in 
some kind of bath chair, the firelight illuminating his tear-streaked face, as 
he steels his jaw to get the words out: "Strong men also cry. Strong men … also 
cry."
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FR33IEQjI1l8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FR33IEQjI1l8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FR33IEQjI1l8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FR33IEQjI1l8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading this on mobile? Click here to watch 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R33IEQjI1l8>.

Yes, I'm finding it quite impossible to separate fact from obvious fiction, 
and keep picturing a poolside Wendi lowering her sunglasses to inform Blair: "
I'll suck your cock for a thousand dollars 
<http://haeha.net/ill-suck-cock-1000-dollars>. Brandt can't watch though, or he 
has to pay a hundred."

Cue Hoffman desperately forcing a jovial laugh: "Ahahahahaha! Wonderful woman. 
We're all ... we're all very fond of her. Very free-spirited."

Quite how fond of Deng the staff at Carmel were is a matter of speculation, 
but you can't help thinking that if ever there were a moment for the mistress 
of the ranch to break out the Chinese characters, then perhaps the writing of 
such notes was it.

For what infinitely little it's worth, Lost in Showbiz does not believe that 
Blair would have sealed the deal with Wendi, keen though she appears to have 
been. Instinct screams that he would have been much too frightened. All those 
years of desperate sucking up to Murdoch; his wide-eyed awe in the face of the 
seriously rich – these are psychological impediments too far, for all the 
illicit thrill someone less craven might have savoured. Blair simply isn't that 
sort of man.

Such chaps do exist, of course, with the contrasting analogy in this case 
being a swashbuckler such as big-hitting West Indies batsman Chris Gayle. You 
don't have to be remotely interested in cricket to relish the hilarious tale of 
the Stanford Super Series, when the since-imprisoned billionaire Allen Stanford 
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jun/14/allen-stanford-jailed-110-years>
invited the English side to the Caribbean for a deeply ostentatious Twenty20 
series, with his Stanford Superstars captained by the then-West Indies skipper 
Gayle.

Now, for the first few days of this edifying episode, Stanford's young fiancee 
– who was also on the tournament's board – was much in evidence at the party. 
And then suddenly, overnight … she seemed to disappear. The reason, so it was 
strongly rumoured, was that Stanford discovered she'd, er, got overly friendly 
with none other than his captain, Chris Gayle. But please don't doff your hat 
to Chris yet, because the moment becomes even more exquisite. The series was 
indeedwon by his Stanford Superstars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2008/nov/02/stanford-super-series-englandcricketteam>
, which meant that Stanford was required to smile before all the cameras as he
shook hands, and handed over a $20m cheque – quite possibly the last of his 
that didn't bounce – to an insouciantly smirking Gayle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2008/nov/03/stanford-series-cricket-blog-andy-bull>
.

Oh, Tony Blair! You may have all your big houses and your war credits and your 
impenetrable umbrella companies. But you'llnever be Chris Gayle, and I think we 
can divide the world into people who think that's only to your credit, and 
people with whom anyone fun would care to have a drink.

Still, even as we raise our White Russians to the Philip Seymour Hoffmans and 
the Chris Gayles, let us thank the Rupert Murdochs and the Wendi Dengs and the 
Tony Blairs of this earthly sphere. We could all use a laugh in sad moments, 
and their commitment to providing one has been nothing if not timely.
