
No, there’s nothing wrong. Well, there is. Tom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tom-hiddleston>, God, I hate him. I was 
nearly over it, but withthe Le Carré 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/mar/06/the-night-manager-recap-episode-three-roper-hugh-laurie-tom-hiddleston-hollander>
 andHigh-Rise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/06/ben-wheatley-interview-high-rise-jg-ballard-mark-kermode>
 – where he’s covered in paint? – it’s worse than ever. Do I look as if I’m 
going mad? Well, I am. No, I did not ever say that aboutBenedict Cumberbatch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/benedict-cumberbatch>! Has Benedict 
Cumberbatch got a double first from Cambridge? Did I ever spend entire days on 
the Northern line just because someone saw him on it? Well then. Eddie who? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/eddie-redmayne> The Hiddle is different. The 
fans are totally different. Tom says Hiddlestoners write him these great 
letters, not the usual fangirl ones, I love him even more, because he truly 
respects our suffering. I wrote him this 10-page letter about Coriolanus, so 
he’d know I exist. Of course he’s not just being polite, or acting.

So if I did meet him – excuse me, it could happen, I know somebody who 
actually saw him on the South Bank. Yes, in real life – we’d talk about 
Shakespearean tragedy orArchipelago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/archipelago> or espionage, that amazing 
article he did in the Radio Times 
<http://www.radiotimes.com/news/2016-02-21/tom-hiddleston-on-the-night-manager-how-could-you-get-away-with-being-a-spy>
, I know it off by heart: “To my mind, it feels as though there are still so 
many secrets.” Why can’t I just be reincarnated as his keyboard? Can you 
believe the person who wrote that could be on the Northern line right now?

Related: Modern tribes: the award winner 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/27/modern-tribes-the-oscar-winner-catherine-bennett>

Well, just look at him: the smile (God, his smile), the frown, the body, his 
manners, the hair, his brain – where do I stop? If you don’t get it, great, one 
less person to worry about. I wish he’d become a priest; I wouldn’t mind 
sharing him with the holy spirit. I put that on Tumblr, though it sounded less 
weird when I wrote it: it was more like, damn you, Hiddle, you’re just too 
beautiful for this world, that’s why you’ve ruined my life, don’t feel bad, I 
love you. That’s not weird. I didn’t even put in that if he can’t father my 
children, I’d rather have my ovaries removed. Sorry, if you’re a Hiddlestoner, 
that’s completely normal. I have to go on the Northern line now.
