
A council has closed down its free fortnightly newspaper because it cost too 
much to publish.

When the London <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> borough of Barking & 
Dagenham launched a paper calledthenews four years ago it claimed it would save 
the council money. It would appear to have done just the opposite.

According to an article in the paper's final issue, 
<http://www.lbbd.gov.uk/thenews/Documents/thenews-96.pdf> its closure is "part 
of a raft of savings to allow the council to balance its books in the new 
financial year."

At the time of launch, the council estimated that it would save the Â£250,000 a 
year it spent on placing advertising in the local commercial newspaper, the 
Barking & Dagenham Post.

In a subsequent row in 2011 about the council's failure to abide by a 
government code forbidding newspaper-publishing by local authorities (seehere 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/greenslade/2011/mar/10/council-run-newspapers-local-newspapers>
 andhere 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/greenslade/2011/mar/11/local-newspapers-council-run-newspapers>
), the council then advanced an editorial, rather than financial, reason to go 
on publishing its paper.

Whatever the case, it has gone to the wall. But can the resource-strapped 
Archant-owned Post bounce back? Its sale has fallen below 10,000 a week in a 
borough with a population of 180,000.

Why are council papers exempted from press regulation?

On a related subject, it appears odd that the government is prepared to allow 
council-owned papers to be exempt from a new system of press regulation.

And it's no wonder that Jim Fitzpatrick, Labour MP for the east London area of 
Poplar and Limehouse,should be in the forefront of attacking the exemption. 
<http://www.eastlondonadvertiser.co.uk/news/mp_jim_fitzpatrick_slams_press_regulation_application_1_2175655>

He serves part of a borough, Tower Hamlets, where the council publishes a 
weekly paper, East End Life, that has spent years strangling the life out of 
the commercial local paper, the East London Advertiser (also owned by Archant).

Fitzpatrick said: "East End Life has become too big and too biased. 
Hand-delivered to nearly every household in the borough it enjoys a privileged 
position without any real oversight."

Sources: Newspaper Society 
<http://www.newspapersoc.org.uk/02/may/13/barking-and-dagenham-council-closes-council-newspaper-to-save-cash>
/Barking & Dagenham Council 
<http://www.lbbd.gov.uk/thenews/Documents/thenews-96.pdf>/East London Advertiser
 
<http://www.eastlondonadvertiser.co.uk/news/mp_jim_fitzpatrick_slams_press_regulation_application_1_2175655>
