
Andy Burnham <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/andyburnham> says young 
people in the north-west of England have it harder then their southern 
counterparts because other northerners “take the mickey” when they say they 
want to be a doctor, lawyer or politician.

The shadow home secretary and MP for Leigh in Greater Manchester 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/greater-manchester> also said he had been forced 
to move from his native Warrington to London after failing to get work as a 
journalist at the Guardian’s Manchester office or the Manchester Evening News.

He made the remarks as he officially launched his bid to be the Labour 
candidate for mayor of Greater Manchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/18/andy-burnham-to-stand-for-mayor-of-greater-manchester>
.

“It’s harder sometimes, growing up in the north-west of England, isn’t it?” he 
asked an audience of supporters and journalists at the Lowry arts centre in 
Salford. “Because you say to someone: ‘Oh, I’d like to be a doctor.’ Or be a 
lawyer or a member of parliament. And you worry you’ll have the mickey taken 
out of you straight away.”
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F18%2Fandy-burnham-mayor-manchester-video-interview&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F18%2Fandy-burnham-mayor-manchester-video-interview&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andy%20Burnham%3A%20could%20an%20Evertonian%20be%20mayor%20of%20Manchester%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F18%2Fandy-burnham-mayor-manchester-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andy+Burnham%3A+could+an+Evertonian+be+mayor+of+Manchester%3F+%E2%80%93+video+interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F18%2Fandy-burnham-mayor-manchester-video-interview&media=>
Andy Burnham: could an Evertonian be mayor of Manchester? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/may/18/andy-burnham-mayor-manchester-video-interview>
Sometimes the mocking was positive, he said, because “we’re down to earth”. 
But the mentality held young people in the north-west back, he said, declaring 
it his mission to give them the confidence to believe in themselves:

“When you really get down to what I’m about, I believe young people here can 
achieve the same if not more than young people anywhere else in this country, 
who sadly currently have better opportunities to get along because they’ve got 
a different accent or they know the right people,” he said.

The comments received a mixed reaction. Gerard McDermott QC, a 
Manchester-based barrister who was brought up in Ashton-under-Lyne, pointed 
out: “Manchester has quite a lot of Mancunian lawyers. And doctors. And MPs – 
all proud to be from Manchester.”

He added: “I am eighth of nine children with no connections in the law at all. 
Decided to be a barrister at age 12. No one ever mocked me or tried to dissuade 
me.”

But Kristy Turner, who has taught chemistry for 11 years in both state and 
private schools in Manchester, said there was an element of truth in Burnham’s 
observations.

“The truth is that actually a number of young people in the north-west do lack 
ambition, mainly caused by plentiful low-waged jobs, eg in shops,” she said. 
“However, despite this I have never known kids to be mocked for saying they 
wanted to be a doctor or lawyer (MP probably, but then to be fair I suspect 
that would happen down south too).

“One of my former pupils at a state comprehensive in the bottom half of the 
league table spent his summer shadowing his MP in year 12 and went on to Oxford 
to study politics, philosophy and economics.”

Despite having moved south to study English at Cambridge University, Burnham 
said he had had his heart set on returning to his native north of England to 
get a job but was thwarted.

“When I left university I wanted to work here. And I went to be a journalist, 
unpaid, an internship of a kind, on the Middleton Guardian [in Rochdale, 
Greater Manchester]. I tried my best to make that work. I kept writing these 
letters to the MEN [Manchester Evening News], the Guardian … I wrote to all of 
them,” he said.

“In the end I had to say to my mum and dad: ‘I’ve got to go to London.’ I knew 
that’s what I had to do to get on. But it was a wrench.”
