
At a parliamentary meeting on the case for disability-inclusive development 
three years ago, one MP playing devil’s advocate said: “Yes, but isn’t this all 
too costly?”

Attitudes to disability inclusion may have moved on over the past few years, 
but concerns over its financial costs have not gone away.


It’s true there are expenses to disability-inclusive development. For example, 
printing documents in braille and tackling discriminatory attitudes, such as 
the idea that women with disabilities don’t need sexual and reproductive health 
services. Yet it can be lower than people think – making a new school building 
accessible is thought to costless than 1% 
<http://www-wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2007/03/01/000310607_20070301144941/Rendered/PDF/388640EdNotes1August2005CostOfAccess12.pdf>
 (pdf) of the total cost of construction.

But while inclusion isn’t cheap, excluding disabled people has a much higher 
price. In the long run, leaving disabled people out of global development is 
counterproductive and to do so is to deny them their human rights.


Related: 'Being classified as a terrorist threat makes me feel excluded' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jun/20/disability-travel-flights-international-exluded>

While I don’t buy-in to the idea that economic arguments matter most, 
researchers have shown 
<http://disabilitycentre.lshtm.ac.uk/files/2014/07/Costs-of-Exclusion-and-Gains-of-Inclusion-Report.pdf>
 (pdf) there’s a strong financial case to be made for inclusion.


The World Report on Disability 
<http://www.who.int/disabilities/world_report/2011/report.pdf> (pdf) in 2011 
found that disabled people are more likely to be unemployed, and to earn less 
when employed. Addressing this discrimination in work would have clear economic 
benefits – increasing production by disabled people, and increasing their 
spending.

We’ve seen this first-hand in Sudan, where ADD International’s partners work 
with women like Tahani, who is deaf. When Tahani left school, she was stuck at 
home with few opportunities. Then local disability activists offered her craft 
making and hairdressing training in sign language. At the same time, the group 
spoke out in the community about the rights and potential of deaf women. Now 
Tahani earns a decent income and is able to buy new goods for the family home.

The economic benefits of disability inclusion go far beyond direct access to 
work. Supporting people with complex disabilities to undertake self-care or to 
help with household tasks, and enabling a child with disability to attend 
school all have broader benefits in opening up new opportunities and 
redistributing care burdens, with knock-on economic as well as social impacts.


Several studies have attempted to put a figure on the economic cost of 
exclusion.One commonly quoted report 
<http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_emp/---ifp_skills/documents/publication/wcms_119305.pdf>
 (pdf) by the International Labour Organization suggested the cost could be up 
to 7% of GDP in some low- and middle-income countries. But in fact, the 
economic implications of exclusion are so wide-ranging, and depend so much on 
the context, that it’s hard to be sure of the exact costs without more research.

Excluding disabled people from development on any grounds – including cost – 
is discrimination

What we do know from our work in Africa and Asia, is that when everybody has 
the opportunity to contribute their talents and creativity without 
discrimination, this drives the whole community forward. As one witness told 
MPs during a recentparliamentary inquiry 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/international-development-committee/inquiries/parliament-2010/disability-and-development/>
 on disability and development: “One community leader from Malawi said to me: 
‘Now that disabled people are benefiting our community, the whole community has 
come out of poverty ... Before, they were dependent; they were drawing our 
resources. Now they are productive, it means the whole community has a better 
potential.’”


But of course the real costs of exclusion aren’t just narrow economic ones: 
it’s the human costs that matter most. Equality is a basic human right – an end 
in itself, not just a means to economic ends. As theBond disability and 
development group argues 
<https://www.bond.org.uk/resources/the-value-for-money-of-leaving-no-one-behind>
, excluding disabled people from development on any grounds – including cost – 
is discrimination, and is at odds with human rights treaties such as theUN 
convention on the rights of persons with disabilities 
<http://www.un.org/disabilities/documents/convention/convoptprot-e.pdf> (pdf).


At ADD International, we are all too familiar with the human costs of 
disability and exclusion: costs for people like Mamun, a man with psychosocial 
disability in Bangladesh, whose family felt they had no choice but to tie him 
up for his safety.

Or like Grace, a woman with physical impairment in northern Uganda. She was 
repeatedly raped by a neighbour, and infected with HIV/Aids. Grace has been 
prescribed anti-retroviral therapy, but struggles to pay for people to carry 
her to the local hospital to collect her medication.


Related: The moment I felt excluded because of my disability – share your 
stories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jun/08/the-moment-i-felt-excluded-because-of-my-disability-share-your-stories>

The sustainable development goals reaffirm global commitment to 
non-discrimination 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/ng-interactive/2016/feb/04/sustainable-development-goals-marginalised-people-leave-no-one-behind>
, where cases like Mamun’s and Grace’s would not be tolerated.


Now the challenge is to allocate resources in a way that matches this 
ambition. All development actors – from governments to grassroots activists – 
have a role to play.



Meeting the ambition to leave no one behind will not be possible without a 
change in the way we think about the costs and benefits of inclusive 
development. Counting costs is important, but it’s also important to be clear 
about which costs – human, not just financial – really count. In the future, we 
shouldn’t be questioning if inclusive development is too expensive, but why 
disabled people have been excluded for so long.

This piece benefited from discussions with colleagues at ADD International (in 
particular Jasmine O’Connor) and the Bond disability and development group (in 
particular Hannah Loryman). However, the views expressed are solely those of 
the author.

Polly Meeks is deputy director of policy at ADD International 
<http://www.add.org.uk/>.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
