
You’re at work, deep in concentration, focusing fully and making good 
progress. Then a conversation begins nearby and, as much as you want to block 
out the noise, your train of thought is derailed. Sound familiar?


Of course, not everyone craves quiet to concentrate. Some people need 
background chatter, while others prefer to listen to music. All this poses a 
dilemma when it comes to designing an office. How do you create a physical 
working environment that caters for everyone and enables every member of staff 
to work to the best of their ability?


Beatriz Arantes, a senior researcher and psychologist at Steelcase, which 
manufactures office furniture, says we can’t help but be distracted in the 
office, it is rooted in our evolution. “From a survival point of view, it was 
important to be attentive to your environment as there could be something 
that’s an opportunity or a threat,” she says. “We are prewired to notice other 
things and can’t switch off our attentiveness to the environment.”


Designers at Steelcase studied neuroscientific research around focus and 
distraction and have identified three different brain modes workers use in the 
office: focus (concentrating on a task), regeneration (resting your mind, or 
seeking sensory input such as interaction with colleagues) and activation 
(physical activity that stimulates the brain). Our brains have different needs 
during the course of the day so creating spaces around these will help 
employees work better, the researchers say.

Imagine what you could get done if you focused for eight hours straight. 
Unfortunately, it isn’t possible, says Arantes. Focus, also known as controlled 
attention, is a limited resource and is energy consuming.


“We’re choosing to keep something in our minds while simultaneously inhibiting 
other thoughts from taking centre stage and stopping other things switching our 
attention.” Our brains use it sparingly. She compares it to a motion-detecting 
sensor for limiting waste in water usage in sinks, or for the lights in a room 
– “it turns on when someone is there and needs it, but otherwise switches off 
automatically”.


Offices should consider providing zones for people to work where there will be 
minimal distractions. These might include quiet areas, enclosed enclaves, or 
sheltered spaces, where staff can concentrate without the fear of being 
interrupted.


Before we shut ourselves away, however, it’s worth considering this: 
colleagues can be a source of inspiration as well as a distraction. 
Brainstorming ideas, or casual chats with co-workers, can help solve a 
particular problem.


“Being around other people is really energising to us,” says Dr Sally 
Augustin, an environmental psychologist and a principal at Design with Science. 
“If you think about how we evolved as a species it was important for us to be 
paying attention to the others around us for all kinds of reasons, so when we 
see and hear other people it’s an energising force.”


Creating places where people can meet and talk, such as a cafe or communal 
hubs, away from the quiet areas, can offer opportunities for interactions.


Another factor that can affect productivity is where people sit. Some 
companies operate a hot desking policy, where staff don’t have an assigned 
workspace. However critics argue that it can decrease job satisfaction. Astudy 
by the University of Wolverhampton 
<https://www.wlv.ac.uk/about-us/corporate-information/wlvdialogue/previous-issues/wlvdialogue---summer-2011/taking-the-hot-desk/>
 in 2011 found that the lack of a dedicated workspace can reduce motivation and 
cause stress. Then there are the obvious inefficiencies, such as hunting round 
for a seat and not knowing where colleagues are sitting. In addition, having a 
dedicated workspace allows staff to personalise it with photos etc, and it has 
the added benefit that it can help us recall useful information.

For example, you might be working on a project, brainstorming for ideas, and 
gazing around your workplace. You might happen to be looking at a certain photo 
on your desk when you come up with a great idea. “When we have an inspiration 
we link that inspiration to what we were looking at when it comes to us,” says 
Augustin. “When we continue to work on the project later and look at the same 
thing we remember that thought.”

Related: The world's coolest offices – in pictures 
<http://www.theguardian.com/careers/gallery/2015/nov/13/the-worlds-coolest-offices-in-pictures>

If you’re feeling sluggish, instead of reaching for a coffee consider going 
for a jog. Studies have shown a linkbetween exercise and mental function 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2010/jan/18/running-brain-memory-cell-growth>
. Movement stimulates the production ofa protein called BDNF 
<http://resulb.ulb.ac.be/facs/ism/docs/behaviorBDNF.pdf> (brain-derived 
neurotrophic factor), says Arantes. This stimulates the birth of new neurons 
and new dendrites (the arms or branches of the neurons, so to speak) on 
existing neurons. “Dendrites connect and communicate with other neurons, and 
the fact that we can create new connections in the brain is what allows new 
ideas to emerge.”


Office layout, therefore, should encourage movement, such as requiring workers 
to get up and walk to a kitchen, or water cooler, to get something to drink.


When it comes to office decor, the choice of colour can help workers feel more 
relaxed. “A relaxed mental state supports creative thinking. Your brain has to 
almost have the opportunity to roam around within itself,” says Augustin. One
study <http://psp.sagepub.com/content/38/6/784.short>found that a brief glimpse 
of the colour green helped workers enhance their creative performance. However, 
researchers who carried out the study say it’s too early to say how these 
findings could apply to office design.


What researchers have found is that happy staff are more productive 
<https://www2.warwick.ac.uk/fac/soc/economics/staff/eproto/workingpapers/happinessproductivity.pdf>
. Experiments by economists at the University of Warwick found that happiness 
made people around 12% more productive.


If businesses are considering how to translate these findings into workspace 
design, Augustin cautions against trying to overtly manipulate people’s moods. 
Instead, create an environment that shows the worker they are respected and 
valued. “Non-verbal messages that an employer provides you with matter more 
than anything else.”

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
