
Governments engaged in higher education policymaking have frequently used the 
“big public review” to create political cover, using independent groups of 
experts – rather than ministers – to suggest unpopular policies.

From Robbins 
<http://www.educationengland.org.uk/documents/robbins/robbins1963.html>, to 
Dearing 
<http://www.educationengland.org.uk/documents/dearing1997/dearing1997.html>, to 
Browne 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/422565/bis-10-1208-securing-sustainable-higher-education-browne-report.pdf>
 (pdf), recent history has seen these reports at the centre of higher education 
reform. In each review, the influence of vice-chancellors and other sector 
leaders were writ large.

This is because vice-chancellors and other sector heavyweights were always 
front and centre of the review, doing much of the work that underpinned the 
outcomes. Backchannels between the sector’s key leaders and the politicians 
were well-established, allowing for careful choreography of policy development 
and implementation.

But this time, there’s something very odd going on. There is no public review, 
and sector leaders report that the government is not working with them in the 
usual way.

For vice-chancellors, this is unnerving. They have made their representations 
on a vast array of high-stakes issues, including the rapid expansion of private 
higher education provision, the link between the Teaching Excellence Framework 
and fees, and the radical shake-up of sector agencies and their 
responsibilities. This time, the government appears to be ploughing on with its 
plans regardless of their popularity with vice-chancellors.

We’re now only days away from seeing a white paper and possibly even an HE 
bill. Not since the passage of the2004 Higher Education Act 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2004/8/contents> has there been a major 
parliamentary debate about universities, nor has there been a programme of 
reform that required such big changes in the law to accomplish. It’s a huge 
moment for universities.

The sector is braced for the white paper to go further and deeper than the 
green paper 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/higher-education-teaching-excellence-social-mobility-and-student-choice>
 to produce a radical shake-up. But these policies are being designed by a 
government that seems unnervingly reluctant to engage the sector.

What’s going on?

There are several possible explanations. Think back to the last parliament. 
David Willetts was popular among sector leaders because of his strong 
engagement with them and his visible passion for the subject. But, perversely, 
a good relationship with the sector does not go down so well in Whitehall.

Ministers “going native” in the sector they’re meant to be working on is 
frowned upon in a political culture that favours arms-length relationships. By 
keeping a careful distance, it becomes harder for critics to argue that a 
minister is colluding in “provider capture” – where those who supply 
state-supported services pursue their own interests at the expense of 
consumers. It is also far easier for the minister to press for radical reform 
and to take on vested interests without having to worry about the possibility 
of having to work with them one day.

Bill Rammell, John Denham and David Willetts are three notable ministers who 
reformed higher education in recent memory. All now work in the higher 
education sector in different guises. The sector opened its doors to them after 
they left politics because they had fostered warm working relationships in the 
draughty corridors of power.

Pace of change

The relationships between ministers and those working in higher education are 
being rewritten by this government partly because of circumstance, but also by 
design. As well as being radical, the government is moving extremely quickly.

Perhaps the pace of change simply makes it impractical for policy to be 
substantially chewed over late at night at the Athenæum. Or maybe this 
generation of vice-chancellors does not carry the same heft in the public realm 
as their predecessors.

Either way, universities are not the only sector to notice a change in 
approach. You don’t even need to look beyond the borders of the Department for 
Business, Innovation and Skills (Bis) for other examples.

Bis seemed inexplicably caught out by Tata Steel’s long-planned board meeting 
last month, which decided the company would close its Port Talbot site. Two 
weeks ago, the CBI sensationally slammed the government’s planned reforms to 
apprenticeships. It seems hard to imagine either of these things happening if 
the department had been fully engaged with their sectors.

And that’s just Bis. Take a look around Whitehall and you’ll see a similar 
story repeating itself. Jeremy Hunt’s approach at the Department of Health is 
notable because of the clarity of his intent to take on vested interests. Sajid 
Javid and Jo Johnson haven’t been so explicit in their language, but they 
appear to have little appetite for satisfying what are, in their view, vested 
interests in higher education.

Deliberately aloof

This aloofness is likely to be visible in the finalised policies. Abolishing 
Hefce <http://www.hefce.ac.uk/> (the Higher Education Funding Council for 
England is the only organisation that purely looks after the interest of 
providers) in favour of establishing anOffice for Students  
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/student-choice-at-the-heart-of-new-higher-education-reforms>
is the clearest and most high-profile example. Without a body able to fight the 
sector’s corner from inside the machine, universities will be hopelessly 
exposed.

And maybe that’s a feature, not a bug. Keeping vice-chancellors happy has 
never seemed less important to Westminster – only time will tell whether that 
results in more or less successful policies.

In the meantime, as an HE bill heads to parliament, vice-chancellors will have 
another chance to plead their case to MPs, peers and the public in a 
long-overdue debate. Let battle be joined.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
