
With visitors flooding to Gothenburg, the city is quickly becoming a favourite 
weekend destination in Europe. Norwegian and British Airways are even doubling 
their flights to Gothenburg from the UK during 2016. As a result of the 
newfound interest, the city is now buzzing with creativity and innovative 
destinations. This is the run-down of the best of what Gothenburg has to offer 
right now.

Related: Live like a Swede 
<https://www.theguardian.com/holiday-in-sweden/2016/may/03/live-like-a-swede> 

Music and culture

Way out West (11-13 August)
Sweden’s most well-known music festival, Way Out West, will celebrate its 10th 
birthday this year. PJ Harvey, Seinabo Sey, Cherrie and Travi$ Scott are some 
of the big acts booked for the three-day festival, which is held in the city 
park Slottsskogen. The festival has gained lots of attention for its 
environmentally friendly approach; since 2012 it only serves vegetarian food 
and last year it became milk free in order to reduce the levels of green house 
gases. Book your tickets onwayoutwest.se <http://www.wayoutwest.se/>

Gothenburg Green World (all year 2016)
A new initiative in Gothenburg aims to get more people involved in gardening 
and living a more ecological lifestyle. This summer, new exhibitions will take 
place in four main parks and 18 popup parks created by a wide range of artists, 
architects and educational institutions. They will appear for nine weeks 
between 4 June and 7 August, on the most famous street in Gothenburg, Avenyn. 
“Whether you just want to enjoy the flowers and the greenery, get gardening 
advice or insight into how the city of Gothenburg works with ecological and 
social sustainability in different projects, hopefully there is something for 
everybody to get inspired by,” says Emma Johansson, gardening architect and 
project leader of the initiative.

Modern art
Gothenburg has become a go-to destination for its many museums and art 
galleries. Besides the larger museums such as theGothenburg Museum of Art 
<http://konstmuseum.goteborg.se>, Hasselblad centre 
<http://www.hasselbladfoundation.org/wp/> and Röhsska Museum of Fashion, Design 
and Decorative Arts <http://rohsska.se/>, there are plenty of galleries spread 
out around town. For a Berlinesque experience, make sure to visitRöda Sten 
Konsthall <http://rodastenkonsthall.se/>, an old boilerhouse turned art gallery 
and club. The building is covered in graffiti and locals love to come here on a 
sunny day for a coffee in the sun, right next to the Gothenburg harbour. Other 
stops should includeGalleri Thomassen <http://www.gallerithomassen.se/>, 
Galleri 54 <http://galleri54.com/>, Urban Artroom <http://www.urbanartroom.se/> 
andGalleri Box <http://galleribox.se/?lang=en>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkkg%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkkg%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fabee381094b03eac954bc2b0b6b8371e43ad7177%2F0_2_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20things%20to%20do%20in%20Gothenburg&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkkg%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top+10+things+to+do+in+Gothenburg&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkkg%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fabee381094b03eac954bc2b0b6b8371e43ad7177%2F0_2_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Refuel at one of Gothenburg’s excellent food trucks. Photograph: Jennie Smith 
Food and Drink

Rosenlund
Gothenburg is becoming a top choice for foodies looking for great restaurant 
experiences. The old harbour town is now seeing a revival of industrial 
buildings being turned into hip restaurants. The location next to the ocean 
makes it a world-class destination for fresh seafood. If you haven’t been to 
Feskekörka, then this must be your first stop; the indoor fish market got its 
name “fish church” from its resemblance to a gothic church. The area around it, 
Rosenlund, which was up until recently was a dodgy part of Gothenburg, is now 
becoming a hip destination thanks to restaurants includingBarabicu 
<http://barabicu.se/>, Market <http://marketrosenlund.se/>, Boulebar 
<http://www.boulebar.se/> and Fee Fi Fo Fum Ramen <http://feefifofum.se/>.

Auktionsverket
Not far away, in the area of Linnéstaden, an old auction house 
<http://www.tredjelanggatan.se/> has been turned into several new stylish 
restaurants, includingTaverna Averna <http://www.tavernaaverna.se/>, Tacos & 
Tequila <http://www.tacosandtequila.se/> and Made in China 
<http://www.madeinchina.nu/>. You can get your coffee from Kafé Magasinet 
<http://kafemagasinet.se/>, bread from Levantine bakery 
<http://www.levantine.se/> and a glass of wine from Olsson’s wine 
<http://olssonsvin.se/>. This is where you typically start and end your 
evening. “Our main ambition is to create a lively bar where you relax and enjoy 
yourself. The well-selected wine is the icing on the cake,” says Olssons bar’s 
Mariana Valderrama.

On top of Auktionsverket is a cultural arena 
<http://www.auktionsverketkulturarena.se/>, which organises talks and other 
events, such as the recent fashion festival Fashion UP!. Don’t miss the chance 
to grab a pizza and beer from micro brewerBrewers <http://brewersbeerbar.se/> 
across the road.

Food trucks
If you just want to grab a quick bite on route, one of Gothenburg’s excellent 
food trucks is a must.Strömmingsluckan <http://www.strommingsluckan.se/> on the 
street Magasinsgatan has been a local’s favourite for years, and serves fresh 
mackerel with mashed potato and lingon berries. Next to it isJinx 
<http://jinxfoodtruck.com/>, which serves steamed baos, and sausage truck Korv 
United <http://korvunited.se/>.

“Food served fast doesn’t have to be fast food, so savor our hearty sauerkraut 
or chilli pickled red onions with a nitrate free banger, and watch the world go 
by,” says Mats Sanguin, founder of Korv United. They also have a fish and chips 
truck on the square Kungstorget “in case the Brits get homesick”, Sanguin adds.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkkg%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkkg%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53138732f233b3309da03447d69cf7d4101e4e35%2F0_0_5700_3420%2F5700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20things%20to%20do%20in%20Gothenburg&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkkg%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top+10+things+to+do+in+Gothenburg&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tkkg%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53138732f233b3309da03447d69cf7d4101e4e35%2F0_0_5700_3420%2F5700.jpg>
 The Gothenburg archipelago is easily accessible by ferry, and features 
beautiful car-free islands. Photograph: GalleryStock 
Outdoor adventures 

Gothenburg archipelago
If you are visiting Gothenburg, it is a must to take a day out in the 
archipelago, which consists of more than 20 islands. The easiest way to access 
it is by a ferry from Saltholmen, which is only a short tram-ride away from the 
city centre (and you can use the same ticket). Visit car-free islands such as 
Styrsö, Vrångö and Brännö, the perfect spots for bike rides and long walks. If 
you like an adventure, book in a seal safari, fishing trip or boat excursion. 
For a quieter trip, make sure to stop byBrännö Värdshus 
<http://brannovardshus.se/> for incredible seafood and Café Öbergska 
<http://obergska.se/> on Styrsö for coffee and cakes. 

“Whether you want to grab a coffee and cake in the sun or a glass of wine in 
the herb garden, this is the perfect spot to relax away from the city buzz,” 
says Michael Carlund, owner of the café. View ferry timetables on
styrsöbolaget.se <http://www.styrsobolaget.se/>

Liseberg amusement park
For an outdoor adventure in the heart of the city head to the famous 
Gothenburg landmarkLiseberg <http://liseberg.se/sv/hem/>, which first opened in 
1923. This is Sweden’s biggest amusement park, offering the whole family plenty 
of attractions. This year sees the opening of a Victorian garden, where little 
ones can enjoy a children’s paradise and a flower carousel, and adults can try 
out the new AeroSpin, with great views over the park. Besides roller coasters, 
log rides and carousels, Liseberg also offer plenty of entertainment in the 
form of concerts and theatre.

Canal activities
If you are up for an adventure and would like to see Gothenburg from the 
water, then kayaking is the perfect activity. There are several tours to join, 
includingPoint 65 Kayak Center 
<http://www.goteborg.com/en/point-65-kayak-center/> for central tours including 
the Gothenburg moat built in 1624, they also offer stand-up paddling. Try
Långedrags Kajakuthyrning <http://www.langedragskajakuthyrning.n.nu/> for tours 
around the archipelago. For a less sweaty experience, join the Paddan 
sightseeing boat tour, which will take you around the city centre, including 
its low bridges.

Cycle
Gothenburg is the perfect destination to bike around: you can cycle from the 
city centre to the coast in less than 30 minutes, from there you can jump on a 
ferry with your bike to the archipelago. Some islands don’t allow cars, so your 
bike will be very useful. Rent a bike from one of many bike rentals, such as
Cykelkungen <http://cykelkungen.se/>, the public scheme Styr & Ställ 
<http://en.goteborgbikes.se/>, which offers rental bikes placed at more than 50 
stations around the town, orCykelkillarna <http://www.cykelkillarna.se/>. 

“The best way to experience any city is by bike. Two-wheels offer the most 
freedom and sightseeing opportunities. While in Gothenburg, make sure steer 
your bike towards Slottskoggen park, the Botanical Garden, the archipelago and 
the neighbourhoods Haga and Linnéstaden,” says Sebastian Nistor, founder of 
Cykelkillarna. A great experience is also to join a tour byBike Tour Gothenburg 
& Rental <https://www.facebook.com/biketourgothenburg>, which will guide you to 
the parts of town in two hours.
