
In a recent online chat, experts joined us to discuss how businesses can work 
together with government to make progress on sustainability. This is what we 
learned:


1. There are lots of examples of business and government collaborating for 
development.

Construction companies worked with the government of South Africa to create 
courses in construction skills in the run-up to the 2010 World Cup, for 
example. Brewing and beverage company SAB Miller has worked with the government 
of Mozambique on a locally producedcassava-based beer 
<http://www.sabmiller.com/home/stories/rooting-for-impala>, giving farmers a 
market for a crop they were previously struggling to sell.


Business, government and non-profit Fairtrade Foundation , have worked 
together to ensure migrant workers in the Dominican Republic havelegal status 
on banana farms 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/feb/06/lidl-sustainable-bananas-commitment-workers-dominican-republic-supermarket-prices>
. And UK supermarket Sainsbury’s has worked with the Department for 
International Development todevelop the Congolese coffee value chain 
<http://www.j-sainsbury.co.uk/media/latest-stories/2013/20130719-drc-fairtrade-sopacdi-coffee/>
 and bring the beans to UK shelves.


2. In some cases business needs to partner with government simply to ensure it 
can operate efficiently.


In developing markets, companies can’t always rely on the supporting 
infrastructure (such as roads, water, electricity and a healthy workforce) that 
they might take for granted in developed markets.


Darian Stibbe, executive director of The Partnering Initiative, 
<http://thepartneringinitiative.org/> explains that to ensure success in these 
environments, companies will often need to invest in improving the ecosystem 
around them.

3. NGOs can play an important role in making sure partnerships are transparent.


They can also act as brokers between business and government. Nicolas Mounard, 
CEO of NGOFarm Africa <http://www.farmafrica.org/>, explains that its role is 
to co-ordinate the different players in partnerships, understand their 
different agendas, and constantly put smallholder farmers at the centre of 
discussions.

4. Communities set to benefit from a public-private partnership (PPP) must be 
engaged.


In 2014, the Fairtrade Foundation found examples of agricultural PPPs 
prioritising commercial interests while overlooking farmers’ concerns, 
according to Shivani Reddy, policy manager at the Fairtrade Foundation.


In the worst case, she says hundreds of farmers claimed to have been forced 
from their land for a sugarcane project in Malawi.

5. We should remember that the sustainable development goals 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive>
 (SDGs) aren’t business goals. 


The challenge for business is translating desired development impacts into 
opportunities, says Erik Simanis, aconsultant <http://eriksimanis.com/> on 
corporate growth and innovation. If the goal is malaria prevention, for 
example, the business proxy would be increased sales of mosquito repellents to 
low-income consumers.


6. There’s a toolkit in the making to help businesses understand their impact 
on global sustainable development.

Andrew Jenkins of development organisation BRAC <http://www.brac.net/> 
explains thatGlobal Value <http://www.global-value.eu/> is an EU-funded project 
bringing together CSR leaders to develop a framework that will aid business in 
better assessing and managing impacts.


7. Partnering isn’t the only way to advance development.

Partnerships consume time, resources and energy, and Simanis warns against 
collaborating for the sake of it or rushing to hail PPPs as a success before 
there is proof of success.


Sahba Sobhani, technical advisor at Business Call to Action 
<http://www.businesscalltoaction.org/>, agrees that business and government can 
support each other without formally partnering. For example, government 
investment in roads in rural areas, which can enable business to expand their 
value chain, and business collaboration on public health pandemics pandemics 
such as Ebola.

8. A changing political landscape and staff turnaround are big challenges.

Amanda Gardiner, vice president of sustainability and social innovation at 
Pearson <https://uk.pearson.com/>, says that you can spend years working on a 
partnership only for a change in government or key partner to prove detrimental.
This doesn’t have to be the case she says, but often is.


