
In the same way I anticipated becoming more rightwing as I grew older, I 
expected my views onabortion <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abortion> to 
change after I had a child. But no. In fact the idea of doing this babying 
against my will – of haemorrhaging this quantity of love, of spending the 
entire weekend of 14 May weeping to Abba’s “Slipping Through My Fingers”, of 
having to ask for so much help – the idea of giving birth to a child that 
wasn’t wanted has made me appreciate abortion even more.

I love abortion the way I love liver transplants and antidepressants. I love 
that it saves people. I love that it rescues women from lives they are not 
prepared to live, from poverty, pain and death. I love that I live in a country 
and a time when we can choose to have children and how to plan our lives. Lives 
that include sex, unplanned and sometimes silly, sometimes regrettable. I love 
that abortion allows women to control their own reproduction when a condom 
breaks, or when that’s what they need to tell their sister.

We have the right to prevent pregnancy, to get pregnant, and to terminate a 
pregnancy – the same right that ensures nobody is prohibited from reproducing 
and that nobody is forced to have an abortion against their will. Which is why, 
rather than “mutinying”(as reported by the Daily Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3593847/I-ve-wrong-insists-midwives-chief-abortion-storm-no-idea-members-didn-t-ask-Board-axing-time-limit.html>
) after their union boss signed them up to BPAS’s (British Pregnancy Advisory 
Service)We Trust Women campaign <http://www.wetrustwomen.org.uk/> to 
decriminalise abortion, members of the Royal College of Midwives should be in 
favour of helping their patients have children when they choose.

I love abortion – I love that it rescues women from lives they’re not prepared 
to live

Their concerns, that if the abortion time limit were to be removed then some 
women would terminate at any time up to nine months, are unfounded. Less than 
0.1% of all abortions take place after 24 weeks gestation – there’s no evidence 
that removing criminal sanctions leads to an increase in later terminations.
Women <http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> know what they’re doing, 
and what they want.

This right, to control our own reproduction, is at the core of women’s long 
and tedious fight for equality. So the fact that abortion remains in criminal 
law in the UK is not just shocking, but also… embarrassing. For a country that 
sees itself as modern, as progressive, how illogical it is that women’s bodies 
are still being regulated by a law passed before they were given the vote.

Rather than trusting a woman to make the choice about whether she is ready to 
have a baby, the decision is in the hands of doctors. Two doctors. If they 
don’t give a woman legal authorisation to have an abortion (or if she doesn’t 
get that authorisation in time), then she must either continue the pregnancy 
against her will or illegally induce a miscarriage herself and face 
prosecution. Last December ayoung woman from County Durham 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3364345/Mother-forced-miscarriage-32-weeks-pregnant-jailed.html>
 was sentenced to two and half years in prison. The pills she used are now 
widely available online.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F06%2Fus-anti-abortion-movement-exporting-tactics-to-uk-video&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F06%2Fus-anti-abortion-movement-exporting-tactics-to-uk-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F5%2F1430840127119%2FA-masked-man-holds-up-a-b-001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20terrifying%20American%20anti-abortion%20movement%20is%20exporting%20its%20tactics%20to%20the%20UK%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F06%2Fus-anti-abortion-movement-exporting-tactics-to-uk-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+terrifying+American+anti-abortion+movement+is+exporting+its+tactics+to+the+UK+%E2%80%93+video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F06%2Fus-anti-abortion-movement-exporting-tactics-to-uk-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F5%2F1430840127119%2FA-masked-man-holds-up-a-b-001.jpg>
The terrifying American anti-abortion movement is exporting its tactics to the 
UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2015/may/06/us-anti-abortion-movement-exporting-tactics-to-uk-video>
 says The Guardian’s Jessica Valenti 
Today organs cannot be taken from the dead body of someone who made clear they 
did not wish to donate even if they’ll save another person’s life, BPAS notes, 
explaining why abortion laws are at odds with fundamental legal principles: 
“Yet a living woman can be compelled to sustain a foetus against her will from 
the moment a fertilised egg implants in her womb.”

A third of women in the UK will have an abortion, and two-thirds of people 
believe that abortion should be allowed according to a woman’s choice. To the 
third who don’t, believing perhaps that women granted easy access to abortion 
will use it, as a number of pious letter writers have said to me, as “lazy 
birth control”, I would direct them to new research that showsanti-abortion 
laws do not reduce abortion rates 
<http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2016/05/11/abortion_rates_are_constant_in_developing_countries_while_developed_ones.html>
. Criminalising it – rather than preventing abortion, rather than punishing a 
woman by making her raise an unwanted child (regardless of the plans of the 
father) – drives them to terminate the pregnancy through illegal methods. It 
drives them to a laptop at 5am, to a box of pills, to the feeling that she’s 
quite, quite alone.

I’m surprised at the mutinying midwives, people who have seen the blood and 
passion of birth a hundred times over, who should know the gravity of 
reproductive choice. The word midwife means “with woman”. To support the 
criminalisation of abortion seems in clear opposition to that role. Instead of 
standing with women, it is pushing them away.

Email Eva at e.wiseman@observer.co.uk <mailto:e.wiseman@observer.co.uk> or 
follow her on Twitter@EvaWiseman 
<https://twitter.com/EvaWiseman?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
