
Café Moor

Proud locals might point out Kirkgate Market's painted ironwork or its acres 
of Victorian tiling but, for me, the prettiest sight on the market has to be 
Kada Bendaha's Café Moor. His unit is decorated with intricate carving, 
marquetry and North African tapestries, and, more importantly, stacked with 
bright platters of tabbouleh, vine leaves and vivid, pink pickled turnips. Its 
Middle Eastern/north African menu runs the gamut from old favourites such as 
falafel and chicken shawarma wraps, to variousbourek and bastilla, a spiced 
"pie" of raisins, eggs and chicken. Café Moor's pickles are fantastically 
zingy; its hummus is unusually coarse and grown up. The blindingly fresh baba 
ganouche is the kind of thing you could eat by the bucketful – its initial 
sweetness turning into an almost treacly smokiness, with a lingering, 
lemony-sour edge.
• Snacks and lunches £2-£5.50. Unit B 1904, Kirkgate Market, 34 George Street, 
0113 247 0569,cafemoor.co.uk <http://www.cafemoor.co.uk>

Shears Yard

When it opened 20 years ago, Arts <http://www.artscafebar.com/> was one of the 
first continental-style cafe-bars in Leeds. Last summer, the team behind it 
opened Shears Yard, an open-plan bar-restaurant in a historic workshop that, 
with its exposed brick, open eaves and stark minimalism, looks a little 1990s 
itself. Which I quite like. It is a refreshing change from the now ubiquitous 
distressed Brooklyn dive bar look. The food charts a similarly individual path 
through modern food. There are burgers, but smart ones (lobster, crayfish and 
mackerel), while the main dishes mix and match traditional (bubble-and-squeak 
croquettes) with trendy ingredients and techniques (black garlic emulsion, 
roast kohlrabi), in interesting ways. It's pretty sophisticated stuff: the 
two-course set-menu is good value although not exactly a budget price at £14.50.

At lunch, though, you can get a taste for what's going on here, via those 
burgers, gussied-up sandwiches and some terrific meat and vegetarian tasting 
boards. I don't know what the caramelised onion chutney was meant for, or if it 
should have been there at all, but otherwise my fish platter (£8.95) was great. 
It comprised rustling whitebait and a lemony mayo as thick as gloss paint; a 
slightly worthy mackerel paté next to a mound of excellent dill-pickled 
courgettes; and crayfish on dressed leaves. The star of the show, however, was 
the home-cured sea trout. These thick, Lucozade-orange tranches had the firm, 
sticky texture of liquorice, with hints of the curing ingredients (tea?) and 
yet had a bright, saline freshness. It was curiously addictive.
• Sandwiches £4.50-£5.95, lunchtime mains £5.95-£8.95. 11-15 Wharf Street, 
0113 244 4144,shearsyard.com <http://www.shearsyard.com/lunch/>

El Topo

This did not start well. Construction work in Sovereign Place meant El Topo 
was a pig to find (it is much easier to reach from Neville Street). And then, 
thanks to a logistical problem, the kitchen only had (yawn!) pulled pork ready 
for its San Francisco-style burritos. I was ready to write it off, but then I 
had a bite… and, well, wow. First, that pulled pork was something else: soft as 
velvet, juicy as hell and full of slow-cooked flavour. This was nothing like 
that dry, fibrous interloper which you now come across everywhere. More than 
that, everything (red rice, black beans, vibrant salsa) tasted fresh and cooked 
to a T, and all the components were in balance. The sour cream and cheese made 
their presence known, but in a civilised, restrained way. They didn't overwhelm 
the burrito. All told, it was the best burrito I have eaten in some time. And 
if you want yours jazzing up with guacamole, hot sauce or jalapenos, El Topo 
will do it free of charge. Refreshingly, they don't stiff you on the extras.
• Burritos £4.75-£6. 1 Sovereign Place, 0113 815 0166, el-topo.co.uk 
<http://www.el-topo.co.uk/>

Laynes Espresso
 Photograph: Giles Smith 
At first glance, Laynes looks unremarkable: just another blandly modern coffee 
shop. Read down its peg-board menu, however (drip-filter, Square Mile beans, 
12-hour cold-brewed tea) and you are left in no doubt about the seriousness of 
this endeavour. That is further borne out by a fastidiously silky flat white 
that delivered big, full-spectrum coffee flavour (£2.50). Sadly, Laynes was out 
of breakfast rarebit (no, I don't want granola instead, thanks), but I swung 
back later for a sandwich and cake. The former, while not huge, was one of 
those sandwiches that reminds you how good a simple sarnie can be when all its 
constituent parts – pastrami that delivers a long, peppery heat, serious rye 
from Leeds Bread Co-op – are A1. For dessert, a piece of salted caramel 
shortbread was every bit as good as that sentence sounds (£2.40).
• Snack items, soup and sandwichesx £1.50-£4.50. 16 New Station Street, 07828 
823189,laynesespresso.co.uk <http://laynesespresso.co.uk/>

Outlaws Yacht Club

You could easily overlook Outlaws. It's in the kind of location – bottom of an 
ugly new apartment block – where you'd expect to find a Starbucks or an estate 
agent. In fact, this late-night DJ bar and event space is one of Leeds' hippest 
hangouts, well-known for its discerning music policy, good food and craft beer. 
The menu is simple but effective: first-rate ingredients are employed in 
sourdough sandwiches; platters of meats and cheeses offer good things to share 
and pick at; while outsized scotch eggs and pork pies (not "homemade" as the 
menu rather misleadingly suggests but, when I query it, bought in from the 
Greedy Pig and the Little Yorkshire Pie Co) round out the offer. TheGrub & Grog 
Shop <http://www.grubandgrog.co.uk>, from local producer Made By Jim 
<https://www.facebook.com/MadeByJim>, pops up each Friday lunchtime offering 
stews, seasonal salads and affordable hot sandwiches, such as slow-cooked lamb 
and pickled rhubarb with pea puree and mint dressing on a Leeds Bread Co-Op 
ciabatta. At the bar, look out for beers from new Leeds brewery Golden Owl, 
which, on the evidence of its big-hitting pale ale (pint £4.50), is a very 
promising outfit.
• Sandwiches £4.50, snacks from £2, platters £7.50. 38 New York Street, 0113 
234 6998,outlawsyachtclub.com <http://outlawsyachtclub.com/>

Hepworth's Deli

Tucked away in one of the many Victorian shopping arcades off Briggate, Joe 
Hepworth's deli-cafe is one of those common-sense operations that make your 
heart sing. In broad terms, he sources top-notch ingredients and lets them 
speak for themselves. They are assembled in interesting combinations across a 
menu of salads, deli platters and upmarket sandwiches (deep-fried halloumi, 
say, with harissa, red peppers and tzatziki), which this experienced chef then 
cleverly tweaks, at the periphery. For instance, on a daisy-fresh croissant, 
smoked salmon of a smooth complexity is dressed with long ribbons of cucumber 
and blobs of an unusually clean, citrus-spiked creme fraiche. Elsewhere, 
Hepworth busies himself rustling up panko-crumbed scotch eggs, quiches, slick 
cakes and hot sandwiches, such as his lunchtime special of fish fingers and 
homemade tartar sauce. The breakfast menu, which includes eggs Benedict, French 
toast and pancakes, looks terrific, too. As for Hepworth's fondness for serving 
everything on slates, we will have to discuss that another time, but the deli – 
its shelves lined with everything from bacon jam to Yorkshire fudge – would 
benefit from less gloomy lighting.
• Snack items and sandwiches £1-£3.95, platters £7.25-£8.50. 21 Thorntons 
Arcade, 07938 960517,hepworthsdeli.co.uk <http://hepworthsdeli.co.uk>

Trinity Kitchen

Ordinarily, you might walk the long way round just to avoid Trinity, a huge, 
shiny new shopping centre in Leeds city centre. Trinity Kitchen, however – a 
food court stuffed with chain names but also, crucially, five food trucks, vans 
and shacks that change on a monthly basis – is a pretty irresistible lure. 
Those mobile guests are chosen in collaboration with the organiser of the 
British Street Food Awards, Richard Johnson, which means that London's best 
(such asOriginal Fry Up Material <http://www.originalfryupmaterial.co.uk/>; the 
Cheese Truck <http://trinityleeds.com/shops/cheese-truck>, whose grilled 
sandwiches look incredible; andBig Apple Hotdogs 
<http://www.bigapplehotdogs.com/>), regularly rub shoulders here with Leeds 
outfits such asMarvellous Tea Dance  
<http://www.themarvellousteadancecompany.co.uk>, Fish& 
<http://www.fishand.co.uk/> and Manjit's Kitchen 
<http://www.manjitskitchen.com/>. Many of the northern traders are members of 
the energeticNorthern StrEats <http://www.northernstreats.co.uk/> association, 
a key name to look out for locally.

Pemberman's <http://www.pembermans.com/> is run by two very friendly lads who 
knock out tasty, seasonally driven, British rare-breed meat sandwiches, but as 
a new wave of traders arrive on 25 May, you may well miss them. That next wave 
includesMama's Jerk Station <http://www.mamasjerkstation.com/>, Hackney's 
Tacochu <http://www.tacochu.com/> (specialising in taco-rice boxes, Okinawa's 
take on Tex-Mex), and the altogether more straightforwardCatering Yorkshire 
<http://cateringyorkshire.com>. The space itself – part Bangkok street market, 
part crazed German beer garden – is a riot of noise, bright colours, lights, 
neon and concrete, and feels rather like a dystopian future where cities have 
to retreat into huge, hermetically sealed glass pods. But don't let that put 
you off your lunch.
• Meals around £4-£8. Trinity Leeds, Albion Street, 0113 394 2415, 
trinityleeds.com <http://trinityleeds.com/>

The Greedy Pig

A deceptive one is the Pig, in that it still looks like a pretty drab cafe 
(with spam baps on the menu and prices to match – full breakfast with tea 
£4.50), but it is far more ambitious than your typical greasy spoon. On closer 
inspection that menu – ham hock with homemade piccalilli sandwich, eight-hour 
cooked pulled pork with the Pig's own spicy barbecue slaw, brisket burger with 
blue cheese and dry-cured bacon – is pretty trendy. The Pig serves coffee from 
local micro-roastery North Star and its legendary pork and chorizo scotch eggs 
are served in hip Leeds bars. What the Pig delivers is sometimes less 
miraculous than the hype but, nonetheless, a large breakfast bap of decent 
bacon, properly fried until it had taken on a rusty char, topped with a thick 
wedge of smooth, quietly spicy black pudding, was £2.40 very well spent. A hot 
hog roast sandwich of pork belly with apple compote needed a dab of gravy or 
pan juices to lubricate it properly, but it was also good value at £3.50. I can 
see why Leeds swears by the Pig.
• Sandwiches and snacks £1.90-£4.50. 58 North Street, 0113 245 3596, 
facebook.com/pages/The-Greedy-Pig 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/The-Greedy-Pig/101684753228381>

The Reliance and North Bar

Inexplicably omitted from my original Leeds guide, this longstanding Leeds 
cafe-bar is well known for two things: superb beer and home-cured charcuterie. 
The latter is so good you will find it on the menu at super-picky local pig 
jointFriends of Ham 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/jul/28/friends-of-ham-leeds-restaurant>
 . At night, most main courses break our £10 cut-off but, during the day, you 
can sample those complex air-dried meats on deli boards, or take your pick from 
fish finger and meatball sandwiches and a short menu that includes such 
rib-stickers as homemade black pudding with potato, spinach and poached egg, 
and Erdinger-battered fish and chips. The Reliance is also a good place to 
recover over Sunday brunch (£3.25-£7.50). I enjoyed a glass ofSaltaire 
Brewery's South Island Pale <http://saltairebrewery.co.uk/saltaire/?page_id=16> 
(half pint £1.65) then, with more beer in mind, pottered along to North Bar, 
arguably Leeds' best craft beer bar. Keen to ensure that your stomach is lined, 
North serves snack boards of charcuterie from the Reliance, alongside toasties 
and pies from renowned Leeds butcherWilsons <http://www.wilsonsbutchers.co.uk/>
. Prices are keen (£2.50-£5), particularly on Fridays, when you pay £5 for pie, 
mushy peas and a pint of Prototype, which Kirkstall Brewery developed with, and 
brews exclusively for, North.
• Daytime dishes £3.95-£9.75. 76–78 North Street, 0113 295 6060, 
the-reliance.co.uk <http://the-reliance.co.uk/>; 24 New Briggate, 0113 242 4540,
northbar.com <http://northbar.com/>

Belgrave Music Hall 
 The Dough Boys at Belgrave Music Hall. Photograph: Tom Joy 
Variously a bar, canteen and club/gig space with a brilliant, ridiculous 
rooftop garden, Simon Stevens and Ash Kollakowski's Belgrave Music Hall packs a 
lot in – not least food. The ground floor includes not one, but two 
self-service kitchens, occupied byDough Boys 
<https://www.facebook.com/doughboysleeds> and Patty Smiths 
<https://www.facebook.com/PattySmithsBurgerCompany>. The Boys serve fantastic 
New York-style pizza slices (from £2) and, before 7pm, these are all half 
price. My bravura veggie sample, Paul & Linda, with smoked mozzarella, fat 
caperberries, artichoke and pools of lemony-fresh salsa verde, was, at £1.40, a 
complete bargain. At the other end of the bar, Patty's serves superlative 
cheeseburgers from £5 that, dripping with cheese and meat juices (and 
momentarily steamed under a cloche before serving), are so soft and yielding, 
so plump and squishy, you could almost slurp them down. The skin-on chips are, 
likewise, earthy, golden and seriously moreish. On their own, they would make a 
godlike beer snack. The cost for the two? £6.50. Talking of drink, while the 
Belgrave's bar is well-stocked with cask and craft ales; and if you are keeping 
a close eye on the pennies, Amstel is £2.50 a pint on weekday afternoons.

Were all that not enough (did I mention that Laynes also runs a coffee 
concession here, too?), Fu-Schnickens sellsguo bao steamed Taiwanese buns here 
at weekends and, on the second Saturday of each month, the Belgrave welcomes 10 
traders to Street Feast for a three-floor throwdown of music, art, film and 
fodder. If that kind of thing is your nosebag, also check outBrandon Street 
Night Market 
<http://canalmills.com/events/brandon-street-night-market-friday-30th-may> 
(last Friday of the month, free).
• 1-1a Cross Belgrave Street, 0113 234 6160, belgravemusichall.com 
<http://www.belgravemusichall.com/>

Train travel between Manchester and Leeds was provided by First TransPennine 
Express (tpexpress.co.uk <http://www.tpexpress.co.uk/>). Leeds Food & Drink 
Festival runs from 23 May to 8 June,leedsfoodanddrinkfestival.com 
<http://www.visitleeds.co.uk/things-to-do/LeedsFoodandDrinkFestival.aspx>
