
Well, I didn’t do a whole lot of running this weekend. But if you are going to 
not do a whole lot of running, thenDaios Cove in Crete 
<http://www.daioscovecrete.com/> is definitely the perfect place not to do it. 
The heat and hills meant that hill reps were the only real option, but with 
waters an unreal shade of turquoise to cool off legs in, a private beach and 
pools galore, I am most certainly not complaining.

I did, however, postpone my long run for early evening Sunday and the cooler 
streets of home, a plan scuppered by a hole in the runway at Gatwick and a 
last-minute aborted landing. One trek home from Stansted later, and it was just 
too late. I’ve never really been an evening runner – I do love the odd 
night-time jaunt, but I can’t quite get my head around starting a long run at 
8pm, even with summer evening light. Instead, I get maximum smug Monday points 
for fitting in 12 miles on my way to work, though someone might need to prod me 
late morning to check I’m not snoozing …

Summer weekends usually have a host of races. At this time of year, most are 
shorter – 10km, 5km, track races. Not all, though. I am in awe of two women I 
know, who bought a whole new meaning to long runs this weekend –Cat Simpson 
<http://www.escaperunning.com/> came second in her second 100-miler (yes, 100 
miles) at theSouth Downs Way 
<http://www.centurionrunning.com/south-downs-way-100-2016/> and Susie Chan 
<https://twitter.com/susie__chan?lang=en-gb> came third in a race I think I 
literally would not survive – the 230kmJungle Ultra 
<http://www.beyondtheultimate.co.uk/jungle-ultra.asp> in Peru. Add to that, 
Anna Kessel of this parish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/11/anna-kessel-mbe-services-journalism-womens-sport>
 was given an MBE for services to journalism and women’s sport. Basically, this 
weekend was all about epic women. Suddenly, my 12 miles before toast seem 
slightly less impressive …

So, over to you. As always, I want to hear about your races (even those piddly 
little ones that are less than 100 miles) and training, your highs and lows. 
And how those bones are mending, @breezehillpete?
