
Daniel and Dennis Keighron-Foster have experienced a whirlwind of emotional 
and life-changing events in the past two years. They have created a new 
internet hosting and e-commerce business,Steamhaus 
<https://www.steamhaus.co.uk/>, renovated a Victorian house and started a 
family. The Keighron-Fosters live and work in Manchester. “We’re both 
workaholics,” says Daniel, “but we’re a family now and want to spend as much 
time as possible with our children.”

Twins Rose and Austin, born to a surrogate mother in America, are currently 
recovering from colds and have that wide, unblinking stare of the nearly, but 
not quite, better. “We always wanted children and have been so lucky to have 
been able to make that happen,” says Dennis.

As we chat, the toddlers tuck into toast soldiers in the elegant conservatory, 
gazing about the space, seemingly in awe at their surroundings. As well they 
might be. A crumbling pile when Daniel and Dennis bought it a few years ago, 
the house had been divided into five bedsits in the 1950s and denuded of 
original interior features. Cornices and fireplaces had been removed, and its 
many doors had had their beading hammered off to be painted with a wood-effect 
finish. “The original floor tiles in the hall and the carved wooden staircase 
were all that were left, but they were all we needed to see to fall in love 
with the place,” says Dennis.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h7yy%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h7yy%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F98ec9f5f430834ac9733ef09abc336e19ae3d11d%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Home%20front%3A%20five%20into%20one%20does%20go&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h7yy%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Home+front%3A+five+into+one+does+go&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h7yy%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F98ec9f5f430834ac9733ef09abc336e19ae3d11d%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
 From poky scullery to spacious reception room: the kitchen, where the family 
spend most of their time. Photograph: James Balston 
The renovation took a year, twice as long as anticipated, and cost twice as 
much. A workforce of 15 toiled long and hard to achieve the couple’s slightly 
ad-hoc, ever-evolving interior scheme, which now incorporates a double-height 
master bedroom, basement cinema, observatory and five bathrooms. “We like a 
classic Victorian look, mixed with contemporary influences for contrast,” says 
Daniel. “The retro music room, for instance, shows that off particularly well.” 
Everything is meticulously finished.

We trawled reclamation yards, and found it was the Art Nouveau pieces that we 
ended up loving the most

The family spend most of their time in the kitchen, which was relocated from a 
poky back scullery to a spacious front reception room. Wanting something 
unique, they called inthe Main Company <http://themaincompany.co.uk/>, a 
York-based firm that specialises in combining new and reclaimed materials. “We 
looked at a few bespoke kitchens around Cheshire for inspiration, but they were 
all a bit Waggy,” says Daniel. “We loved this design for its handcrafted feel. 
We’re big socialisers, so a practical, beautiful kitchen was essential.”

Upstairs, the master suite comprises a bedroom with a vaulted ceiling, a 
dressing room and a bathroom. The leather bed was purchased in anticipation of 
them buying a new house and wedged, for months, into their previous room in a 
small two-up, two-down. Here it has more than enough room to breathe. Hanging 
above the bed is a multi-pendant light fitting found in Manchester storeInsitu 
<http://www.insitumanchester.com/>. It replaced the installation they had 
originally earmarked for the space. “It was a big shock how pricey lights can 
be, so this was a great find. It’s one of my favourite things in the house,” 
says Dennis.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h7yy%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h7yy%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbecb0145c0856255a9c2ec11e97dababc6d90743%2F0_2111_3744_2248%2F3744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Home%20front%3A%20five%20into%20one%20does%20go&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h7yy%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Home+front%3A+five+into+one+does+go&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4h7yy%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbecb0145c0856255a9c2ec11e97dababc6d90743%2F0_2111_3744_2248%2F3744.jpg>
 Daniel and Dennis with children Rose and Austin in the hall. Photograph: James 
Balston 
Contemporary wallpapers from Vivienne Westwood and Timorous Beasties 
<http://www.timorousbeasties.com/> rub shoulders with classic furnishings such 
as the 1950s Ercol day bed in the music room and a smattering of Art Nouveau 
pieces. “We trawled reclamation yards, and it was the Art Nouveau pieces we 
ended up loving the most,” says Dennis, pointing out a pewter fireplace 
depicting a reclining nude.

Along the corridor is Austin and Rose’s bedroom. Here two identical white cots 
fill the space and above them is a flotilla of tiny hot air balloons from 
Authentic Models.

For all its imposing size, the house has a warm, friendly feel. “When we first 
showed friends around, they said how homely it felt for such a big house,” says 
Dennis. “We’re proud of that. We never wanted to live in a show home. This is 
somewhere we can express ourselves.”
