
White applicants are three times more likely to be appointed as recorders than 
lawyers from black, Asian and minority ethnic backgrounds, according to the Bar 
Council.

The relative lack of success for BAME candidates is revealed in the latest 
annual statistics from the Judicial Appointments Commission (JAC).

In its assessment of the figures, the Bar Council, which represents barristers 
across England and Wales, warned that more needed to be done to ensure the 
judiciary reflects the society on which it passes judgment.

The JAC report showed a marked improvement in the number of women entering the 
lower ranks of the judiciary but diversity has not improved for those from 
ethnic backgrounds. There are only two high court judges of Asian descent –Dame 
Bobbie Cheema-Grubb 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/oct/23/bobbie-cheema-grubb-first-asian-female-high-court-judge>
 and Sir Rabinder Singh. There are no BAME judges in the court of appeal or the 
supreme court.

Being appointed as a recorder is usually the first rung on the ladder to a 
full-time judicial career. The JAC statistics show that for all judicial 
appointment exercises last year, 38% of applications were from women, 36% of 
those shortlisted were women, and 45% of those recommended for the bench were 
female.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k6bd%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k6bd%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a74d79b5a97435fd33d068e89c8959e835e6026%2F0_184_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=White%20lawyers%20three%20times%20more%20likely%20to%20be%20appointed%20as%20recorders&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k6bd%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=White+lawyers+three+times+more+likely+to+be+appointed+as+recorders&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k6bd%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a74d79b5a97435fd33d068e89c8959e835e6026%2F0_184_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
 Dame Bobbie Cheema-Grubb is one of only two high court judges of Asian 
background. Photograph: Lauren Hurley/PA 
BAME candidates constituted 16% of applicants, 10% of those shortlisted, and 
only 9% of those appointed.


Sam Mercer, the Bar Council’s head of equality and diversity, said: “At every 
stage of the process, BAME applicants did less well than their white colleagues.

 “If you are a white lawyer applying to become a recorder you have a one in 10 
chance of success. If you belong to a minority ethnic group, that drops to one 
in 33.

Related: First woman appointed to Scotland’s second highest judicial post 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/apr/14/leeonia-dorrian-scotland-second-highest-judicial-post-lord-justice-clerk>

“White applicants are three times more likely to succeed. This inequality is 
unacceptable. We urgently need to work in partnership with organisations across 
the legal sector, and with government, to find out why this distortion is 
occurring and take immediate measures for correction.

 “Those appointed as recorders make up the pool from which the ranks of the 
senior judiciary are drawn. Lack of diversity at this level has huge 
implications for the ethnic makeup of our most influential and respected tier 
of public servants.

 “Since 2012, there have been no BAME applications or appointments at all to 
the court of appeal and there are still no BAME judges in the supreme court. A 
modern judiciary must be representative of the communities it seeks to serve.”

Peter Herbert, chair of the Society of Black Lawyers 
<http://www.blacklawyer.org/>, said: “The first African and Asian barristers 
joined the bar in the 1850s and 1860s. Gender discrimination is easier for the 
establishment to deal with than race discrimination.

“There needs to be affirmative action. What we want is to have every BAME 
candidate interviewed for a post. Otherwise we will have the same system 
carrying on for the next 50 years.


“This is a dysfunctional justice system across the board. There’s been a lack 
of leadership. The disproportion is worst in terms of those who come before the 
courts where around 30% [of defendants] are from BAME backgrounds.”




