
How far has the world progressed on achieving gender equality? In the latest 
in ourseries 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/series/millennium-development-goals-the-final-countdown>
 looking back at the millennium development goals, we explore MDG3, which aimed 
to “promote gender equality and empower women”.

You can learn what the goal was all about 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/26/millennium-development-goal-three-gender-equality-explainer>
, read about theprogress 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/26/millennium-development-goal-3-15-achievements-on-gender-equality>
 that has been made, and hear why the UN mustlook beyond targets 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/26/why-gender-equality-by-numbers-never-measure-up-mdg3-stereotypes>
 to achieve gender parity.Liz Ford <http://www.theguardian.com/profile/lizford> 
also travelled to Kyrgyzstan, where women spoke of theslow erosion of their 
rights 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/26/kyrgyzstans-cocktail-of-conservatism-and-apathy-a-bitter-draught-for-women>
 and their efforts to combat this. Plus, take a look at thisvideo on women in 
power 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2015/mar/26/chile-women-in-power-michelle-bachelet-camila-vallejo-video>
, featuring Chilean president Michelle Bachelet and MP Camila Vallejo speaking 
about the role of women on the political stage.

Meanwhile, a recent report <http://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/en/> 
has found 38% of health centres in low- and middle-income countries have no 
access to water.Lucy Lamble <http://www.theguardian.com/profile/lucy-lamble> 
went to Mali, where just20% of health facilities provide clean water 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/17/lack-safe-water-sanitation-soap-embarrassment-who-priority>
, andvisited 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/17/mali-community-clinic-helps-improve-healthcare-women-babies-water>
 a clinic outside the capital Bamako, which has improved the health of local 
women and children.

Plus, test your knowledge on all things H20 with our world water day quiz 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/quiz/2015/mar/20/world-water-day-2015-quiz>
.

Elsewhere on the site

 * Ethiopia: new TB treatment means patients will no longer need a miracle 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/24/ethiopia-new-tb-treatment-tuberculosis-drugs-mdr-drug-resistant>
 * Aid must be smarter to stop conflict and end poverty, report says 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/30/aid-fragile-states-cic-report-stop-conflict-end-poverty>
 * Asylum requests to rich countries at highest point for almost 25 years 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/datablog/2015/mar/27/asylum-applications-rich-countries-highest-since-1992>
 * Human traffickers may face life sentence under Britain’s tough new slavery 
bill 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/27/human-traffickers-face-life-sentence-britain-slavery-bill>
 * Bean breakthrough bodes well for climate change challenge 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/25/heat-resistant-bean-climate-change-cgiar>
 * Yemen on brink of humanitarian crisis amid rising food shortages, says 
Unicef 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/27/yemen-major-humanitarian-crisis-food-shortages-malnutrition-unicef>
Opinion

The funeral of Farkhunda, the young Afghan woman killed by a mob 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/22/afghan-woman-beaten-to-death-kabul-mob-buried>
 in Kabul, united people in the country. After attending the funeral, women’s 
rights activist Frozan Marofi explained whyFarkhunda belonged to all the women 
of Afghanistan 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/28/farkhunda-women-kabul-afghanistan-mob-killing>
.

Meanwhile, legal expert Parosha Chandran commented on the UK’s new 
anti-slavery bill 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/27/human-traffickers-face-life-sentence-britain-slavery-bill>
, warning of aloophole 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/24/loophole-modern-slavery-bill-transparency-supply-chain-abuses>
 that could allow companies to hide abuses in their supply chains. And after 
the devastation of cyclone Pam in Vanuatu, Oxfam CEO Mark Goldringargued 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/20/sendai-climate-change-inaction-poor-countries-vanuatu-cyclone-pam>
 why the country wouldn’t be the final poor nation to fall victim to climate 
change inaction.

Multimedia

Video: Chile’s women in power – Michelle Bachelet and Camila Vallejo 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2015/mar/26/chile-women-in-power-michelle-bachelet-camila-vallejo-video>

Gallery: World water day – how the poor pay more in west Africa 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2015/mar/22/world-water-day-west-africa-poor-pay-more-in-pictures>


Gallery: Treating multi-drug resistant TB in Ethiopia 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2015/mar/24/treating-multi-drug-resistant-tb-ethiopia-in-pictures>

What you said: top reader comment

On the piece Why gender equality by numbers will never measure up 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/26/why-gender-equality-by-numbers-never-measure-up-mdg3-stereotypes>
,Natalia Cardona wrote:

Thank you for writing this article! It speaks to what women’s rights 
organisations have been saying for years! We can’t have progress if we ignore 
the very tenets – universal declaration of human rights – that led to the 
establishment of the UN and gave so many hope that this would be a body to 
bring about real change. Justice is so important for women and marginalised 
populations who face the brunt of underdevelopment and poverty. Because justice 
goes beyond the numbers – which can be easily manipulated – it implies 
reparations for grave wrongdoings and requires ALL of us to rethink systems of 
oppression.

Highlight from the blogosphere

Global Voices: Myanmar rural villagers share their development plans through 
Facebook 
<http://globalvoicesonline.org/2015/03/31/myanmar-rural-villagers-share-their-development-plans-through-facebook/>

And finally …

Poverty matters will return in two weeks with another roundup of the latest 
news and comment. In the meantime, keep up to date on theGlobal Development 
website <http://www.theguardian.com/global-development>. Follow @gdndevelopment 
<https://twitter.com/gdndevelopment> and the team – @swajones 
<https://twitter.com/swajones>, @LizFordGuardian 
<https://twitter.com/lizfordguardian>, @MarkC_Anderson 
<https://twitter.com/MarkC_Anderson> and @CarlaOkai 
<https://twitter.com/CarlaOkai> – on Twitter, and join Guardian Global 
Development on Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardianglobaldevelopment>.
