
Life expectancy in England has risen to its highest ever level. The length of 
time people of pension age can expect to live once they attain certain 
milestones has risen on the previous year, a new report fromPublic Health 
England <http://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/public-health-england> 
reveals.

Based on data covering 2014, men who reach the age of 65 can look forward to 
another 19 years, a rise of 0.3 years on 2013. They can expect another 12 years 
at 75, six years at 85 and three years at age 95.

Women <http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> who make it to 65 may 
expect to live a further 21 years, also a rise of 0.3 years on 2013, and then 
another 13 years at 75, seven years at 85, and three years at age 95.

Related: Ten ways to live longer 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/mar/05/ten-ways-to-live-longer> 

Last year, a report showed that life expectancy at some older ages had dropped 
between 2011 and 2012 but the levels recovered in 2013.

The exception to the rise for other ages in 2014, concerned women aged 85; 
their life expectancy stayed at the same level as it was in 2011.

The report also revealed regional differences in life expectancy. The life 
expectancy for men aged 65 in London, the south-west, south-east and eastern 
England was more than a year longer than in the north-east and north-west.

In all but one region of England, male and female life expectancy at the age 
of 65 had lengthened between 2013 and 2014, and it was longer in 2014 than in 
any other year presented. The exception was the north-east, where male life 
expectancy was highest in 2013.

John Newton, chief knowledge officer at Public Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> England, said it was not yet clear 
what was causing the regional differences. “Overall the report presents a 
positive picture nationally and life expectancy is the highest it’s been since 
we started measuring.

“People in England are living longer than ever and that makes achieving a good 
quality of life in later years even more important. Our current evidence shows 
that people are living longer but many are doing so in poor health. This report 
is an opportunity to remind people that, even during mid life, it is not too 
late to improve your health.”
