
The moose is a comical animal. Everyone knows that. Woody Allen proved it 
beyond doubt with hisJewish moose routine 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xmnLRVWgnXU>. The oversized feet, the baggy 
lugubrious head and sad wary eyes – Allen was funny in those days. Now it’s 
just the moose that make me laugh. They’re made for panto, not safaris, in my 
opinion.

Tommy, my Swedish wildlife guide, disagrees. He says moose are clever, 
incredibly clever: “Sometimes we follow their tracks into deep woods and then 
they get behind you and disappear. Very clever animal.”

Related: Stockholm: the only European capital you can explore by kayak | 
Travel | The Guardian 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/oct/12/-sp-stockholm-city-guide-bars-restaurants-hotels>

We are riding on snowmobiles in the far north of Sweden, 430 miles from 
Stockholm, and the sky has just dumped half a metre of snow on the forest, 
which means the moose tracks are clearly visible – though the creatures 
themselves are a little harder to spot.

If you have ever ridden one of those infernal skiddoo machines, you will know 
how noisy they are, but apparently that is why a moose safari works so well. 
The animal just cannot make out what this giant wasp is doing buzzing through 
the woods in winter, and, instead of running away, just stands and watches.

We come to a ridge and get a view across endless snowy forest. An eagle soars 
away in the distance and a small herd of reindeer suddenly scramble through the 
trees, the golden light flickering behind them. These are semi-domesticated 
animals and belong to the local Sami people.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F45qbn%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F45qbn%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F17%2F1424191618157%2Fe3b1df86-3fc3-4023-ba56-9560d521be7a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Say%20boo%20to%20a%20moose%20in%20Sweden&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F45qbn%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Say+boo+to+a+moose+in+Sweden&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F45qbn%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F17%2F1424191618157%2Fe3b1df86-3fc3-4023-ba56-9560d521be7a-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Guide Tommy on his skiddoo. Photograph: Kevin Rushby 
“The herds can attract predators,” says Tommy, “wolves, wolverines, lynx and 
bears – although they are all hibernating now.”

The bears, interestingly, are extremely shy, though sometimes encounters with 
humans do lead to rather one-sided wrestling matches. Statistically, however, 
the most dangerous beast in Swedish forests is the wasp – they kill one person 
a year on average. But the moose can cause trouble too: they have a tendency to 
jump out on cars and squash them. I hope they don’t do the same thing to 
snowmobiles.

We start to explore deeper into the forest, along tracks that are deep in 
snow. It’s hard to stay upright. I bury my skiddoo and Tommy pulls it out with 
a rope. Further on we both get stuck and spend a long time digging and shoving. 
Tommy calls in a friend, Yngve, to help us locate some moose. Yngve arrives, 
helps us dig out, then gets stuck himself. It’s all great fun.

Yngve goes off on a recce and finds fresh tracks. He’s certain there are moose 
nearby. We stop. I can hardly see anything now: the tears are whipped from my 
eyes by the wind and tiny particles of drifting ice in the air. Then Yngve 
grins.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F45qbn%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F45qbn%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F17%2F1424191695075%2F1c622d0f-2d22-4218-b3e1-2903760672ff-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Say%20boo%20to%20a%20moose%20in%20Sweden&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F45qbn%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Say+boo+to+a+moose+in+Sweden&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F45qbn%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F17%2F1424191695075%2F1c622d0f-2d22-4218-b3e1-2903760672ff-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Moose mother and baby. Photograph: Kevin Rushby 
“Behind you!”

Well, they would be. Panto comedians. Five moose, hooves flying wildly, are 
just legging it across the track. And gone.

Related: Northern Sweden: fun in a cold climate 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/nov/01/sweden-winter-family-holiday-husky-sled>

“There are more – look!” A mother and calf step gingerly through the trees a 
hundred metres to our right. Moose can have two or three calves a year, hence 
the healthy 300,000-strong population in Sweden.

It is almost dark now so we head for our accommodation, an off-grid cabin at 
Svansele Vildmarkscenter on the banks of the Skellefteå river. Built by a local 
carpenter and entrepreneur, Thorbjörn Holmlund, it is a superb bit of Swedish 
design: White Fang meets Ikea. There is a huge central fire for cooking, plus a 
sauna and outside hot tub. There is also a hole in the river ice, but I refuse 
to take a dip. Ice swimming? That is insane.

Next morning we spot more moose before visiting Thorbjörn’s headquarters and 
wildlife display of stuffed specimens. The Swedes have a robust attitude to 
wildlife, allowing hunting but encouraging conservation. The result is a 
healthy countryside filled with prey and predators, rather than the glorified 
pheasant farm we call Britain.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F45qbn%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F45qbn%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F17%2F1424191773194%2F53914f76-e0c0-4382-b107-de24b88af180-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Say%20boo%20to%20a%20moose%20in%20Sweden&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F45qbn%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Say+boo+to+a+moose+in+Sweden&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F45qbn%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F17%2F1424191773194%2F53914f76-e0c0-4382-b107-de24b88af180-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Dinner time in the wildlife centre. Photograph: Kevin Rushby 
So that is my moose safari. They guarantee moose in 24 hours and I must have 
seen more than a dozen. We drive back to the Skellefteå town, where there is 
something happening on the river. It turns out to be the Scandinavian cold 
water swimming championships, for which they have cut a 25-metre pool in the 
river ice. Local organiser Lasse explains: “The water is at zero degrees and 
the body reacts differently.”

“Shock?”

Related: Cool Scandinavian hotels: readers’ tips 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/jul/21/cool-scandinavian-hotels-readers-tips>

“You slide into it, then wait till your breathing comes back. Wanna try?”

“No.”

Ten minutes later, in borrowed dressing gown and slippers, I’m standing by the 
water. Lasse is a persuasive man. Entering the water I get the feeling that a 
large moose and a bear have squashed me. After half a minute the bear gets off 
and my breathing settles. I push off and swim a length, trying not to get my 
head wet. The last 25 metres are a struggle.

I climb out and within a minute I’m inside a sauna. That’s the amazing thing 
about Sweden: you are never more than a minute from a sauna. Slowly the moose 
gets off me and circulation returns.

That night I drink a lot of local beer and sleep for 14 hours, dreaming of 
moose. They are still funny, I reckon, but clever too. I think Woody Allen 
should try the moose safari.

• The trip was provided by Visit Sweden <http://www.visitsweden.com/>. A 
two-day/one-night stay at Svansele Vildmarkscenter (+46 915 210 03,svansele.se 
<http://www.svansele.se/en/activities/moose-safari/>), with equipment, 
snowmobile safari, meals and activities, costs £416pp.Ryanair 
<http://ryanair.com> flies from Stansted to Skellefteå twice a week from £30 
return
