
The UK’s statistics watchdog has delivered a public rebuke to the Vote Leave 
campaign for continuing to claim that EU membership costs the UK £350m a week.

Sir Andrew Dilnot, chair of the UK Statistics Authority, said he was 
disappointed that the lead Brexit campaign was continuing to make this claim 
and that it was “misleading and undermines trust in official statistics”.
Brexit explained: campaign funds 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/05/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?sheet=intermediate&id=campaign_funds>
Dilnot has previously described the claim as potentially misleading in 
correspondence with Vote Leave, but his latest reprimand – issued in the form of
a statement on the authority’s website 
<https://www.statisticsauthority.gov.uk/news/uk-statistics-authority-statement-on-the-use-of-official-statistics-on-contributions-to-the-european-union/>
 – is stronger and reflects his frustration that Vote Leave is ignoring his 
concerns.

In an unusual second intervention, he said: “The UK Statistics Authority is 
disappointed to note that there continue to be suggestions that the UK 
contributes £350m to the EU each week, and that this full amount could be spent 
elsewhere.

Related: The Guardian view on the Leave campaign: show some respect for truth 
| Editorial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/27/the-guardian-view-on-the-leave-campaign-show-some-respect-for-truth>

“As we have made clear, the UK’s contribution to the EU is paid after the 
application of the rebate. We have also pointed out that there are payments 
received by the UK public and private sectors that are relevant here. The 
continued use of a gross figure in contexts that imply it is a net figure is 
misleading and undermines trust in official statistics.”

The £350m-per-week claim is so central to Vote Leave’s campaign that it has 
been plastered on the side of its battlebus. The slogan on the vehicle says the 
UK sends £350m a week to the EU and suggests: “Let’s fund our NHS instead.”

Related: Does the EU really cost the UK £350m a week? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/reality-check/2016/may/23/does-the-eu-really-cost-the-uk-350m-a-week>

In the past, Dominic Cummings, Vote Leave’s campaign director, has argued that 
£350m a week was actually an understatement because the UK’s gross contribution 
to the EU in 2014 was equivalent to £367m a week. He has also argued that Vote 
Leave is entitled to ignore the rebate because the rebate is not guaranteed, 
and is only paid by agreement with other EU member states.

Dilnot recently said that between 2010 and 2014 the UK’s net contribution to 
the EU – ie taking into account money received back – was £7.1bn annually. That 
is equivalent to £136m per week. But Cummings has also challenged this 
methodology, saying it does not include private sector contributions to the EU 
such as those that take the form of fines imposed by the European commission.
