
It really is very hot in the costume. We’re not allowed to wear it for more 
than half an hour at a time, so there are always two or three of us on 
rotation. If you’re the second one, more often than not the inside is soaked 
with someone else’s sweat, but there’s no time to let it dry off. You just have 
to grin and bear it.

There’s quite an art to not looking like a person – you have to convey a 
fluidity to your movements and learn to see behind a thick layer of gauze. The 
costumes make me a good five inches taller and a lot wider and heavier – I 
always fear that I’ll topple over.

As soon as the costume’s on, I stop being me. I am that character, and I’m 
only addressed as such. But I always find myself smiling for the photos people 
take of me – even though they can’t see my real face.

Reactions are mostly positive. Some children get boisterous, but I have a 
minder who is out of costume and acts like a bouncer. Most kids want hugs and 
high fives; some greet me like a friend and want to tell me things. I love the 
interaction. Some are terrified, which I understand. I hated costume characters 
as a child, too.

Related: What I’m really thinking: the workplace investigator 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/27/what-im-really-thinking-workplace-investigator>

My least favourite are the children who think it’s funny to punch me. The 
costumes have metal bars lining the inside, so yes, it does hurt.

It’s always strange walking past these same children when I’m out of costume. 
I feel as if I’m suddenly invisible. Occasionally, a child will look 
suspiciously at my flushed and sweaty makeup-free face and will realise who I 
am. They never say anything, though. I suspect they don’t want to ruin the 
illusion.

• Tell us what you’re really thinking at mind@theguardian.com 
<mailto:mind@theguardian.com>
