
A British exit from the EU would starve hospitals of European doctors and 
nurses and blow a £10.5bn hole in the NHS budget, according to the shadow 
health secretary,Heidi Alexander 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/heidi-alexander>.

The Labour frontbencher said she believed there was an urgent need to set out 
the benefits of immigration, pointing out that 52,000 non-British Europeans 
work in theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>, rising to 130,000 
when care workers are included.
Brexit explained: the NHS 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/05/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=NHS_and_Brexit#>
Alexander, who will make her case during a speech on Wednesday at Unison’s 
headquarters in central London, pointed to a fresh analysis by the House of 
Commons library based on the “worst-case scenario” for public finances after a 
British exit, set out by the Institute for Fiscal Studies. That concluded the 
Department of Health’s budget would be cut by £10.5bn by 2019-20.

“If the government decide to stick to [the] commitment to balance the books, 
not to raise taxes, and not to take more money out of the welfare budget ... 
that would mean every hospital trust in the country cutting 1,000 nurses or 155 
doctors,” said Alexander.

The MP will reject the suggestion made by Vote Leave that leaving the EU would 
reduce hospital waiting times and overcrowding. The out campaign has said it 
would redirect money sent to Brussels to the NHS.


Related: Don’t doubt it. Brexit would hurt the NHS | Zara Aziz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/07/brexit-would-hurt-nhs-doctors-nurses-eu-referendum>

“I think it is misleading, simplistic and complete and utter nonsense. You are 
a lot more likely to come across a migrant in a hospital who is caring for you 
than one who is in the bed next to you,” Alexander said.

“I think of my own family. Two years ago my gran passed away and who was the 
person who sat by her bedside and dabbed water on her lips in the days before 
she passed away? It was a Polish care assistant called Kristina. We have to be 
honest about the benefits that migrants have brought to the country.”

Alexander hit out at Boris Johnson and Michael Gove, saying she found it 
“utterly astonishing” that they were depicting people like her as the “elite 
establishment that has been brainwashed by Brussels bureaucrats”.


“My view of the world is informed by going to a comprehensive school in 
Swindon, in contrast to them. I’m the daughter of an electrician, my mum was a 
dinner lady, I didn’t go to Eton, I didn’t have those privileges,” she said.

Vote Leave accused the MP of “personal smears and overblown rhetoric” and said 
parts of the Labour party were in denial about the pressures of immigration.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kj84%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kj84%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a027a9ed2f266c5caca87aa9f11b509d5e2c3d2%2F229_439_2890_1734%2F2890.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Heidi%20Alexander%3A%20Brexit%20would%20blow%20%C2%A310.5bn%20hole%20in%20NHS%20budget&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kj84%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Heidi+Alexander%3A+Brexit+would+blow+%C2%A310.5bn+hole+in+NHS+budget&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kj84%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a027a9ed2f266c5caca87aa9f11b509d5e2c3d2%2F229_439_2890_1734%2F2890.jpg>
 Michael Gove and Boris Johnson campaigning for Vote Leave. Photograph: Getty 
Images 
Labour has come under pressure from remain campaigners who say the party must 
do more to mobilise its vote, amid fears that acampaign led by David Cameron 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/07/cameron-accuses-eu-leave-campaigners-six-lies-brexit>
 could put off its supporters. A leaked memo from the remain camp suggested 
half of Labour voters did not know what its party’s position was, despite the 
fact that 214 of its 229 MPs are backing remain.

Some have also criticised Jeremy Corbyn, claiming he has not been forthright 
enough on the issue.


The party says it has already distributed 8.5m leaflets, hand-delivered by 
volunteers, but now plans to issue a further 8m alongside 1.3m direct mails 
that are already being used to target postal voters. There will also be a 
doubling of the digital strategy, through social media sites such as Facebook.

Related: Burning anger in the land of Nye Bevan: why a Labour heartland is 
backing Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/07/nye-bevan-labour-heartland-backing-brexit-south-wales>

A senior remain source said: “There has been some criticism but Labour are 
really coming to the party now.”

However, a senior figure in the party said that while many felt that the 
outcome would be a remain vote, they did not believe their own constituencies 
would swing in that direction.

Despite the insistence of Vote Leave campaigners that those in Britain who are 
from outside theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> will be 
able to remain, Alexander asked if that could change when they had to renew 
their visas in the future.


Alexander’s speech kicks off the final two weeks of activity in which there 
will be a major intervention every day, including from Corbyn, Angela Eagle, 
Hilary Benn, Tom Watson and others.


There will also be a push from trade unions, including Unison, where Alexander 
is delivering her speech and which represents nearly half a million health 
workers.

The union’s general secretary, Dave Prentis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/daveprentis>, said Vote Leave’s claims 
that the NHS would be “quids-in outside the EU are the stuff of nonsense”.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Fyoung-people-eu-referendum-video&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Fyoung-people-eu-referendum-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Do%20young%20people%20care%20about%20voting%20in%20the%20EU%20referendum%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Fyoung-people-eu-referendum-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Do+young+people+care+about+voting+in+the+EU+referendum%3F+%E2%80%93+video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Fyoung-people-eu-referendum-video&media=>
Do young people care about voting in the EU referendum? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jun/06/young-people-eu-referendum-video>
Alexander said that Vote Leave had started the campaign claiming that £350m 
sent to the EU each week could be spent on the NHS, but had later changed that 
to £100m. “So where will we be come the 23 June? At this rate there won’t be 
anything going into the NHS,” he said.

A Vote Leave spokesman said the remain campaign was looking “increasingly 
desperate”. He said the IFS and House of Commons research was not original and 
made “the same dodgy assumptions of establishment economists and the Treasury”.

The spokesman said Brexit would mean no longer sending £350m to the EU, of 
which only half comes back. “It is clear that the NHS benefits from having 
talented nurses and doctors but our immigration system makes it harder to bring 
those professionals in from across the world while increasing pressures in the 
waiting room,” he added.
