
I usually begin late. I am old enough to admit I have a warped concept of 
time. The problem is, I hate waiting. I want everyone else to arrive before me 
so I don’t have to wait.

I like to shade in my eyebrows. When I was younger I never gave my eyebrows a 
thought, but they have become an issue. I blame my mum, who has no eyebrows. 
You will know I care if I have pencilled in my eyebrows. If I haven’t, it is 
like me saying, “I am not impressed with this company at all.” It is the 
equivalent of wearing heels. If I am in heels I am either working or I care. 
These days I am like, “I am not wearing heels. Why would I do that?” I used to 
practically wear them to the gym but I’ve just had a baby and I don’t care.

I will go to the closet, stand there, with one eyebrow done, take a look, head 
back to the bathroom, do the other eyebrow; it’s like when you check the fridge 
again hoping something else to eat will pop up – I wonder if I missed something 
spectacular that I really want to wear. And then I will take an hour trying 
really hard not to wear jeans and I will fail and end up wearing jeans with 
heels and a jacket. By this time I am super-late so I add a great bag and feel 
as if I’ve made an effort.

Related: Levi Roots: ‘I haven’t cut my hair for 25 years’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/may/07/levi-roots-personal-style-how-i-get-ready>

I go out all the time in New York when I’m there, but living in LA means going 
out is more of a chore. It is not a night-time place and everywhere is so far. 
Here, I will work out in the morning and I will end up in workout clothes for 
the rest of the day. Whereas in New York you wouldn’t catch me dead in spandex 
and sneakers.

 * Kelis will perform at Y Not Festival <http://www.ynotfestivals.co.uk/> on 
29 July andStandon Calling <http://standon-calling.com/> on 31 July
