
On 28 October 2004 we humans took a giant step towards cataloguing all of our 
sexual fetishes 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/feb/10/fetish-lovers-fifty-shades-of-grey-stonewall-moment>
. An Italian/Swedish research team, led byClaudia Scorolli 
<https://www.unibo.it/sitoweb/claudia.scorolli/cv> at the University of 
Bologna, downloaded data from hundreds of online fetish discussion groups and 
spent the next three years analysing their haul. Then they published a study in 
the International Journal of Impotence Research:Relative Prevalence of 
Different Fetishes 
<http://www.nature.com/ijir/journal/v19/n4/full/3901547a.html>.

Many fetishes concern body parts, the catalogue reveals. Feet and toes 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/oct/21/my-man-has-foot-fetish> 
lead the list, followed in order of frequency by body fluids (blood, urine, 
etc), then body size (slim, stout, short, tall, whatever) and head hair. The 
least coveted bits by fetishists are nails, nose, ears, neck and, in last 
place, body odour.

Other fetishes documented centre on objects associated with the body. 
Stockings, skirts, footwear and underwear are the most popular. The list 
eventually dribbles out, with some – but few – people erotically craving 
nappies, hearing aids, catheters and, dead last, pacemakers. Only two people 
are tallied as having a sexual preference for pacemakers. The catalogue does 
not specify whether the pacemakers are inside people, or in their boxes, or not.

Related: Porn data: visualising fetish space 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/the-lay-scientist/2015/apr/30/porn-data-visualising-fetish-space>

Psychiatrists also do this kind of research, assaying the range of raunch to 
decide what – to their professional satisfaction – should be officially 
considered a fetish. The profession’s bible of treatable and billable 
conditions, theDiagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 
<http://www.dsm5.org/about/Pages/Default.aspx> (DSM), must be kept up to date.

In the world of psychiatry, the big name in fetish definition maintenance is 
Kafka –Dr Martin P Kafka <http://www.mcleanhospital.org/biography/martin-kafka>
, of McLean hospital in Belmont, Massachusetts. In the wake of the Scorolli 
fetish survey – performed by non-psychiatrists, and thus of questionable use to 
mind doctors – Kafka published two studies updating the fetish situation for 
his professional peers.

The Kafka writings appeared in the Archives of Sexual Behavior, in 2010, with 
the titlesThe DSM Diagnostic Criteria for Fetishism 
<http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10508-009-9558-7#page-1> and The DSM 
Diagnostic Criteria for Paraphilia Not Otherwise Specified 
<http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10508-009-9552-0#page-1>.

Paraphilia is a word that some psychiatrists find fascinating. It means “the 
experience of intense sexual arousal to atypical objects, situations, or 
individuals”. In the old days, people called it “sexual perversion” or “sexual 
deviance”. Kafka inspects what he calls the “not otherwise specified” 
categories of paraphilia: telephone scatologia (obscene phone calls),necrophilia
 <http://preview.gutools.co.uk/education/2008/sep/30/research.highereducation1>,
zoophilia 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/education/2011/sep/19/improbable-research-bestiality-horses-intelligence>
, urophilia, coprophilia andpartialism 
<http://www.forensicpsychiatry.ca/paraphilia/partialism.htm>. Google at your 
own risk.

Related: Improbable research: bestiality saddled with the wrong image 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2011/sep/19/improbable-research-bestiality-horses-intelligence>

In a world of 7 billion or so people, many of them freshly embarked on 
personal post-puberty voyages of discovery, any list of fetishes is bound to 
overlook something. Scholars must scramble to catch up. Such scrambling is on 
display in a new study calledCompassion, Dominance/Submission and Curled Lips: 
A Thematic Analysis of Dacryphilic Experience 
<http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/19317611.2015.1013596#.VZ_RCWbd79I>
, byMark Griffiths 
<http://www.ntu.ac.uk/apps/staff_profiles/staff_directory/125054-0/26/mark_griffiths.aspx>
 and Richard Greenhill, published in the International Journal of Sexual 
Health. Griffiths, famous for his long run of studies aboutfruit-machine 
gamblers 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2010/feb/16/slot-machine-gamblers-academic-study>
, instructs us: “Dacryphilia is a non-normative sexual interest that involves 
enjoyment or arousal from tears and crying, and to date, it has never been 
researched empirically. The present study set out to discover the different 
interests within dacryphilia and to explore the range of dacryphilic 
experience.” Read it and weep.

Marc Abrahams is editor of the Annals of Improbable Research 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/research> and organiser of the Ig Nobel 
prizes
