
When a child dies or is catastrophically harmed because of abuse, there is 
often a knee-jerk political response. Perhaps the most chilling example for 
social workers was David Cameron’s announcement last year that theycould find 
themselves jailed for five years 
<http://www.communitycare.co.uk/2015/03/03/social-workers-face-five-years-prison-failing-protect-children-sexual-abuse-warns-cameron/>
 for failing to act on evidence of child sexual abuse.


This raises concerns that professionals mandated to report reasonably-held 
suspicions of child abuse could be criminalised for failing to prevent it.

Despite this, proposals for mandatory reporting are included in the victims of 
crime bill 
<http://services.parliament.uk/bills/2015-16/victimsofcrimeetcrightsentitlementsandrelatedmatters.html>
 designed by Keir Starmer MP, former director of public prosecutions. The 
measure was prompted, Starmer says, because “there [have been] too many 
historic examples of institutions choosing not to report when they have 
balanced that duty against other interests, such as their reputation.”


Related: Should reporting child abuse be compulsory? Experts give their views 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/may/07/pros-cons-of-compulsory-reporting-child-abuse>

Now out of time for this session of parliament, Starmer must decide whether to 
reintroduce his bill next time or butcher it and create amendments to other 
legislation. Whichever option he chooses, campaigners for mandatory reporting 
are unimpressed at what they say is a lack of scope and detail in the proposed 
law.

At a time when the Independent Inquiry into Child Sexual Abuse (IICSA) 
<https://www.iicsa.org.uk/> has just launched its initial investigations, they 
are also angry that a promised government consultation on mandatory reporting 
has failed to materialise, despite a mooted start date of last December.


On this, at least, campaigners are at one with the British Association of 
Social Workers <https://www.basw.co.uk/>. President Ruth Allen is keen for 
consultation to begin, and urges the government to consult widely. “Social 
workers working directly with children and families have many clear and 
evidence-informed ideas about what would improve the protection of children 
that do not require the risk of criminalising practitioners.”

But at campaigning organisation Mandate Now <http://mandatenow.org.uk/>, abuse 
survivor Tom Perry believes that putting a statutory duty on those responsible 
for children outside the home is the only effective way to change a culture of 
non-reporting that has seen professionals reluctant to “tell tales” of 
colleagues or end up stigmatised as whistleblowers.

Such failures, he says, can be observed in cases such as that of teacher 
Jeremy Forrest who abducted a student <http://gu.com/p/3gmqg/stw> to France 
despite considerable disquiet about his behaviour among fellow teachers,the 
non-reporting to the local authority <http://gu.com/p/3537g/stw> of concerns 
about the now convicted paedophile Nigel Leat, and theabuse of girls by other 
pupils at Stanbridge Earls boarding school <http://gu.com/p/3hkq2/stw>. In such 
situations, says Perry, the proposals in the victims of crime bill will make 
barely a scrap of difference to protecting children from harm.


“Why are so few categories of people mandated to report – and nobody from the 
medical profession at all, when we know where [Jimmy] Savile preyed on 
vulnerable children?”, he asks with evident frustration. “Why are so few 
settings included, so that children in nurseries, youth offenders institutions, 
church activities and leisure clubs miss out on this protection? And why only a 
requirement to report sexual abuse, not physical abuse and neglect?

“It’s disappointing, because in its present form, it’s simply not going to 
deliver the major culture change that’s needed.”


Starmer says he envisaged the measures in his bill as a starting point, but 
emphasises that the decision not to mandate all professionals was made in an 
attempt to prevent police being inundated with reports, something he claims has 
happened in other jurisdictions where mandatory reporting operates.

But there is evidence from Australia to show that while reporting levels do 
spike immediately following the introduction of such a law, the increase is 
never sustained – and may even fall to levels below those previously 
experienced.

Meanwhile, the success rate in proving abuse allegations has often risen. 
Australia’s states’ and territories’ varying mandatory reporting protocolshave 
been subjected to longitudinal study 
<https://www.dss.gov.au/families-and-children/publications-articles/child-abuse-and-neglect-a-socio-legal-study-of-mandatory-reporting-in-australia>
 over a 10-year period by Prof Ben Mathews, co-director of thechildren’s health 
programme at Queensland University of Technology 
<https://www.qut.edu.au/research/research-projects/making-prevention-matter-establishing-characteristics-of-effective-child-sexual-abuse-prevention-programs>
. Data from Western Australia show that due to improved reporting after the 
introduction of the law, the number of cases of substantiated sexual abuse 
doubled.

Mathews believes that a statutory, sanctionable duty to report suspected abuse 
changes the dynamic within institutions that may make people reluctant to come 
forward.


“The laws overcome gaze aversion, which is the tendency for people to avoid 
uncomfortable phenomena and turn the other way,” he says. “They … set a social 
norm about what must be done instead of ignoring the child’s situation.

“Together with good education about child sexual abuse and the reporting duty, 
the laws increase professionals’ awareness of just how serious sexual abuse is, 
and its nature, frequency and indicators. The laws say what professionals must 
do. The education [that goes with it] explains why.”

Importantly, he says, the laws in Australia also give anonymity and legal 
immunity to anyone who reports – important if people are afraid of 
repercussions. “The fear of whistleblowing is a non-issue here. The best 
evidence indicates [these laws] are probably the best public policy innovation 
we have to help identify cases of child sexual abuse.”

However, Allen holds that there is little international evidence mandatory 
reporting has the desired impact of increasing protection of children.

Related: Views from the social care sector on jail risk for ignoring child 
abuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/mar/03/jail-risk-social-workers-child-abuse-views-from-sector>

“There is evidence it can indeed drive abuse further underground and reduce 
cooperation of families with child protection services,” she says. Allen 
believes effective professional standards, regulation and capability processes 
“should be sufficient to drive good practice and uphold public confidence.”

Perry disagrees: “Relying on professional bodies to hold people to account, 
given the evidence of widespread, serially ignored and wilfully overlooked 
abuse over decades, is complacent and risible.”

Australia has reflected on the efficacy of its mandatory reporting over the 
years, with five government inquiries in four different states since 2003. Each 
time, explains Mathews, the recommendation has been that the law be retained.

“The only key change has been, in some states, to supplement mandatory 
reporting of severe child abuse and neglect with differential reporting for 
less serious cases – where you report significant cases to child protection and 
less significant cases to welfare agencies,” he says.

However, he also notes: “Queensland recently did make a change to remove 
mandatory reporting for neglect and psychological abuse – even for severe and 
life-threatening cases – which to many was a very bad move.”

The Home Office could not say when the promised public consultation on 
mandatory reporting would be launched. When it is, will both sides of the 
argument be able to come to any greater understanding of their respective fears 
and examine the evidence objectively?


Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
