
David Cameron <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> has hinted at 
concessions on his plan to force all schools to become academies, saying they 
will still be able to work with councils.

He said further plans would be brought forward at the Queen’s speech next 
month, and suggested schools who wanted the support of local authorities would 
be able to receive it.

His comments suggest the government may be preparing a compromise that would 
let local authorities be involved in running academies, amid athreatened 
rebellion 
<http://theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/23/tory-mps-call-for-academies-plan-dropped-from-queens-speech>
.

Pressed by Jeremy Corbyn <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> 
about the issue at prime minister’s questions, he said: “There are lots of ways 
that schools can become academies. They can convert and become academies, they 
can be sponsored by an outside organisation, they can work with other schools 
in the area, they can look at working with the local authority.

“Those schools that want to go on using local authority services are free to 
do so. I’m very clear – academies are great, academies for all is a good 
policy.”

Cameron has previously said he wants local authorities running schools to 
become “a thing of the past” but the policy has caused controversy amongTory 
backbenchers 
<http://theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/02/backbench-pressure-on-osborne-academy-scheme>
 andcouncils 
<http://theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/21/west-sussex-council-academies-louise-goldsmith-nicky-morgan-state-schools>
.

Corbyn said the row over academies was part of a pattern of the Conservatives 
imposing unpopular policies from Whitehall that are opposed by the professions 
they affect.

“The pattern is quite simply this – you have a health secretary that’s 
imposing a contract on junior doctors, against the wishes of patients and the 
public and the rest of the medical profession,” he said.

“You have an education secretary imposing yet another Tory top-down 
reorganisation that nobody wants. When will your government show some respect 
and listen to the public, parents and patients, and indeed professionals, who 
have given their lives to public service in education and health, and change 
your ways?

“Listen to them and trust other people to run services rather than imposing 
things from above.”

After PMQs <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/pmqs>, a senior Downing Street 
source stressed that the full academisation process would not be completed for 
another six years.

This could include local authorities offering services to academy schools in 
the same way that multi-academy trusts do.

“The schools will be academies and will be able to choose who they use to 
bring in additional services,” said the source. “We are not being prescriptive. 
The schools will be in charge. The headteachers and teachers will be in charge. 
That’s the fundamental principle.”

Nicky Morgan <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicky-morgan>, the education 
secretary, would not be drawn on Monday about reports that discussions were 
under way about possible concessions aimed at appeasing Tory rebels, including 
allowing the best-performing local authorities to run their own multi-academy 
trusts.

Responding to education questions in the House of Commons 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/houseofcommons>, she did not appear to 
budge from the government’s stated aim that all schools should be academies by 
2022. She told MPs: “I’m not going to leave the job half done. I’m going to 
finish this job.”
