
When I am facing the unknown, I like to read about the experiences of those 
who have been there before me. During the process of adopting my second child, 
I scoured the library and bookshops for stories of adoptive motherhood.

Related: I built a musical fort for my PhD 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/may/09/i-built-a-musical-fort-for-my-phd>

Jackie Kay and Jeanette Winterson have published highly moving accounts of the 
adoptee’s experience. Yet the voices of adoptive mothers are largely absent in 
literature. In fact, aside from celebrity yummy-mummy memoirs, life stories of 
modern mothers are sorely lacking in general.

And so I love my PhD <http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/phd> 
because it combines my two greatest passions: creative writing and motherhood.

As increasing numbers of women choose to delay motherhood in order to focus on 
their careers, more of us are entering motherhood via egg donation, surrogacy 
and adoption. Factor in same-sex couples and single parenthood, and building a 
family by so-called “alternative” routes is now commonplace. So why isn’t 
anybody writing these stories?

For my PhD, I am working on a writing project entitled The Other Mothers. The 
focus is on exploring the untold lives of women who have become mothers through 
adoption, surrogacy and egg donation, along with the “silent partners” – birth 
mothers, surrogates and egg donors – who made motherhood possible for them. For 
the next few years, I will be immersed in the world of “other motherhood”.

It’s a privilege to meet with women who are willing to share highly sensitive, 
often heart-wrenching, stories. Alison’s* journey to motherhood was far from 
plain sailing. Now with two children (via donor conception and adoption 
respectively), she told me how she almost adopted a different child – but 
things broke down, leaving her angry and sour.

Related: My PhD takes me to one of the last truly wild places on earth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/feb/29/my-phd-takes-me-to-one-of-the-last-truly-wild-places-on-earth>

She went back to fertility treatment and found an anonymous egg donor abroad 
but worried about the ethical considerations: “Woman’s Hour was talking about 
women being trafficked to Cyprus for prostitution and I immediately thought – 
who’s our donor, where did she come from, is she genuinely altruistic or is she 
being coerced?”, she explains.

Having been approved by the Human Research 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/research> Ethics 
Committee, learning how to navigate this ethical minefield continues to be one 
of the biggest challenges of my work.

Reaction to the project has been mixed. There has been a lot of genuine 
interest, as well as (sadly) predictable dismissal of my topic. I once listened 
attentively to a fellow student talk about his research, before he walked away 
within 30 seconds of me mentioning the “m word”.

I started my PhD under the cloud of that commonly held belief that motherhood 
and academia were mutually exclusive. But I now study part-time at the Open 
University, which has an open ethos and a flexible approach to those of us who 
need to juggle our studies alongside work and caring responsibilities. Not all 
PhD students are 20-somethings with full-time funding.

I love being able to challenge the perception that PhD study must involve 
either cutting-edge science or trawling around in library archives wearing a 
tweed jacket. When my eldest son tells everyone at school: “My mum’s a writer! 
My mum’s going to be a doctor!” I suspect his mates are visualising J K Rowling 
performing open heart surgery, but it doesn’t matter to me that I’m not about 
to find a cure for cancer. What matters is that my children are seeing me 
actively pursuing my interests and goals with enthusiasm and determination. I 
can be a role model without saving the world.

Related: My PhD gives a voice to women abused by their husbands in the '80s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/apr/11/my-phd-gives-a-voice-to-women-abused-by-their-husbands-in-the-80s>

US writer Adrienne Rich said that the good and bad moments of motherhood are 
inseparable, and that pretty much sums up my experience of PhD study. It’s 
challenging, it keeps me awake at night and takes up huge amounts of my time 
and energy, but life would be much less fun without it.

We need to understand that the lives of ordinary women can make for 
extraordinary writing. We also need to encourage more women into PhD study, and 
continue to develop an academic environment that supports those combining other 
responsibilities with their research. So if you’re a mother considering PhD 
study, I’d urge you to look into it. The world needs to hear your voice.

* name has been changed

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>
