
Michael Kiwanuka

Michael Kiwanuka, 29, is a soul singer-songwriter, soon to release the 
follow-up to his critically acclaimed 2012 debut album,Home Again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/mar/08/michael-kiwanuka-home-again-review>
. He is wearing a vintage Wrangler denim jacket.

I’ve always been a fan of denim; it’s my staple. I had never been to America 
until I toured there in 2012, and in between gigs I’d look for clothes in 
vintage stores. As soon as I saw this Wrangler jacket in Atlanta, Georgia, I 
loved the corduroy collar; I’d not seen a denim jacket like it before. It was 
only about $25; it would be double that in London.

I wore it soon after, to perform I’m Getting Ready 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VHRKdpR1E6Q> on the Late Show With David 
Letterman. I was really nervous; it was my first TV appearance, and I loved 
that show when I was growing up.John Mayer  <http://johnmayer.com/>wrote a post 
on his blog 
<http://johnmayer.yuku.com/reply/488034/Tumblr-com-one-forty-plus-blog-#.V0_kbNfd79I>
about that performance, and how he’d bought my album, and loads of people 
started listening to my music. From then on it became my lucky jacket.

I’ve got backstage passes in the lining, from the last Latitude and 
Glastonbury, and a few European festivals. I’ll be adding to them this summer.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kjgn%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kjgn%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa528d7165ca52e4ceae47b3e7ee7c1354cfb4739%2F0_368_5440_6794%2F5440.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Me%20and%20my%20lucky%20pants%3A%20men%20on%20the%20clothes%20they'll%20never%20throw%20out&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kjgn%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Me+and+my+lucky+pants%3A+men+on+the+clothes+they%27ll+never+throw+out&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kjgn%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa528d7165ca52e4ceae47b3e7ee7c1354cfb4739%2F0_368_5440_6794%2F5440.jpg>
 ‘I just love the whole 1970s look.’ Photograph: Julian Anderson for the 
Guardian 
I just love the whole 1970s look: neat afro, Wrangler jacket, polo neck and 
round sunglasses. It’s that west-coast-soul kind of vibe you get looking at 
early Prince photos. I remember going to a pub in Dalston, east London, 
thinking I was the only one with a corduroy collar, and everyone had them. 
People used to notice it, and it felt rare; now it’s like, “You’ve got one of 
those.”

I do like finding a bargain, but I’m known to splash out every now and again. 
Jackets are my thing: there’s about seven I wear a lot, including a brown Lee 
corduroy one, an American college baseball jacket, and aRick Owens 
<https://www.rickowens.eu/en/GB> leather jacket. The irony is that I can never 
wear them on stage because I get hot and sweat a lot. I never go shopping at 
home in London, only on tour, so when I tour again in October, I’ll probably 
end up buying bits and bobs in all the cities we go to: some clothing, and also 
nice records. And then I feel like I’m on the road.

Love & Hate is released on 15 July on Polydor Records.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kjgn%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kjgn%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F996be47f71bd9feaccd4ddd2bfbfa088e4bbd26a%2F0_170_5440_6794%2F5440.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Me%20and%20my%20lucky%20pants%3A%20men%20on%20the%20clothes%20they'll%20never%20throw%20out&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kjgn%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Me+and+my+lucky+pants%3A+men+on+the+clothes+they%27ll+never+throw+out&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kjgn%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F996be47f71bd9feaccd4ddd2bfbfa088e4bbd26a%2F0_170_5440_6794%2F5440.jpg>
 Tom Odell: ‘I just feel more comfortable if I put the same shoes on every 
morning.’ Photograph: Julian Anderson for the Guardian 
Tom Odell

Tom Odell, 25, is a singer-songwriter, who was awarded an Ivor Novello in 
2014. He’s wearing Balmoral boots by George Cleverley.


I’ve never been that into fashion, but I really like shoes. I’ll buy a pair of 
classic English boots every year and wear them out; then I’ll take them down to 
the cobblers, which is like giving them an MOT. I keep every pair, because each 
one reminds me of a different time. For example, 2013 was a brown chelsea boot 
byRM Williams <http://www.rmwilliams.com.au/> that I got in Sydney; the year 
before was aGrenson <http://www.grenson.com/uk/>. A cobbler once told me that 
you should do a day on and a day off to give your shoes a rest – they need to 
have some “me” time. So what I do is not great for the shoe, but I just feel 
more comfortable if I put the same shoes on every morning.

I don’t like to think about what to wear: I like to have three options, and 
I’ll do that for six months until a button falls off, and then move on. To some 
degree, it’s like having a uniform. I’ve got only four shirts and three 
jackets, which are all vintage. I don’t like spending loads of money on 
clothes; it feels like a waste to me. I couldn’t imagine spending £1,000 on a 
jacket.

Last summer Elton John basically said to me, “You look like a fucking student; 
you’ve got to go out and buy some nice clothes for the stage, because it’s a 
show.” He offered to take me out shopping; I said I’d only go with him if I 
could drive my tiny 1990s Mini, which I thought would be hilarious. We haven’t 
got round to it yet, but I took what he said on board a little bit. I wear half 
a suit now, although I do wear the same thing every night – trousers byAssembly 
<http://www.assemblylabel.com/> and a shirt by Oliver Spencer 
<https://oliverspencer.co.uk/?gclid=Cj0KEQjw7LS6BRDo2Iz23au25OQBEiQAQa6hwEe3Tn9sbDOEr38o2xADr0dEtGn7T2jzpmFdEFQZhcIaAjlp8P8HAQ>
.

The other day I did a massive cull and took two bin bags of clothes to my 
local charity shop. A few days later I went into my local coffee shop and the 
guy in there – who’s a mate of mine – was wearing one of my T-shirts. I mean, 
what are the chances? I thought, “Why did I give that away? It’s a really nice 
T-shirt.”

Tom Odell’s second album, Wrong Crowd, is out now on Columbia Records.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kjgn%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kjgn%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2434cb9a7f0b47d51a3e44e6b39f2f60573ba7e6%2F0_151_5052_6315%2F5052.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Me%20and%20my%20lucky%20pants%3A%20men%20on%20the%20clothes%20they'll%20never%20throw%20out&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kjgn%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Me+and+my+lucky+pants%3A+men+on+the+clothes+they%27ll+never+throw+out&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kjgn%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2434cb9a7f0b47d51a3e44e6b39f2f60573ba7e6%2F0_151_5052_6315%2F5052.jpg>
 Daniel Mays: ‘The suit helped my character look more believable.’ Photograph: 
Julian Anderson for the Guardian 
Daniel Mays

Daniel Mays <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/daniel-mays>, 38, is a stage 
and screen actor. He made his name in the Mike Leigh films All Or Nothing 
(2002) andVera Drake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/News_Story/Critic_Review/Guardian_Film_of_the_week/0,4267,1384377,00.html>
 (2004), and most recently starred in BBC2’sLine Of Duty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/apr/29/line-of-duty-review>. He 
is wearing a green pinstriped suit he tailored himself for his role in Vera 
Drake.

My character in Vera Drake, Sid, was outgoing and debonair and worked at a 
tailor’s, so he was very particular about the suits he wore. I was spending two 
days a week at a tailor’s in London Bridge for my research when our costume 
designer, Jacqueline Durran, suggested I make Sid a 1940s suit myself. I chose 
a green woollen cloth and a blue pinstripe thread, cut the cloth and mocked it 
up before it was sent away to be constructed. It’s very important to own your 
character, but to build my costume from scratch was unlike anything I had 
experienced before. Seeing it in the film gave me an incredible feeling.

There’s a wonderfully funny scene where Sid is measuring up a customer (played 
byChris O’Dowd <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/chris-o-dowd>) for a suit, 
which I recall was very difficult to shoot. It was such a wordy scene, but at 
the same time I had to show perfect tailoring. It was a bit like patting your 
head and rubbing your stomach.

The suit helped my character look more believable, and now it’s in my wardrobe 
at home. I have worn it since, even though the trousers are so high-waisted 
they giveSimon Cowell <http://www.theguardian.com/media/simoncowell> a run for 
his money. As time has progressed since the 1940s and 1950s, men’s trousers 
have got lower and lower; nowadays you can see guys’ boxer shorts hanging out 
of their jeans.

I wore the suit for my audition for Joe Wright’s Atonement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/sep/07/romance.keiraknightley>, so it 
feels lucky. If there is ever a hint or suggestion that clothing might benefit 
your chances of getting a job, then I think any actor should try to do that, 
within reason… If you’re auditioning for a clown, you don’t want to turn up in 
full clown makeup and shoes. But if it helps make the decision of a panel of 
people who want to solve a problem and cast a role, that can only be a good 
thing.

Actors can hide behind the clothes they wear. It’s easier to play characters 
than actually be yourself in a room, sometimes.

I’m low-key when it comes to fashion. I buy in bulk every three months and 
then I wear that stuff to death, forgetting what I’ve already got in my 
wardrobe. When you go to film premieres, there is pressure to look smart, and 
you have to have a strong sense of your style. The trouble is you wear one 
thing and get photographed in it, so you have to be seen to try to wear 
different stuff. That pressure is not always associated with men; but it’s 
quite a big thing to take on.

Sometimes I’ll go to Haddon PR in Camden, north London, who champion stylish, 
urban labels likeNative Youth <http://www.native-youth.com/> – Tom Hardy and 
Riz Ahmed <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/riz-ahmed> have both gone there 
in the past. But without a doubt it’s the Vera Drake suit I have the biggest 
emotional connection to. The film’s critical success opened the door and people 
started to take notice. It was the catalyst, really, for things to come.

Daniel Mays stars in the film The Limehouse Golem 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt4733640/> later this year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kjgn%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kjgn%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F45a2a485445743efb53a3dd7b7da494534e881cd%2F0_2471_5440_3261%2F5440.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Me%20and%20my%20lucky%20pants%3A%20men%20on%20the%20clothes%20they'll%20never%20throw%20out&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kjgn%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Me+and+my+lucky+pants%3A+men+on+the+clothes+they%27ll+never+throw+out&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kjgn%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F45a2a485445743efb53a3dd7b7da494534e881cd%2F0_2471_5440_3261%2F5440.jpg>
 Irvine Welsh: ‘My hoodie is a beautiful, cosy garment.’ Photograph: Julian 
Anderson for the Guardian 
Irvine Welsh

Irvine Welsh <http://www.theguardian.com/profile/irvine-welsh>, 58, is a 
Scottish novelist whose cult novel Trainspotting was made into a film in 1996. 
He lives in Chicago with his wife. He’s wearing his favourite Hugo Boss hoodie.

My hoodie is a beautiful, cosy garment. It’s perfect for spring; it’s 
transitional. I wear it to my bored-housewife spinning class in the 
neighbourhood where I live. One of the women once came up and stroked me. She 
said [adopting a midwestern American accent]: “My, my, my, it’s just like a 
warm bear.” So I call it my warm bear jacket. I wasn’t expecting to be stroked 
by a strange woman at that time of the morning; I felt like I was at an acid 
house rave in the 1990s.

My wife bought it for me five years ago. When we first got together, my pals 
would say, “You’re dressing so much better now”, because she was picking out 
the clothes.

I always buy things that are far too young for me; age-appropriate clothes are 
just horrible. I feel great in young persons’ clothes, but I look ridiculous. I 
think, “My God, you’re 58; you can’t dress like you’re 31.”

I never go out and party nowadays, but I do have a mentality that the clothes 
you wear should mean you’re ready to be dragged into a nightclub.

I don’t feel comfortable in nice clothes; I feel like I’m going to court or 
something. I’d rather dress like someone who is breaking into somebody’s house 
than someone who’s in court because they’ve broken into somebody’s house.

I don’t know if I’m a closet goth, but I wear black because it’s practical. 
You have to be, in Chicago, because of the weather. When I go to my place in 
Miami, I’m in a white linen suit and panama hat – a Humphrey Bogart kind of 
look. You get away with it there. It’s weird. In some ways I’m such an 
exhibitionist, but I don’t like standing out on the basis of my clothes. I like 
attention, but I like to earn that attention through personality and 
conversation.

I was in Rome with my publisher about 17 years ago, when I was invited into 
the Armani store. They wanted to put me in a suit and shoes and I picked the 
most expensive cut, which back then would have cost about £3,000. But they said 
it was on them. A few days later Versace invited me, and as I walked in, I fell 
in love with a beautiful long cashmere coat. They fitted it for me and 
everything, and I thought, “Fucking brilliant,” until they were like, “And how 
will sir be paying?” You could have knocked me down with a feather. It was 
about £5,000 – the most expensive item I’ve ever bought – but I don’t regret it 
at all. It was like a drug rush when I put the coat on. I felt on top of the 
world.

The Blade Artist (Jonathan Cape, £12.99) is out now.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kjgn%2Fsfb%23img-6&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kjgn%2Fsfb%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f4324a05d3dbba0a7ff8205405542a08a2e75a9%2F0_470_5440_6794%2F5440.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Me%20and%20my%20lucky%20pants%3A%20men%20on%20the%20clothes%20they'll%20never%20throw%20out&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kjgn%2Fstw%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Me+and+my+lucky+pants%3A+men+on+the+clothes+they%27ll+never+throw+out&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kjgn%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f4324a05d3dbba0a7ff8205405542a08a2e75a9%2F0_470_5440_6794%2F5440.jpg>
 Adrien Sauvage: ‘I wear this jacket everywhere.’ Photograph: Julian Anderson 
for the Guardian 
Adrien Sauvage

Adrien Sauvage, 33, founded his menswear label A. Sauvage in 2010. He is 
wearing a leather jacket he reworked for his 2013 collection.

I found this biker jacket in Camden, north London, in one of those places 
where you just take out £20 from your pocket and hand it over. When I started 
my clothing line everyone knew me for tailoring, but I didn’t want to be the 
suit guy, so I reworked this jacket to look brand new. I wear it everywhere, 
from work events toCoachella <http://live.coachella.com/>; I feel sexy in it. 
It reminds me of who I am and where I am. I know I’m never going to throw it 
away. If my house were on fire I would grab this jacket. And my two babies, of 
course. I could wrap them up in it.

Clothes are like a mixtape: you always update them. If there’s anything in my 
wardrobe that I wouldn’t want to wear in the next 60 days, I’ll put it in the 
bin.

My typical style is a black T-shirt [own design] and leather jeans (by Rick 
Owens 
<https://www.rickowens.eu/en/GB/men/section/all?f%5Bseasons%5D%5B%5D=144&gclid=Cj0KEQjw7LS6BRDo2Iz23au25OQBEiQAQa6hwGKEQhCgovlATq8NPfvhQkCGSfjCuC4i4AgKcLUGnZgaAq6o8P8HAQ>
), but I do take risks. All the fashion faux pas I’ve made in the past are 
coming back into fashion right now. I used to have a yellow raincoat in the 
1990s, and now I’m like, “Wow, I could have actually worn that again.”

I’ll wear pyjama suits around the house with Nike sliders; I can still go down 
the shop and look pretty dope. I buy a lot of animal-print shirts from anywhere 
that does long enough sleeves. Being 6ft 5in, it’s handy that I can make my own 
clothes, butSaint Laurent <http://www.ysl.com/gb> do a good leopard print, or I 
buy vintage shirts for women, although it’s annoying buttoning them up the 
other way round.

You have to be a bit aspirational if you’re selling a certain kind of product. 
As a designer, you never want to be the subject – you like to let your work 
speak for itself – but it’s also a bit like if your personal trainer was fat. 
My wife knows me better than I know myself: if she ever says, “You’re wearing 
that, then?” I’ll never wear it again.

asauvage.com <http://asauvage.com/>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kjgn%2Fsfb%23img-7&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kjgn%2Fsfb%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c568d58b1cfd0a408417924224d008be2ecd26e%2F0_470_5440_6794%2F5440.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Me%20and%20my%20lucky%20pants%3A%20men%20on%20the%20clothes%20they'll%20never%20throw%20out&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kjgn%2Fstw%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Me+and+my+lucky+pants%3A+men+on+the+clothes+they%27ll+never+throw+out&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kjgn%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c568d58b1cfd0a408417924224d008be2ecd26e%2F0_470_5440_6794%2F5440.jpg>
 Jon Snow: ‘It’s a secure link to one’s mild insanity.’ Photograph: Julian 
Anderson for the Guardian 
Jon Snow

Jon Snow, 68, is a newsreader and the longest-running presenter of Channel 4 
News, which he has hosted since 1989. He is wearing a Versace greatcoat.

I found this greatcoat in a high-end junk shop about 25 years ago. Apparently, 
it belonged to an Arab gentleman who paid £3,000 for it, and had only ever worn 
it once. I had a good haggle and eventually got it down to £150.

It’s a completely inappropriate piece of outerwear that in no way fits into 
any other aspect of my wardrobe. It’s so big you could fit three of me in it; 
you wouldn’t know who was inside. It makes it out on location – for example, 
when I have to stand in Westminster in the cold – a dozen times a year, but I’d 
never wear it on any other occasion.

Why do I feel so attached to it? Because it’s a secure link to one’s mild 
insanity. On the inside, there’s an amazing gold splash of Versace filth, I 
suppose you could call it. It’s a flasher’s paradise. Recently, I was given a 
wardrobe at work because they realised we need to keep things in places, hung 
up; so the coat now lives in the wardrobe there. My wife is pleased; it’s 
allowed for about five suits to be hung where it once was.

I’m a tie fetishist: I’ve got in excess of 100 ties, and I keep the numbers 
down by giving them away to charity after a certain amount of time. My socks 
must reflect an element of colour in my tie. It’s a mood thing: if I meet a man 
with grey socks, I know their character is in trouble.

I couldn’t call myself a fashionista. Buying clothes isn’t a huge pastime, but 
I do go to Italy about twice a year and make sure I go to a shop or two. I buy 
leather shoes fromFratelli Rossetti 
<http://www.fratellirossetti.com/gb-GB-en/Default.aspx?gclid=Cj0KEQjw7LS6BRDo2Iz23au25OQBEiQAQa6hwL7jK2j-09KDKaySdxuSrW204BPRw8Delh76zPS-HaYaAj3k8P8HAQ>
 and drainpipe trousers fromBanana Republic <http://www.bananarepublic.co.uk/> 
– being an American firm, they understand someone who is over 6ft. I almost 
never wear a suit at home or out of work, if I can avoid it; I’m a sweater and 
cords man. For me, an attachment to clothes has a lot to do with nostalgia and 
vanity. We occasionally think we look good in certain things, but it’s not very 
often that we actually do. So when you do find something you love wearing, you 
hang on to it. In fact, you can never let it go.
