
I got engaged recently, for my sins, and though I am naturally overwhelmed 
with joy to be marrying a man who adds Tabasco to any delicately flavoured dish 
I cook while complaining about how many books I own, it does also mean that I 
have been sucked into the terrifying, pastel-hued vortex that is the world of 
the online wedding blog. For those unacquainted with this particular genre of 
lifestyle porn, believe me when I say: here be monsters, and those monsters are 
after your hard-earned cash.

Don’t get me wrong: I’ve got nothing against a good wedding. I find such 
public declarations of commitment and the way they bring friends and families 
together deeply moving. But I can’t help but be alarmed that not only doesthe 
average British wedding cost a preposterous £20,500 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/17/couples-healthier-wealthier-marriage-good-health-single-survey-research>
, but almost all of them seem to be indistinguishable (or at least the 
heterosexual ones do; gay couples have largely escaped this fate, through not 
being so doggedly devoted to centuries’ worth of rigid gender norms).

Thanks to the decline of the bridal magazine in favour of the more DIY 
aesthetic of social media, not to mention a hefty amount of one-upmanship, the 
same touches and tropes keep popping up. How can your day truly represent the 
two of you when it is little more than a series of carefully curated conceits 
nicked from someone else’s Instagram?

It has slowly dawned on me that, no matter how hard I might try to make my own 
wedding different, it will probably end up being exactly the same as everyone 
else’s. The only question is, which one of the trending types will it be? Here 
are 10 weddings you’ve certainly got in your diary this summer.

The Pinterest wedding

Everything looks as though it has been ripped straight from the visual 
scrapbooking site <https://www.pinterest.com/> and made real. There’s a 
chalkboard welcoming guests in curly cursive, and Facebook profile picture name 
cards printed out to look like Polaroids. There’s a “cake” consisting of three 
wheels of British cheese stacked one on top of the other. There’s a basket of 
“wedding flip-flops” (yes, they are a thing) for female guests who have worn 
shoes too impractical to dance in. There’s confetti made with real rose petals, 
there’s pick ’n’ mix, a Gypsy swing band, antique pictures of all the couple’s 
ancestors who ever got married, even if they eventually got divorced or were 
bigamists or lived for decades in silent, aching desperation. There are giant, 
wooden, light-up initials, in case people drink so much cava, they forget the 
bride and groom’s names. There’s a photo booth. Most of all, there is bunting. 
Oh, is there bunting.

The barn wedding

This is almost exactly like the Pinterest wedding, except the wine is warm, 
there are hay bales, it is possible at all times to discern a faint backnote of 
manure, and in order to relieve yourself, you’re forced to squeeze out of your 
Spanx in a darkened portable toilet. Meanwhile, the farmer, who knows that the 
bridal party have never once been near the countryside and will therefore pay 
through the nose to get married in a glorified corrugated tin can just because 
it’s got fairy lights in it, has made a cool four grand.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jhbf%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jhbf%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa981a7495b3672b10a161501c348b4bfe03829b8%2F2113_1317_2770_1804%2F2770.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Something%20borrowed%3A%20the%20rise%20of%20the%20identikit%20wedding&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jhbf%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Something+borrowed%3A+the+rise+of+the+identikit+wedding&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jhbf%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa981a7495b3672b10a161501c348b4bfe03829b8%2F2113_1317_2770_1804%2F2770.jpg>
 A far-flung wedding ensures most of your family won’t show up. Photograph: 
Alamy 
The exotic beach wedding

For people who dislike most of their family members, the far-flung beach 
wedding guarantees that most of them will not turn up. Those who do show up 
have a tendency to treat the bride and groom like their travel agent, and 
behave as though flying to a four-star exotic beach resort has been nothing but 
an inconvenience. As a result, there’s an air to all proceedings of “We’ve come 
all this way, and… you’re only serving us house wine.” Everyone worries 
constantly about the weather. Also, did you know there was such thing as a 
bridal bikini?

The emotionally awkward wedding

Everything about this wedding is geared towards making you feel things. There 
might as well be ushers standing next to the top table holding up prompt signs 
that read “EMOTE”. The speeches are tearful and peppered with cliches, not to 
mention inappropriate jokes about ex-partners and the wedding night. The 
readings are nauseating (“Wherever I am, there’s always Pooh, there’s always 
Pooh and me” being inexplicably popular). There are homemade signs saying, 
“Today two families become one, so pick a seat not a side” or “He stole my 
heart so I’m stealing his last name”. The couple wrote their own vows to 
include their secret pet names. The first dance isSnow Patrol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/snow-patrol>, and they will french kiss for 
the duration. If you’re extremely unlucky, as a friend of mine sadly was, they 
may even grind each other.

The ‘just something small’ wedding

This starts off as being “just for friends and family”, but rapidly spirals 
out of control until it’s an 11-course meal featuring hours’ worth of speeches 
and a role for every member of the wedding party, whether it’s handmaking 250 
wedding favours, chauffeuring elderly relatives to and from the reception, 
sewing thousands of silver beads on to the bodice of the wedding dress, or 
distilling the very essence of the bride and groom into an interpretative dance 
performance to be uploaded straight to YouTube.

The boho hipster wedding

Everyone is wearing a flower crown. There are so many flower crowns that you 
have forgotten what people looked like before flower crowns. The groom has a 
beard and a man bun, and is wearing braces; he and his groomsmen look like a 
budget version ofMumford & Sons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/mumford-and-sons>. The bridesmaids are all 
wearing dresses in different, delicate colours that complement one another 
perfectly. Decorations come in the form of wildflowers in jam jars, found 
objects and mismatched china. There is elderflower in everything, and for some 
reason everyone is encouraged to wear disturbing woodland animal masks that 
make the entire wedding party look as if they are about to participate in a 
pagan black mass.

The American wedding

This wedding lasts for approximately 152 days, because there’s a bachelor 
party, a bridal shower, a bachelorette party, a rehearsal dinner, a wedding 
brunch, a lengthy service and a 12‑course meal. Everyone is drinking mimosas 
all the time. There are 27 bridesmaids and groomsmen, the only requirement for 
such a role being that you once stood in an airport boarding queue next to one 
of the happy couple and offered them a tissue when they sneezed. Speaking of 
flights, getting to this wedding has already cost you £2,000 and that’s before 
you even consider the gift list. All the women are on juice fasts; all the men 
have undone their bow ties and are thrilled to think that smoking a cigar makes 
themDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>.

The traditional English church wedding

Bow down to this couple, for they have made the ultimate sacrifice: they have 
attended Sunday school every week for a year so they can be married in the 
bride’s parish church, as is her dearly cherished dream. This wedding is 
essentially unchanged from the days ofFour Weddings And A Funeral 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/four-weddings-and-a-funeral>. The dress is a 
blancmange, the hats are sensational, the disco cheesy, the salmon overpoached. 
But the guests do not care, because they know that, ultimately, they are 
swaying precariously on the dancefloor while burping neat sauvignon blanc not 
for themselves, not even for the couple, but for England.

The festival wedding

This wedding has all of the bad things about festivals (rain, camping, Calvin 
Harris <https://www.theguardian.com/music/calvin-harris>) with none of the good 
(a feeling of blessed liberation from the constraints of society, MDMA). The 
bride and bridesmaid are wearing matching wellies under their dresses, there 
are food vans serving hot dogs, a hog roast and, of course (because the couple 
insist that the Native American deities smile down on their special day), it’s 
in a tipi. There is guaranteed to be at least one exhausted great-grandma 
silently wishing for the days when a prawn cocktail consumed while sitting down 
in a chair was a guaranteed good do.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jhbf%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jhbf%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ad3009744aee22404496519a7630d4640d51455%2F827_1023_3497_2098%2F3497.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Something%20borrowed%3A%20the%20rise%20of%20the%20identikit%20wedding&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jhbf%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Something+borrowed%3A+the+rise+of+the+identikit+wedding&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jhbf%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ad3009744aee22404496519a7630d4640d51455%2F827_1023_3497_2098%2F3497.jpg>
 Make like you’re in a Tim Burton film. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
The alternative wedding

This is exactly like all the other weddings, except the couple have tattoos, 
DMs and a lot more purple in the colour scheme. But why not? Pretending to be 
in a Tim Burton film is a lot more fun than standing around in a community 
centre full of trestle tables. So what if auntie Sue doesn’t like Cradle of 
Filth?

And the one you’re not invited to… the best wedding of all time 

Why haven’t they invited you? “Whywhywhywhywhy?” you moan as you peruse their 
wedding hashtag to watch everyone you have ever met quaff champagne in the 
sunshine without you there. OK, so you haven’t seen either of the happy couple 
for five and a half years, and the last time you did was at a dinner party 
where you were sick, and they had to put you on the sofa under a blanket, and 
you did sleep with the groom once at university – but then, so did everyone, so 
it’s not a big deal. And when they got engaged, you may have told them weddings 
were an outdated, patriarchal concept. But still – why didn’t they invite you?
Why?
