
A late plea for voters to back the remain option in this week’s EU referendum 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> has been issued by 1,285 
business leaders who say in a letter to The Times that Brexit would damage 
Britain’s economy.
Brexit explained: Cost to UK businesses of EU regulations 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/05/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=regulations_business_costs>
Smaller businesses and employers would be particularly vulnerable to any 
economic shock as a result of a leave vote, according to its signatories, who 
include the leaders of 50 of theFTSE <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ftse>
 100 companies.

“Britain leaving the EU would mean uncertainty for our firms, less trade with 
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and fewer jobs,” they 
say in the letter.

The letter goes on to claim that the terms of trade between Britain and its 
European market would have to be reset “from scratch” in the event of a Brexit.


Its signatories included the founder of the Virgin Group, Sir Richard Branson, 
who this week launched his own nationwide campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/20/richard-branson-starts-his-own-campaign-to-keep-britain-in-the-eu>
 to urge people to back remain, and Michael Bloomberg, the former New York 
mayor,who has already claimed 
<https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/leaving-europe-risk-uk-shouldnt-take-mike-bloomberg?trk=hp-feed-article-title-channel-add&trk=v-feed>
 that a vote for Brexit could lead to job losses in Britain and harm its 
ability to fight terrorism.

They were joined by Jo Malone, the perfume entrepreneur, and Charles Dunstone, 
the co-founder ofCarphone Warehouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/carphonewarehousegroup>.

Figures from a number of FTSE 100 companies who had previously not added their 
voice to calls earlier this year also signed the letter. They included leaders 
from the ranks of Barclays, Anglo American, Standard Life, Barratt Developments 
and the Berkeley Group.

While major institutions are represented in the letter’s list of signatories, 
it says of a potential Brexit: “Smaller businesses and the people they employ 
are particularly vulnerable to any economic shock which could follow.”

Boris Johnson <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris>, one of the most 
prominent Tory figures in the Vote Leave campaign, said on Monday that Downing 
Street was waging an operation to pressurise business leaders into supporting 
the remain side.
