
“New shoes, eh?” the man said to me in a knowing tone. “So, what’s the tread? 
Let’s have a look.” I’d just joined the local running club. “Tread?” I thought. 
“What’s ‘tread’?” Back then, my shoe knowledge was farcical. The week before, I 
had gone online, found a random website sellingrunning gear 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/27/heart-rate-monitors-gps-watches-running-kit-vassos-alexander>
, clicked on the “sale” tab, picked a pair my size and pressed “buy”. “Tread?” 
All I knew was that, even at 30% off, they were still the most expensive pair 
of trainers I’d ever bought.

I have run casually all my adult life. A few laps of the park in the evening. 
Maybe a longer run on a weekend. Nothing serious. Certainly not serious enough 
to invest in any proper kit. Then I moved to a village just outside the Welsh 
border town ofHay-on-Wye 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/may/17/hay-on-wye-beyond-the-festival> 
and everything changed. Nestled in the lee of the Black Mountains, the 
Radnorshire hills at my back, the River Wye at my feet, the landscape seemed to 
scream “Run!” I heeded its call.

For the first few months, I kept to the road. Tarmac felt safe. I’d done most 
of my running until then in cities, pounding the pavement, dodging the traffic. 
Eventually, I plucked up the courage to hit the fields and footpaths. That 
decision changed my life. The feel of springy turf beneath my feet, the sense 
of nature near at hand, the space to breathe and think. The sheer, seductive 
solitude of it all. Me, the bare hills, the cold air, nothing else. Alone.

Related: All the gear…: ‘How obsession with kit eclipsed my love of running’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/27/heart-rate-monitors-gps-watches-running-kit-vassos-alexander>

Then, about six months after arriving, I joined Hay Hotfooters 
<http://www.hayhotfooters.co.uk/>, the local running club. Other than school 
cross-country, which I recall even now with total dread, I’d never really run 
with anyone else. Dread pretty much summed up my image of running clubs, too. I 
had their members pegged as mild obsessives, keen onfartleks 
<http://www.runnersworld.com/tag/fartlek> and the achievement of personal 
bests. I’d see them around town from time to time, setting off 
shoulder-to-shoulder, dressed in their tights and doused in neon.

So why did I join? Simple: a friend suggested it. It would be sociable, he 
said. Plus, it would get me into a routine: every Thursday night, same time, 
same crowd. I could learn some new routes to boot, stop repeating the same old 
two or three around my house. I heard the reason in his arguments, but felt 
attached to my lone running. It was what I knew, what I enjoyed.

Then, during the Hay festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/guardian-hay-festival>, a jamboree of 
book-loving 
<https://www.hayfestival.com/m-113-hay-festival-2016.aspx?skinid=2&currencysetting=GBP&localesetting=en-GB&resetfilters=true>
 that engulfs the town in late May, I saw that Hay Hotfooters were arranging a 
jog. A “taster”, they called it. What did I have to lose? So I gave it a go, 
turning up in an old T-shirt and my threadbare trainers. A friendly retired man 
called Martyn greeted us and led the way. He kept to a comfortable pace, not so 
quick that we couldn’t chat among ourselves, not so slow that we didn’t build 
up a sweat. The looping route took us along paths I had never been down before 
and through woods and dingles I never knew existed.

None of them, to my great relief, were super fast. Just ordinary folk, out 
doing what we all enjoy

I was sold and the next Thursday, slightly shy, still sceptical, I turned up 
to my first regular club run. Martyn was there, friendly as ever. An hour 
later, I’d also met Alan and Shaun and Imme and Mark and Tina and John, and a 
dozen or so others. All of them welcoming – and none of them, to my great 
relief, were super fast or chronically competitive. Just ordinary folk, out 
doing what we all enjoy.

There is some nerdy running chat. We discuss head torches and heel-toe 
differentials, breathable materials and stretching options. Contrary to my 
expectations, much of the information I have picked up has proved invaluable. 
Tips about good prices and nearby races, for instance. Advice about diet and 
dealing with injuries. But what occupies most of our conversation is family and 
work, hobbies and holidays, life’s joys and its occasional frustrations. The 
usual banter between friends.

Running clubs aren’t for everyone, I know. If my local club did fartleks or 
track training, it probably wouldn’t be for me, either. But as a kickstart into 
regular running, it’s been great. As a means of learning new routes – up the
Begwyns 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/apr/09/walking-welsh-marches-with-victorian-clergyman-kilverts-diary>
, down the Dragon’s Back, along Offa’s Dyke, through Wern Woods – it has been 
invaluable. But it’s as a way into the local community that has made joining a 
club so special for me. Through Hay Hotfooters, I have met people I would not 
otherwise have met. It has helped to turn a place where I bought a house into a 
community in which I live. The only downside: it’s turned me into a tread bore.

Oliver Balch’s book Under the Tump: Sketches of Real Life on the Welsh Borders 
<http://www.faber.co.uk/9780571311958-under-the-tump.html> is published by 
Faber, £14.99. To buy for £10.49 including UK p&p visit the guardian bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/400232/>.

Hay Hotfooters’ annual Magic Roundabout 10k race is on Sunday 12 June, 11am. 
For information, see the club’swebsite 
<http://www.hayhotfooters.co.uk/magicroundabout.htm>.
