
The heads of England’s two most powerful education bodies, the exam regulator 
Ofqual and the schools regulator Ofsted, have clashed over reshaping the summer 
exam timetable to accommodate Islam’s holy month ofRamadan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ramadan>.

Glenys Stacey, the chief executive of Ofqual, has issued a public letter 
<https://ofqual.blog.gov.uk/2016/01/15/letter-to-sir-michael-wilshaw/> to her 
counterpart at Ofsted, Sir Michael Wilshaw, following Wilshaw’s warning that 
any changes to the GCSE and A-level timetable could lead to other groups 
“piling in” as a result.

Wilshaw told the London talk radio station LBC: “Once we give in to one 
religious group, we’ve got to give in to the other.” He said pressure from such 
groups could make the exam timetable unmanageable.

“Other groups might say we’ve got a festival here, a holy day there, we want 
you to change.Schools <http://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> would find 
it very difficult to manage that,” said Wilshaw, the chief inspector of schools.

But in blunt terms, Stacey told Wilshaw: “I would like to confirm that exams 
have not been moved this summer to accommodate Ramadan, nor is there an 
intention to move them.

“Ofqual and the Joint Council of Qualifications (JCQ) liaise with a broad 
range of groups regarding exam timetables far in advance of exams being sat. 
Schedules are set to ensure that, as far as possible, no child is disadvantaged 
due to the timing of exams. This includes consideration of those who follow 
Islam.”

Related: Summer exams will not be fitted around Ramadan, confirm boards 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jan/07/summer-exams-wont-be-fitted-around-ramadan-confirm-boards>

Stacey, who is due to take up a new post as chief inspector of probation, 
concluded: “I appreciate you were asked for your thoughts on this issue and 
responded as such, but I would draw your attention to JCQ’spublic statement 
issued last week 
<http://www.jcq.org.uk/media-centre/news-releases/jcq-statement---exam-timetables>
 … If you would like to discuss this further please do contact my office.”

An Ofsted <http://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> spokesperson 
responded: “Sir Michael is grateful for the clarification from Ofqual.”

Wilshaw’s remarks came despite the exam boards having said that Ramadan had 
been treated the same way as other events, such as the Queen’s diamond jubilee 
in June 2012, and that the exam timetable was not open to change.

In 2013 Ofqual and the exam boards said they had held talks with Muslim groups 
in advance of Ramadan coinciding with the summer exam season in England, Wales 
and Northern Ireland. Last month the issue re-emerged after the children’s 
commissioner, Anne Longfield, erroneously said discussions over “delaying the 
exam timetable” were under way.

The JCQ said there had been “a clear misunderstanding in some parts of the 
media as to how the GCSE and A-level timetable is set, and the impact religious 
events such as Ramadan, Easter and Passover have on it.

“It is important to note that the timetable for 2016 was drafted over a year 
ago, is published and won’t be changing,” it said.

Comparisons of the 2015 and 2016 timetables suggest any changes have been 
minor, and in many cases Ramadan has had no obvious effect on timings.

Related: Ramadan: a guide to the Islamic holy month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/17/ramadan-guide-to-islamic-holy-month-muslims-fast>

Ramadan – the period when the Qur’an is believed to have been revealed to the 
prophet Muhammad – is observed by fasting during the hours of daylight. 
Headteachers fear that some Muslim pupils could suffer as a result during the 
stress of sitting exams.

As Ramadan is set by a lunar calendar, its date changes by 11 days every year. 
In 2016 the month falls between 7 June and 5 July, overlapping with the 
traditional exam season in May and June.

Ramadan will continue to fall during peak periods in the exam season for the 
next two years, as it is forecast to begin on 27 May in 2017 and 16 May in 2018.

Some Jewish leaders 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/education/educationnews/12087421/Pressure-mounts-to-cancel-exams-on-day-of-Jewish-festival.html>
 have called for delays in exams scheduled to follow the festival of Shavuot 
ending on 13 June.

But the British Board of Jewish Deputies said: “This problem comes up on a 
regular basis. When we know that an exam board has scheduled an important exam 
on the day of a Jewish holiday, we alert them and try to arrange a change of 
date.

“If this is impossible, we can usually arrange for religious students to take 
the exam on a different day under strict conditions. Generally, this works 
without much fuss.”
