
Ofsted’s chief inspector, Sir Michael Wilshaw 
<http://www.theguardian.com/profile/michael-wilshaw>, is proposing a national 
network of talent scouts who will fast-track young teachers into leadership 
positions in order to tackle “persistent failure” in England’s state secondary 
schools.

According to Wilshaw, the lack of able headteachers 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jan/26/english-schools-struggling-to-recruit-headteachers-research-finds>
 was the biggest challenge in improving state secondary schools outside London 
and the south-east, with many schools being being held back by weak leadership.

Wilshaw told MPs on parliament’s education committee 
<http://www.parliament.uk/education-committee> he has sent proposals for the 
new network to the education secretary, Nicky Morgan, and urged the government 
to do more to recruit effective school leaders.

“Leadership is absolutely critical. We have banged on about school structures 
for the last few years and my advice for government is to move away from that 
now, and to look at what’s happening in terms of if we have got strong 
leadership,” Wilshaw said.

“I have said time and time again – I’ve said it to the secretary of state – we 
need to make sure we have a national system which identifies good people with 
potential leadership capabilities and to move them into leadership positions as 
soon as possible. I’ve put forward a paper to her on the way that could be done.

Related: Return to grammar school selection would be disaster, says Ofsted 
chief 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jan/29/grammar-school-selection-disaster-ofsted-chief-sir-michael-wilshaw>

“The government’s looking at it but it is something which I think is urgent, 
absolutely urgent, because where we see a poor school we see poor leadership.

“How are we going to get better leaders in Dudley, in Hull or Grimsby or in 
Bradford, where I was yesterday, where standards are miserably low?”

The chief inspector was openly scornful of the Department for Education’s 
National College ofTeaching <http://www.theguardian.com/education/teaching> and 
Leadership’s efforts, telling MPs: “What’s the national college for school 
leadership doing? When’s the last time you and I heard them say anything about 
leadership? I haven’t.”

Wilshaw’s plan is that young teachers be talent-spotted early in their careers 
and then encouraged to seek promotion into leadership positions that he dubbed 
“apprentice heads”.

“What I’m proposing is that we have a strong national college, that it’s 
regionalised, and that the regional directors for the national college would – 
in conversations with headteachers and executive heads and regional 
commissioners and local authorities – identify at an early stage, after a few 
years of teaching, that person has got what it takes to eventually become a 
leader,” he said.

Wilshaw said he would make the issue a priority for the remainder of his term 
asOfsted <http://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> head, which ends in 
January.

“What I will do is to say, we must as a country ensure we’ve got enough 
teachers, enough good teachers and enough good headteachers.

“Once we have both and they are evenly distributed across the country, and 
particularly in those parts of the country that have languished in the doldrums 
for years, we will become a better system.”

Lucy Frazer, the conservative MP for South East Cambridgeshire 
<http://www.lucyfrazer.org.uk/>, asked if effective headteachers could be 
recruited from among business leaders.

“They could come from outside but I’ve not met one yet,” Wilshaw said. “I’ve 
not heard of the chief executive of the local plumbing firm coming in and 
becoming a good headteacher.”

On the subject of teacher shortages 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/feb/26/uk-schools-suffering-as-new-teachers-flock-abroad-warns-chief-inspector>
, Wilshaw said more should be done to publicise the upside of the profession.

Related: Calls for 'homegrown talent' to take over as next Ofsted chief 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/feb/14/calls-for-homegrown-talent-next-ofsted-chief>

“If you’re a headteacher you can be on up to £100,000 a year. Chief executives 
of academy trusts are very wealthy individuals. We should publicise that. If 
you are good and you want to make leadership a career, you can do very well 
financially,” he said.

“So much of what we hear is negative: workload, children misbehaving. We need 
to say: this is a really noble profession to go into.”

Wilshaw dismissed arguments to include lessons in so-called soft skills in 
schools, and said he did not thinkpersonal, social, health and economic (PSHE) 
lessons should be compulsory 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/mar/24/personal-social-health-education-compulsory-schools-estelle-morris>
.

“PSHE has always been badly taught in schools, that’s been my experience. It’s 
usually been bunged on the end of the curriculum,” Wilshaw said.


“So you have a physics teacher who is trying to teach sex education for 15 
minutes on a Monday morning. I wouldn’t make it statutory.”
