
The academic publishing market is worth £4.4bn to the UK economy 
<http://www.publishers.org.uk/policy-and-news/news-releases/2016/strong-year-for-uk-publishing-industry-as-it-grows-to-44bn/>
. It encompasses global academic publishers and sector-specific publishers, as 
well as a thriving and learned society publishing community. If you read the 
recent article“It’s time to stand up to greedy academic publishers” 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/apr/18/why-academic-journals-expensive>
 you could be forgiven for confusing publishers with printers, thinking that 
all they do is passively receive research articles, proof, typeset and then 
publish them. This is not the case.

Related: Why peer review needs a good going over 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/28/why-peer-review-needs-a-good-going-over>

Publishers serve researchers by undertaking a wide variety of tasks 
<https://scholarlykitchen.sspnet.org/2016/02/01/guest-post-kent-anderson-updated-96-things-publishers-do-2016-edition/>
 that the community needs but cannot complete on its own. The fact that they 
are able to do these things means that those scientists, their institutions, 
funders, policymakers and other benefactors can focus on their work.

Publishers invest heavily in scholarly communication, for example, including 
the technology-intensive digital platforms upon which authors, reviewers, 
editors and readers conduct their work.

Publishers offer value to research institutions by providing data-driven 
metrics and analytics that inform their research management activities. This 
investment allows for rigorous peer review, thereby enabling scrutiny of the 
collective scientific record and helping to ensure that the business-related 
aspects of publishing are effectively managed. It also pays for the development 
of technology of that ensures articles are discoverable, shareable and able to 
be accessed in underserved regions.



Many small publishers partner with larger groups in order to take advantage of 
their scale and reach, thereby reducing costs for members and authors. Such 
diversity leads to competition, as established publishers vie with new entrants 
for the best authors.

And this competitive system plays an important role as we work with the 
research community to deliver the government’s goal of ensuring all publicly 
funded research is accessible either at the point of publication or following a 
reasonable embargo period. Arecent review 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/open-access-to-research-independent-advice>
 conducted by Adam Tickell, the newly appointed vice-chancellor of Sussex 
University, concluded that good progress is being made in the UK – partly as a 
result of the wide variety of publications on offer from publishers of all 
sizes.

Related: Are publishers really 'hoodwinking' academics? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/sep/17/are-publishers-really-hoodwinking-academics>

There are many activities that the individual researcher who submits and reads 
papers doesn’t see, but the fact that he or she wants to submit and read is the 
result of the good work of publishers to maintain the system in which that can 
take place. Publishers are committed to quality and to preserving the 
scientific record to fuel future research. Our goal is simple: to ensure the 
research community receives the support it needs.

If the accusation is that publishers are charging too much, then let’s at 
least ensure that the debate includes proper acknowledgement of the investment 
academic publishers make in their sector.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
