
If anyone ever needed a lesson on graphic novels, it’s the publisher who told 
Stan Lee:“That is the worst idea I’ve ever heard. People hate spiders, you 
can’t call a book Spiderman.” <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p038d4wr> As you 
may have heard, that idea ended up working out quite well for Mr Lee who, at 
93, is the god of the graphic novel and createdThe Incredible Hulk, The 
Fantastic Four and Iron Man 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/nov/22/marvel-stan-lee-sky-1-lucky-man>. 

There can be a bit of snobbery when it comes to using such texts in schools, 
but they can be a brilliant way of bringing literature to reluctant readers, 
and are particularly useful for those who don’t speak English as their first 
language. The more sophisticated examples contain the kind of complex themes 
and language (it’s not all KAPOW! and THWACK!) that will challenge even the 
highest-achieving students. And, of course, the books are beautiful to look at, 
combining illustration and text in a unique way.

If you’re still unconvinced, this article from the National Council of 
Teachers of English <http://www.ncte.org/magazine/archives/122031> puts forward 
a strong case and thispresentation looks at ways to use graphic novels to teach 
the classics 
<https://prezi.com/mkxa6aclox8t/using-graphic-novels-to-teach-the-classics/> 
such as Little Women, Frankenstein and a surprisingly muscular Macbeth.

Primary

Take younger students on a journey through the many worlds of graphic novels 
with thislist of recommended examples for primary classes 
<http://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/12744/Graphic-novels-for-primary-schools>
 fromBookspace <http://www.bookspaceforschools.co.uk/>. This includes Tintin, 
Asterix and the intriguing Sardine in Outer Space (which has anonline activity 
pack 
<http://images.macmillan.com/media/firstsecond/teachers-librarians/Activities_Ahoy.pdf>
 (pdf) available to print).

Graphic novel techniques can also be used to complement texts that students 
are already reading, like thisresource pack on Roald Dahl’s The Twits 
<http://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/20363/The-Twits-bumper-resource-pack>
 fromTeachIt Primary <http://www.teachitprimary.co.uk/>. It asks pupils to 
illustrate key events from each chapter, such as the dark and brilliant move of 
making Mrs Twit think she is shrinking by gluing bits of wood to the bottom of 
her walking stick.

The next step is to get your classes creating their own comic books. This 
guide from Sarah McIntyre 
<http://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/6537/How-I-make-Comics-by-Sarah-McIntyre>
, illustrator of Vern and Lettuce and Morris the Mankiest Monster, talks 
students through the professional process – from coming up with characters and 
adventures, to using Photoshop. Thisguide and collection of top tips 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/21856/Comic-strip-template>
, also fromTeachIt Primary <http://www.teachitprimary.co.uk/>, takes your class 
through a practice exercise before dreaming up their own pieces.

Get your students to create their characters using this How to draw ... 
characters guide from Jacqueline Wilson, 
<http://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/gallery/2011/mar/10/how-to-draw-characters-gallery>
 which details the author’s long process of drafting and redrafting. If you 
want to follow Stan Lee’s example and design superheroes, thisguide 
<http://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/12458/How-to-draw-awesome-super-heroes>
 explains the importance of exaggeration, costumes and a cool name. Or, if you 
want to get a bit more high-tech, thisonline comic creator 
<http://www.comicmaster.org.uk/> lets pupils create their own colourful graphic 
novels using drag-and-drop tools. And for a creative homework task, try this 
printable“Adventures in Cartooning” activity book 
<http://images.macmillan.com/media/firstsecond/teachers-librarians/Adventures_in_Cartooning_Activity_Kit.pdf>
 (pdf).

Once your class has mastered the skills of the graphic novel, they can use 
them to explore any area of the curriculum.Twinkl <http://www.twinkl.co.uk/> has
blank comic book templates 
<http://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/11630/Comic-Book-Templates> 
of different sizes available to print. Studying history? Get students to render 
key moments in graphic form. Looking at geography? See if they can make rocks 
into characters. For science, thisresource book 
<http://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/10575/Illustrating-Science-----Heart-and-Circulation>
 guides students through creating a comic that explores the heart and 
circulatory system.

Secondary

There are endless ways to use graphic novels in secondary classrooms, as this 
list <http://www.getgraphic.org/Teachers/TeachingStrategiesforGraphicNovels.pdf>
 (pdf) explains. The suggestions cover key literacy skills such as summarising, 
sequencing and predicting, as well as more inventive tasks such as holding a 
graphic novel tea party. Thisposter 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/21858/Graphic-novel-poster> 
from theScottish Book Trust <http://www.scottishbooktrust.com/> explores the 
features of graphic novels and would work well as a handout at the beginning of 
the unit.

But which text should you go for? The Book Trust 
<http://www.booktrust.org.uk/books/children/booklists/122/> recommends some 
trusty favourites and interesting newbies, from The Savage, David Almond’s 
exploration of grief, to theManga Shakespeare <http://www.mangashakespeare.com/>
 series, which includes Romeo and Juliet, Othello and other curriculum 
stalwarts (and provides an excellent introduction to the Bard for those with 
lower literacy levels).

This project-based resource 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/21857/Comic-book-heroes> 
fromTeachIt <https://www.teachit.co.uk/home> sets students the task of 
researching the history of comics, sourcing examples of different types and 
analysing the common attributes of the books’ heroes, before creating their own.

For older pupils, this Ted talk from Michael Chaney 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qAyEbgSPi9w>, a professor of English at a US 
university, explores the complexities of the graphic novel form and how 
caricature and distortion are used to convey messages in a coded manner – an 
interesting cross-curricular topic for art and literature. Chaney includes two 
examples that are now considered classics and make for rich study for key 
stages 3 and 4: Maus and Persepolis.

Art Spiegelman’s Maus tells the story of his father’s survival in Auschwitz 
concentration camp, mice representing the Jews and cats the Nazi guards. These
discussion questions 
<http://www.randomhouse.com/highschool/catalog/display.pperl?isbn=9780394747231&view=tg>
 guide students through the book, and thiscollection of teaching resources 
<http://www.comicsineducation.com/home/comics-in-education-presents-resources-for-teaching-art-spiegelmans-maus>
 includes an interview with Spiegelman on the creation of Maus and the enormous 
impact its had since it was published in 1986.

Marjane Satrapi’s Persepolis <https://youtu.be/NZ22VyjJ6n8> looks at the 
Iranian revolution through the eyes of a young girl, offering a wealth of 
learning in history, religious studies and politics. Thisresource bank  
<http://teachingpersepoliseng434.weebly.com/teaching-resources.html>contains 
historical background, language analysis, discussion questions and lots of 
other useful study links.

Finally, get your class to harness the power of the graphic novel to explore 
issues they feel strongly about with thisworkshop on grassroots comic 
campaigning 
<http://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/19385/Comics-campaign-session>
 from Cafod which guides them through the process of conceiving and creating 
their own issue-based comic. Happy sketching!

Do you have an inspiring teaching resource you’d like to share? Upload it here 
<http://teachers.theguardian.com/resources.aspx>, or email 
teacher.network@theguardian.com <mailto:teacher.network@theguardian.com>

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
