
Q I really want to buy my girlfriend a piece of jewellery for her birthday. 
She's hinted that she'd like something, but she doesn't wear a lot of jewellery 
so it's hard for me to judge her taste. Is there a sneaky way to do this?

Jeremy

A You should stay away from subtly trying to extract information from your 
partner and ask one of her friends to do it instead. Or you could follow the 
lead of one of my friends: she gives her husband a wish list, choosing items at 
a number of shops. Her husband can pick a gift she wants - and she still gets a 
surprise on her birthday. Plenty of shops now do wish list-style services. At 
Goldsmiths (goldsmiths.co.uk <http://www.goldsmiths.co.uk>), your girlfriend 
can browse the store and leave a card detailing the product numbers of pieces 
she liked for you to see when you visit the shop. Alternatively, you could try 
the Gift Guru service at Selfridges. A member of staff will quiz you about your 
partner and then point you in the direction of appropriate and interesting 
products. Good luck!

Q My 16-year-old daughter is going through an animal-print phase. All she 
wants to buy is leopard-print tops and other equally hideous stripy and spotty 
garments. If she will persist in wearing these prints, how can I ensure that 
she looks sophisticated but, most importantly, still looks her age?

Betty

A I wouldn't worry too much: I spent my late teens in the oddest creations. 
One favourite look was thick black tights, velvet hot pants and a bright-green 
ruffle shirt. Why don't you suggest to your daughter that she go for a 
sophisticated leopard-print pussy-bow blouse, like this Dolce & Gabbana shirt 
(left)? She could team an item like this with high-waisted shorts for a look 
that's fun but elegant - very Sugababes. Or you could be firm and encourage a 
smaller dose of leopard spots. Animal-print pumps are everywhere on the high 
street. French Sole (frenchsole.com <http://www.frenchsole.com>) is the home of 
the ballet pump and currently has every combination of faux skin with fluoro 
trim your daughter's heart could desire.

Â· If you have a wardrobe question for Jo Jones, email her at 
ask.jo@observer.co.uk <mailto:jo.jones@observer.co.uk>
