
British doctorates are hard to supervise; they’re not similar to any other 
type of education. There is no reassuring structure of courses and exams, only 
the need for a thesis. Research points to high levels ofdepression 
<http://qz.com/547641/theres-an-awful-cost-to-getting-a-phd-that-no-one-talks-about/>
 among PhD students.

Related: PhD vivas are unfair and I am paying the price 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/feb/26/phd-vivas-are-unfair-and-i-am-paying-the-price>

Consciously or not, new supervisors tend to draw on their own experiences. I 
have aPhD <http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/phd> so I can 
reasonably say that my supervisors were successful role models. I can denounce 
their methods and mistakes, but ultimately I’m influenced and even controlled 
by their example.

I am fond of telling the farcical stories of my first supervisor, who forgot 
that I was his student two years running. Nevertheless, I was in awe of him and 
now, more than 15 years later, I still am. His confidence in me was inspiring.


Learning to lead?

By the time I became a lecturer, academic practice courses were common. They 
didn’t help. They taught me some technical rules and requirements but nothing 
about the practical processes involved in teaching, mentoring and 
career-building a fellow human.


I started well with my first PhD student, using exercises designed to give him 
something concrete to achieve while gaining the skills and techniques of the 
trade. I was proud and congratulated myself on my proficiency in what I later 
learned was called “guided discovery”.

Then came the moment where the student should become the master and I had no 
idea how to evolve the relationship.


I kept organising meetings, filling in forms, looking at their projects, but 
not really helping at all

My student did somehow finish, graduate and become independent. I suspect he 
just assumed that as I gained more students and responsibilities I simply 
became too busy. I failed to see that even as mature, independent people, my 
students still needed clear achievable milestones and objectives and 
celebrations when they reached them.


Before I had finished supervising my first doctoral student, I had my second; 
by the time my second had finished, I had six. I built a research group but I 
had no more idea about how to manage a team than an individual. These students 
were also costing a lot in kit and conferences, giving me even less time to 
worry about supervision.

Like my supervisors before me, I was technically successful – all my students 
passed on time and within budget – but in practice they struggled, feeling 
lost, unsupported and sometimes depressed.

I felt powerless. I kept organising meetings, filling in forms, looking at 
their projects, but not really helping at all. I tried to organise informal 
occasions – my poker night was so badly attended that my cat won several games.

Understanding autonomy

I put all of my students’ desks in a large, open-plan lab – I thought it would 
be hip and they’d help and support each other. Instinctively I was trying to 
develop relatedness. Yes, they helped each other, but they also lacked privacy 
and space, and spent part of the time wanting to kill each other.

I should have given them autonomy – their own offices (budget allowing) and a 
communal coffee room or lunch break. They didn’t need to work alone, but they 
were adults and should have been able to choose when to interact and when to be 
in control of their own spaces.


Related: Bad PhD supervisors can ruin research. So why aren't they accountable?
 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/dec/11/bad-phd-supervisors-can-ruin-research-so-why-arent-they-accountable>

Every one of my students got depressed at the beginning of their second year. 
They reached a point where they finally understood what they were trying to do, 
but did not yet believe that they could do it. I wanted them to know that this 
was normal. But telling them in advance that it was going to happen didn’t help 
and safety in numbers didn’t apply, I just ended up with more depressed 
students.

Looking back, perhaps what they were missing was the feeling of competence. I 
could have had them give seminars, conference talks or even work with 
undergrads or first-year PhD students, anything to make them realise how much 
they’d already achieved. Instead I put them in buddy groups and told them their 
feelings of incompetence would pass.


I tried so hard to be a leader that I forgot to be a coach 
<http://homepages.lboro.ac.uk/~pssj/JOURNALS/Nomological%20Network%20HMPE_A_361081_REVISES.pdf>
. I knew the technical aspects of my field and how to tailor a project to the 
student’s aims, but I didn’t know how to foster trust, celebrate success or 
maintain motivation. I was an utterly appalling supervisor and I didn’t even 
realise it. Perhaps you can learn from my example.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
