
David Cameron <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> issued a 
statement from a podium in Downing Street to call on British people not to quit 
the EU, as he warned that the results of Thursday’s referendum would be 
“irreversible”.
Brexit explained: The Guardian view 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/05/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=guardian_view>
Two days before the EU referendum 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>, the prime minister made a 
plea to the nation, saying he wanted to speak directly to people of his 
generation, and older, to persuade them to consider the impact on younger 
people.

“I know Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> isn’t perfect,” 
he said, adding that he understood those frustrations and felt them himself. 
But he urged older voters to think of the “hopes and dreams of your children 
and grandchildren”.

He added: “Remember they can’t undo the decision we take. If we vote out that 
is it. It is irreversible. We will leave Europe for good and the next 
generation will have to live with the consequences for far longer than the rest 
of us.”

The Conservative leader urged voters to “remember how far we’ve come as a 
country, and for you, for the family, and for the future of our country, vote 
remain”.

He argued: “Of this I am convinced. Indeed, of this, every living prime 
minister, whether Labour or Conservative, is convinced. Britain is better off 
inside the EU than out on our own.” The single market was at the heart of his 
argument, he said.

He said on Thursday the conversations across the country would end and instead 
each voter would be on their own inside a polling booth, where they should 
consider the risks to jobs, to families and to their children’s future.

Related: EU referendum live: Cameron makes 'Brits don't quit' plea in Downing 
Street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/21/eu-referendum-live-george-soros-steve-hilton-bbc-debate>

Cameron said he would not be urging the nation to vote to remain if he did not 
believe the country was safer and stronger cooperating with its allies and 
friends inside the EU. He said he had been prime minister for six years and 
that experience had made him feel strongly about the need to remain in the EU.

“There is no going back,” he said, arguing that national security was his top 
responsibility. “Our membership of the EU helps me. I’ve seen firsthand in 
these dangerous times how we can better cooperate with our friends and 
neighbours, how we can share information, track terrorists down.”

He said with allies such as Germany and France, Britain was more effective at 
facing down threats. “We are safer in Europe than out on our own.” Staying in 
the EU “with 27 countries behind us”, meant the UK could be more of a leader on 
foreign policy and in tackling climate change. He said membership amplified 
Britain’s voice.
