
It was pitch dark by the muddy lagoon, the only light coming from the leaders’ 
head torches. Two by two, the stealth team pushed their kayaks off from the 
mangroves and paddled across the inky water in search of the island’s most 
prized asset.

I say stealth team. We were actually a bunch of tourists, and our splashy 
paddling would have alerted any enemy guards. But the treasure we sought was no 
less exciting, because we were on the Caribbean island of Vieques, eight miles 
off Puerto Rico and home to one of the world’s brightest bioluminescent bays.
Puerto Rico and Vieques map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/12/travel_puerto_rico_web/giv-32650tYOJHlDh6vPv/>
At first it was thrilling just to be in a boat under a starry sky, but then 
things got spectacular: every stroke of the paddle sent wooshes of blue light 
swirling around the kayak; forearms dipped in the water came up wreathed in 
momentary sparkles. As we headed further across Mosquito Bay, each kayaker was 
entranced – waggling fingers over the side to enjoy the swirling bright halo, 
and exclaiming as darting fish lit blue streaks below the surface. Even water 
splashed into the kayaks would glitter by our feet.

The effect is caused by millions of single-cell organisms, dinoflagellates, 
that emit a blue glow when disturbed – and the ideal conditions for them here 
(mangroves, little onshore development, narrow channel to the sea) mean there 
can be up to 150,000 per litre of water. It is a fragile habitat, though: last 
year Mosquito Bay dimmed for several months, and this year the same has 
happened at Puerto Rico’s other bioluminescent bay, near Fajardo on the main 
island.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4empp%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4empp%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcde1248e23ad36c538091c169cbc67e738d47b5a%2F0_0_4368_2624%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20Puerto%20Rico%20flight%20brings%20idyllic%20Vieques%20within%20reach&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4empp%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New+Puerto+Rico+flight+brings+idyllic+Vieques+within+reach&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4empp%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcde1248e23ad36c538091c169cbc67e738d47b5a%2F0_0_4368_2624%2F4368.jpg>
 Kayakers near Mosquito Bay. Photograph: Alamy 
I’d been attracted to Puerto Rico by new, great-value direct flights to San 
Juan from Gatwick with Norwegian. I’d then gone in search of a real Caribbean 
idyll on its much littler sister, Vieques, 21 miles long by four wide. It owes 
its idyllic nature, strangely, to the US military, which for years used swaths 
of the island as a bombing range. The navy was driven out in 2003, and 18,000 
acres of forest and wild beach became a national wildlife refuge.

Vieques remains quiet, somnolent even, with just one big hotel (the W on the 
north coast near the tiny airport). Accommodation is mainly in small 
guesthouses in Esperanza on the south coast, whose balustraded seafront has a 
handful of bars and restaurants; and in the capital, Isabel II, where the ferry 
from the “mainland” docks (If you have more time than money, the ferry to 
Vieques is only $2 each way)
 Casa Amistad 
I stayed first at Casa de Amistad <http://www.casadeamistad.com/>, an ochre- 
and pistachio-painted guesthouse near Isabel’s ferry dock. It has responded to 
the island’s slowly growing popularity by adding three rooms (taking the total 
to nine) and a small pool, but is still a laid-back spot, where guests share a 
kitchen, and beach gear can be borrowed for a small fee, paid into the honesty 
box that also serves for cold beers and soft drinks.

Vieques’ glories are the sandy, horseshoe-shaped bays that decorate its south 
coast, many still known by their US Navy designations as well as local names. 
Sun Bay, near Esperanza, is the most developed – that just means toilets and a 
cafe (bring your own hammock to sling between palms). The road east was paved 
in 2013 as far as Playa Caracas (Red Beach) but my hired hatchback coped easily 
with the gravel road beyond to half a dozen palm-lined golden coves. I pulled 
off the track at the eastern end of La Chiva (Blue Beach), settled into the 
soft sand of a coconut-palm clearing and saw two other people all afternoon.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4empp%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4empp%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53c71b36e3861e7e428bd99d0543399a841e06bc%2F0_0_1500_1000%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20Puerto%20Rico%20flight%20brings%20idyllic%20Vieques%20within%20reach&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4empp%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New+Puerto+Rico+flight+brings+idyllic+Vieques+within+reach&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4empp%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53c71b36e3861e7e428bd99d0543399a841e06bc%2F0_0_1500_1000%2F1500.jpg>
 Concrete buildings at Hix Island House 
Casa de Amistad was colourful, cosy, old-school; my next billet, up in the 
hills, was anything but. Imagine a room, or rather open-plan apartment, with no 
windows or curtains, a bare concrete floor and no aircon. It was far from 
comfortless, though, and is part of one man’s vision for sustainable tourism 
here. That man is Canadian architect John Hix, whose beef is that buildings all 
over the world used to work with the climate: keeping people warm or cool as 
needed. But then came aircon and architects designing all sorts of “unsuitable” 
houses.

He wanted to go back to older, greener ways, playing to the strengths of this 
tropical climate. Plenty of hot sunshine, so the five buildings (19 rooms in 
total), pool and reception atHix Island House <http://hixislandhouse.com/> run 
on solar power. It rains every day, so water is collected in cisterns and 
heated by the sun. And Puerto Rico sits in the path of the trade winds, so 
rooms are sited to catch the cool breeze. The buildings are built of unadorned 
concrete, to resemble the large grey rocks that dot Vieques.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4empp%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4empp%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdae4a2281ffe60e5f3e9d7e2c74513e9e33e3be4%2F0_78_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20Puerto%20Rico%20flight%20brings%20idyllic%20Vieques%20within%20reach&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4empp%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New+Puerto+Rico+flight+brings+idyllic+Vieques+within+reach&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4empp%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdae4a2281ffe60e5f3e9d7e2c74513e9e33e3be4%2F0_78_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
 Hix Island House pool 
So I had no windows, but I did have a large deep balcony, open to the 
elements, with views of the eastern beaches. Everything that could be concrete 
was – bathroom with outdoor shower, dining table and kitchen area (stocked for 
breakfast). This was elegant concrete, though, sleek, polished, lovely to touch.

It was odd to go to bed in a breeze, almost like sleeping outdoors. In theory, 
mosquitoes prefer stagnant air, but it had rained heavily the day before and 
the mozzies were braving that wind and had several goes at me before I slid 
under the net. The long cotton nightshirts provided seemed just right, though, 
and I wafted around feeling like the first Mrs Rochester – though with nothing 
much to set on fire.

I gazed one last time at the island’s heavenly beaches from the eight-seater 
turbo prop that flew me back to San Juan the next day. A dozen years after the 
navy left, Vieques has remained outside the tourism mainstream. Islanders boast 
that it has no stop lights, and no fast-food franchises (there was an attempt 
to open a Subway in Isabel, but it caused such a social media furore that it 
has not gone beyond a sign). Daniel Esteras, a returning Nuyorican (Puerto 
Rican in New York) who has a general store/gift shop in Isabel II, said to me: 
“If Puerto Rico were Italy, Vieques would be Sicily – apart, less developed, 
looked-down-on by mainlanders – and most of us want to stay that way.”

• Flights were provided by Norwegian (returns Gatwick-San Juan from £338, 
norwegian.co.uk <http://www.norwegian.com/uk>) and Vieques Air Link (San 
Juan-Vieques from $135 return,viequesairlink.com <http://viequesairlink.com/>). 
Accommodation was provided by Casa de Amistad (doubles from $85 room-only,
casadeamistad.com <http://www.casadeamistad.com/>) and Hix Island House 
(doubles from $135 B&B,hixislandhouse.com <http://hixislandhouse.com/>)
