
What causes conflict and how can it be resolved? Our latest global development 
podcast 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/audio/2015/may/17/conflict-resolution>
 features researchers, peace advocates and a former UN representative debating 
the key drivers of conflict and what role women, the UN and others can play in 
peacebuilding. Also on conflict and development, you can read amedic’s 
first-hand account 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/22/yemen-conflict-aden-medecins-sans-frontieres-hospital>
 of working in Yemen amid the ongoing civil war, as well as the UN’s warning of
economic collapse in South Sudan 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/22/south-sudan-conflict-economic-collapse-famine-fears>
 as fighting in the country continues.

A month on from the devastating Nepal earthquake, global development 
correspondent Sam Jonestravelled to the country 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/25/nepal-one-month-after-earthquake-emotional-impact-devastating>
 to speak to survivors. He reports from Chapagaun, a half-hour drive from 
Kathmandu, where 200 villagers have established a temporary camp amid the 
rubble of their homes.


Annie Kelly and Mei-Ling McNamara report on the estimated 3,000 Vietnamese 
children in forced labour 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/23/vietnam-children-trafficking-nail-bar-cannabis>
 in the UK. Plus,watch the story of Hien 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2015/may/23/vietnam-child-trafficked-uk-forced-labour-trafficking>
, who was smuggled from Vietnam to the UK when he was 10 years old.


Elsewhere on the site

South Sudan close to economic collapse as famine fears resurface 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/22/south-sudan-conflict-economic-collapse-famine-fears>

Out of Africa: e-learning makes further education a reality for tens of 
thousands 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/20/elearning-africa-conference-addis-ababa-further-education>

Poverty in Nicaragua drives children out of school and into the workplace 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/19/poverty-nicaragua-children-school-education-child-labour>

UN deal secures release of child soldiers held by Central African Republic 
militias 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/15/central-african-republic-child-soldiers-released-un-deal-armed-groups>

Burundi’s turmoil points to a shifting social and political landscape 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/21/burundi-turmoil-shifting-social-political-landscape>

Opinion

Colombia has established a national day to recognise victims of sexual 
violence. Despite the progress, Christian Aid’sLisa Maracani says more must be 
done 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/25/peace-in-colombia-tackling-systemic-violence-against-women>
 to stop an apparent escalation of gender violence in the country. As 
Ethiopians prepared to go to the polls, Daniel Calingaert and Kellen McClure
called on the international community 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/23/ethiopia-election-wake-up-call-human-rights-governance#comments>
 to challenge oppression by funding local human rights and democracy groups. 
And on the debate surrounding the privatisation of healthcare, academicDominic 
Montagu argues 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/18/universal-health-coverage-private-sector-world-health-organisation>
 that the World Health Organisation should consider the role of the private 
sector in achieving universal health care.

Multimedia

Podcast: What causes conflict and how can it be resolved? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/audio/2015/may/17/conflict-resolution>

Video: Burundi violence forces thousands to flee to Tanzania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2015/may/18/burundi-violence-forces-thousands-to-flee-to-tanzania-video>

Pictures: South Sudan: how conflict shapes life in local communities 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2015/may/11/south-sudan-conflict-communities-exhibition-saferworld>

What you said: top reader comment

On the piece Universal health coverage and private hospitals are not mutually 
exclusive 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/18/universal-health-coverage-private-sector-world-health-organisation>
,ayospeaks wrote:

Having to choose between the public or private sector is another example of 
binary thinking. It only limits our options. The truth is always somewhere in 
between, which is that we can leverage the reach and regulation of the public 
sector while modelling it on the quality and result-oriented motive of the 
private sector to achieve universal health care in the developing world.

Highlight from the blogosphere

Overseas Development Institute: Migration is capitalism’s unfinished business 
– it cannot and should not be stopped 
<http://www.odi.org/comment/9538-migration-capitalism-immigration-trade-freedoms>

And finally …

Poverty matters will return in two weeks with another roundup of the latest 
news and comment. In the meantime, keep up to date on theGlobal Development 
website <http://www.theguardian.com/global-development>. Follow @gdndevelopment 
<https://twitter.com/gdndevelopment> and the team – @swajones 
<https://twitter.com/swajones>, @LizFordGuardian 
<https://twitter.com/lizfordguardian>, @MarkC_Anderson 
<https://twitter.com/MarkC_Anderson> and @CarlaOkai 
<https://twitter.com/CarlaOkai> – on Twitter, and join Guardian Global 
Development on Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardianglobaldevelopment>.
