
The most dangerous moment for a woman fleeing domestic violence is when she 
leaves her home, hoping to find somewhere safe to rebuild her life. But, for 
women in Croydon,a joint investigation between BBC London 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-london-36467470> and the Bureau of 
Investigative Journalism 
<https://www.thebureauinvestigates.com/2016/06/08/revealed-homeless-housing-trust-accused-letting-domestic-violence-victims-400-week-rooms/>
 revealed claims of massive failings in supported housing for women who had 
fled violence. Women said the supported accommodation they were offered gave 
them barely any support, with several telling the BBC that 24-hour staffing was 
a fiction.

Domestic violence <https://www.theguardian.com/society/domestic-violence> 
shelters can be extremely difficult to live in: as well as the fear of former 
partners or family members attempting to break in, domestic violence affects 
your mental health. If women with mental health problems aren’t supported, 
their conditions worsen, and other residents are possibly at risk too. One 
woman living in supported accommodation owned by London Housing Trust told the 
journalists: “Three weeks, a month in. Never heard from no one, never saw 
anyone. They would pop round and spend five minutes and go. There is no support 
and if I don’t get it, everything goes downhill.”

A supported housing scheme for homeless people, also owned by London Housing 
Trust, was said to be in disarray, with damp and mildew, and staff failing to 
report missing people for weeks at a time. One young resident, a man with 
cerebral palsy and alcohol dependency issues, is alleged to have left with no 
alarm raised, having upped his alcohol use while housed by the trust. Stephen 
Dellar, London Housing Trust’s director,has resigned over the allegations 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-london-36467470>, as well as allegations 
of conflict of interest over properties leased by the trust. The trust has 
denied most of the allegations.

Related: Without supported housing, a lot of people will be left outside to 
die | Frances Ryan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/31/supported-housing-people-outside-die-housing-benefit>

Not all supported housing is poor. I visit homeless shelters, support schemes 
for people who have been street homeless, and domestic violence refuges: every 
one has been staffed by people who are committed to providing the best service 
they can. But every scheme tells the same story: they’re battered by cuts, 
starved of funding and terrified they will have to close. With cuts to local 
authority budgets, the forced sale of council housing, and mooted cuts that will
hit supported housing budgets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/31/supported-housing-people-outside-die-housing-benefit>
, this fear is not abating. Services are caught in the centre of a storm, while 
the need for their services is ever greater, with homelessness rates rising and 
rent rises forcing people from their homes.

It’s this climate that makes it easier for unscrupulous companies to spot the 
opportunity to turn a profit by providing inadequate services while squeezing 
as much money as possible from local authorities. Poor services leave women 
without proper support and homeless people essentially abandoned, but if the 
service provider can undercut others, councils will feel unable to shift 
contracts elsewhere.

It hinges on one key point: these services are provided to people who are 
silenced and voiceless. People who have been abused, discarded by society, and 
often demonised. If you feel disenfranchised, it is unlikely you believe your 
concerns will be listened to, or that you have a clear idea what your rights 
are. If your supported housing has been franchised out to a private company 
that has little desire to provide round-the-clock care, but tells the local 
authority paying for the service it is doing so, how can you raise the alarm?

Many of us have seen first hand what happens when the private sector overtakes 
state-provided housing:hundreds of thousands of people are living in sub-par 
housing 
<http://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2015/nov/11/children-poor-housing-temporary-accommodation-health-education>
, scared to complain for fear of eviction. The market isn’t as dynamic and 
self-correcting as the government would claim: profit-making is a bigger 
incentive than providing a good service. If they can get away with hawking a 
shoddy product in a captive market, people can and will. The worry is that this 
will extend to housing provision for the very poorest, most vulnerable and 
voiceless.

Join the Guardian Housing Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/housing/register/> to read more pieces like 
this. Follow us on Twitter (@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/GuardianHousingNetwork/?ref=hl> to keep up with the 
latest social housing news and views.
