
Locally sourced food has graced our dining tables for years, but what about 
the dining table itself? Along with growing environmental concerns about flying 
furniture around the globe comes an increasing demand for locally produced 
furniture, ceramics and lighting, created with homegrown materials and inspired 
by nearby landscapes to create an interesting backstory.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktmm%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktmm%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa82a85db21e4c6303d80ea41bbc476bc1380b91c%2F0_300_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Close%20to%20home%3A%20furniture%20designers%20go%20back%20to%20their%20roots&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktmm%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Close+to+home%3A+furniture+designers+go+back+to+their+roots&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktmm%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa82a85db21e4c6303d80ea41bbc476bc1380b91c%2F0_300_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
Sebastian Cox <http://www.sebastiancox.co.uk> Hewn Stool. 
Novocastrian <http://www.novocastrian.co/> was founded by an architect, a 
graphic designer and a metalworker who grew up together in Newcastle. They make 
furniture inspired by their city. “The north-east is steeped in industrial 
heritage,” says co-founder Mark McCormick (the graphic designer). “It has mined 
coal, built ships and invented steam trains. It has a creative force that’s 
really inspiring.”

Originally designed for a riverside cafe, the Staiths shelving unit references 
theDunston Staiths <http://dunstonstaiths.org.uk/> – industrial timber 
structures built in the river Tyne at the turn of the 20th century to expedite 
the transfer of coal from rail to river. “The Staiths weren’t built to be 
attractive,” says McCormick. “They are utilitarian, functional and industrial, 
but the rhythm of their latticework has its own beauty.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktmm%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktmm%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0676731feaf90a6d0b122249d112609cb7495a64%2F0_0_1540_1512%2F1540.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Close%20to%20home%3A%20furniture%20designers%20go%20back%20to%20their%20roots&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktmm%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Close+to+home%3A+furniture+designers+go+back+to+their+roots&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktmm%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0676731feaf90a6d0b122249d112609cb7495a64%2F0_0_1540_1512%2F1540.jpg>
Novocastrian <http://www.novocastrian.co/> shelving inspired by timber 
structures built on the river Tyne at the turn of the century. 
Another Novocastrian product, the Slate Binate coffee table, comprises a 
blackened steel frame topped with Cumbrian slate quarried 75 miles from their 
workshop. “It’s about elevating local materials,” says Richy Almond (the 
architect). “Slate is seen as a boring, bumpy building material, but lift it 
off the ground by 350mm, frame it with a brass trim, and it’s totally 
different. A honed finish brings out the natural grain. Suddenly it’s as 
beautiful as Italian marble.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktmm%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktmm%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F393ef760eaa8567facebb7152d8d6364d71779c7%2F0_1004_5299_5275%2F5299.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Close%20to%20home%3A%20furniture%20designers%20go%20back%20to%20their%20roots&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktmm%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Close+to+home%3A+furniture+designers+go+back+to+their+roots&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktmm%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F393ef760eaa8567facebb7152d8d6364d71779c7%2F0_1004_5299_5275%2F5299.jpg>
Kangan Arora <http://www.kanganarora.com/>’s Radium rug, £550, references the 
offcuts of vinyl that decorate trucks in her native India. Photograph: Rob 
Wilson/PR Company Handout 
When the Indian-born designer Kangan Arora <http://www.kanganarora.com/> came 
to London to study in 2001, aged 21, homesickness led to a debut collection of 
textiles inspired by the colour and chaos she had left behind in the Punjab. 
Her latest collection of cushions and rugs consists of three prints, Radium, 
Painter and Jali, sparked by a recent trip home. Radium references the offcuts 
of vinyl used to decorate commercial trucks in India: “They end up stuck to 
every surface in the workshops and create this incredible colourful 
camouflage,” she says. Painter comes from the traditional hand-painted signs 
that vinyl is slowly replacing: “I’ve taken their brushstrokes and enlarged 
them into a Memphis-style pattern.” Jali echoes decorative steel screens used 
protect Punjabi windows. “They’re functional objects, yet they have such 
beautiful, intricate patterns,” she says. Arora screen-prints her products by 
hand in her south London studio. “London is an incredible city, but it’s rather 
grey,” she laughs. “I think people are drawn to my colours.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktmm%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktmm%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a3f89b8324ac78be93ed609b69e3361e216b8dd%2F628_349_1480_1273%2F1480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Close%20to%20home%3A%20furniture%20designers%20go%20back%20to%20their%20roots&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktmm%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Close+to+home%3A+furniture+designers+go+back+to+their+roots&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4ktmm%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a3f89b8324ac78be93ed609b69e3361e216b8dd%2F628_349_1480_1273%2F1480.jpg>
 Seaweed lines vessel, £190,Charlotte Jones <http://charlottejones 
ceramics.co.uk>. 
When the furniture designer Sebastian Cox <http://www.sebastiancox.co.uk/> was 
studying sustainable design at the University of Lincoln, bamboo was in vogue. 
“I couldn’t help thinking, ‘I’m sure coppiced hazel behaves the same way,’” Cox 
recalls. He now uses hazel, coppiced from woodland where he grew up in Kent, 
for his Underwood collection of seating, ladders and shelves. “Hopefully people 
will notice hazel in the woods and make that connection,” says Cox. Using the 
hazel “in the round” – with the bark intact – also reduces waste from a typical 
50% to just 10%, and limits processing, which reduces the environmental impact 
and enables Cox to keep prices down.

Ceramics designer Charlotte Jones 
<http://www.charlottejonesceramics.co.uk/home> finds inspiration in England’s 
most south-westerly county: “Living in Cornwall opens your eyes,” she says. “It 
might be the grain of local granite or some dead leaves, but something always 
sparks an idea.” Jones makes her pots from white stoneware clay, coloured with 
oxides and clay she digs herself. She burnishes them with a stone before firing 
them. “I wanted a pebble-like surface, so using a pebble I found on a local 
beach seemed only right,” she says.

Nearby, Tom Raffield <http://www.tomraffield.com/> designs steam-bent 
furniture from a workshop in a tree-filled Cornish valley. His Scots Light, a 
lampshade made from 80 individually cut and steam-bent shards of ash, is 
inspired by cones that fall from the Scots pines surrounding his workshop. “I 
wouldn’t be making the work I am if I were anywhere else. I only need to step 
outside and an idea will be staring me in the face.”
