
Late afternoon is the perfect time to arrive in Nashville, giving just enough 
time to settle into your hotel, grab a drink, and head out to hear live music. 
And Nashville's all about live music.

If it's a Monday, try 3rd and Lindsley <http://www.3rdandlindsley.com/> (818 
3rd Avenue South). The doors open at 5.30pm, the music starts at 9pm, and if the
Time Jumpers <http://thetimejumpers.com/wired/> are playing, as they do most 
Mondays, you're in for a world-class treat: western swing played by virtuoso 
pickers with country legends sitting in. Don't be put off by the strip-mall 
setting.

If it's a Tuesday, make for The Basement <http://thebasementnashville.com/> 
(1604 8th Avenue South) and catch the freeNew Faces show. The entrance is on a 
hard-to-find, dicey-looking alley. Find it. And if there's a concert atGrimey's 
<http://grimeys.com/>, the vintage record store upstairs, do not miss it. 
Grimey's shows are life-changing events, for artists and audience alike.

On Wednesday or Thursday, get to the Bluebird Cafe 
<http://www.bluebirdcafe.com/> (4104 Hillsboro Pike). It's become very popular 
since the TV showNashville 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/feb/26/country-music-fan-view-nashville>
, and not what it was when owner Amy Kurland personally shushed anyone who 
dared speak while songwriters performed, but a lot of great songwriters grew up 
in the Bluebird and come back to it as if it were home.
 Grimey's vintage record store. Photograph: Rick Diamond/Getty 
If it's Friday or Saturday, head to the honky tonks on Lower Broad. My 
favourite isRobert's Western World <http://robertswesternworld.com/> (416 
Broadway), where you can dance for free, buy cowboy boots, and listen to a 
stone country classic served up righteous.

When you tumble out of Robert's, go to Pub5 <http://www.pub5.com/> (104 5th 
Avenue South) for a nightcap, late dinner, or snack. Don't stop at the 
ground-floor dining room. This is all about the view. Climb three flights to 
the roof of one of Nashville's oldest buildings to take it in.

Next day, to put the music you've heard into context, head to the Country 
Music Hall of Fame <http://countrymusichalloffame.org/> (222 5th Avenue South); 
Studio B (1611 Roy Acuff Place) – where Elvis recorded; and Hatch Show Print 
(316 Broadway), an amazing letterpress shop that has reprinted posters for 
blues, country and rock icons (excellent souvenirs). Or go to theRyman 
Auditorium <http://ryman.com/> (116 5th Avenue North), former home of the Grand 
Ole Opry, for a tour.

Have lunch at Burger Up <http://burger-up.com/> (2901 12th Avenue South), 
where your server is likely to be a rising star, then stroll up the same street 
toCorner Music <http://cornermusic.corecommerce.com/splash-page.html>. This is 
a true pro-musician's neighbourhood music store, but they're nice to every 
customer, not just Bob Dylan. Once you've bought your harmonica, guitar strings 
or pick, walk up the road again toImogene and Willie 
<http://www.imogeneandwillie.com/> (2601 12th Avenue South) and try on artisan 
blue jeans. Or just find out they, and Nashville's burgeoning fashion design 
scene, do really exist.

But first you've got to settle into that hotel. If you want a hip vibe and 
cool star sightings, try theHutton on West End <http://www.huttonhotel.com/> 
(1808 West End Avenue. Doubles from $191) in a repurposed office building. If 
you want history and old-school luxury, and want to be able to walk to the 
honky tonks, stay at theHermitage Hotel 
<http://thehermitagehotel.com/homepage.aspx> (231 Sixth Avenue North. Doubles 
from $279) and ask for a room with a view of the state capitol. Train buffs 
will enjoy theUnion Station Hotel <http://unionstationhotelnashville.com> (+1 
615 726 1001, doubles from $259).
 The gold piano which Priscilla Presley gave to Elvis on their first 
anniversary, on display at the Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum. 
Photograph: Kevin Fleming/Corbis 
Food is beginning to challenge music as the magnet that draws visitors to 
Nashville, so don't leave town without tryingPrince's Hot Chicken Shack (123 
Ewing Drive) – even if you like spicy food, order the mild – or one of the 
chef-owned establishments that mix southern staples into something 
contemporary. Tandy Wilson'sCity House <http://cityhousenashville.com/> (1222 
4th Avenue North) is my favourite. This is austere southern food at its best. I 
love the Carolina trout, with peanuts, raisins, lemon and parsley ($22). Others 
adore his house-cured pork and the chicken roasted in an open fire while you 
wait. His side dishes are a revelation: I'd lived half a century in the south 
before I was served a corn salad with raw perfectly herbed corn.

For great food crafted by local artisans, go to Rolf and Daughters 
<http://rolfanddaughters.com/> (700 Taylor Street). The sourdough, radish and 
seaweed butter starter ($5, perfect for sharing), accompanied by the mescal and 
tequila cocktail, followed by a bowl of chef-owner Phillip Krajec's gargenelli 
verdi with heritage pork ragout ($15) is a perfect quick-ish meal before a 
night out. On Sunday morning, join locals atMargot's 
<http://www.margotcafe.com/> (1017 Woodland Street) for a funky-elegant brunch. 
Her menus are short, perfect, and ever-changing, but if you see a savory crepe, 
get it. Margot's the queen of keeping the renovated classic relevant.

Don't leave town without going to the Fisk University and its Jubilee Hall. 
This 19th-century building houses aportrait commissioned by Queen Victoria of 
the original Jubilee Singers 
<http://www.civilwarshades.org/making-music/jubilee-singers/>, an a cappella 
group of newly freed slaves who sang to raise funds for their university. It's 
because of them that Nashville earned the name Music City.

Alice Randall is an award-winning songwriter who married into a family who 
have been in Nashville for nine generations. She teaches at Vanderbilt 
University and is also the Jamie Oliver food ambassador for Nashville

• For more information on holidays in the USA, visit DiscoverUSA.com 
<http://www.discoverusa.com>
