
As anyone lucky enough to have spent time soaking up the sweet, sweet sun of 
the Caribbean will know, rice and peas (or peas and rice, if you’re in the 
Bahamas), is more than just a side dish. As Jamaican author Helen Willinsky 
explains, it is the “staple of our diet”. No traditional Sunday lunch would be 
complete without a steaming bowl of moist, fluffy rice and starchy beans, but 
now you’ll find it on the weekday menu too, and having just eaten it every day 
for a week, I can’t say I’m surprised; it goes with everything.

Similar recipes are found throughout the region, from southern US dish Hoppin’ 
John to the Cuban Moros y Cristianos, suggesting African origins; certainly the 
humble main ingredients are things that slaves were allowed to cultivate on 
their own meagre plots of land. As with similarly bland, starchydishes such as 
polenta 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2013/nov/21/how-to-make-perfect-polenta>
, or indeedmashed potato 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/dec/02/perfect-mashed-potato-recipe>
, the simplicity is the main attraction. Stodge this may be, but a bowl of rice 
and peas still brings a touch of tropical warmth to a chilly autumn afternoon 
in the northern hemisphere.

The rice

Plain old long grain is the default here, though fancy pants Levi Roots 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2009/aug/23/levi-roots-caribbean-carnival-feast>
 calls for basmati andmaverick Shivi Ramoutar writes 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=30xpBgAAQBAJ&pg=PT228&lpg=PT228&dq=Shivi+Ramoutar+rice+and+peas+recipe&source=bl&ots=OJ_q1dvreY&sig=xGcs1WCGNo2FkDD4Ql-QLsqVk7o&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0CFcQ6AEwCWoVChMIqfCLr-SjyAIVS10UCh1LlQI-#v=onepage&q=Shivi%20Ramoutar%20rice%20and%20peas%20recipe&f=false>
 in her book Caribbean Modern that she “loves the stickiness and bite of brown 
rice”. The delicate fragrance of basmati is easily lost among other, heavier 
flavours, so it seems a needless extravagance, but, like Ramoutar, I’m very 
taken by the nutty chewiness of the brown. Ordinary long grain is still the 
best choice for optimum fluffliness, but I would urge anyone to give brown a 
try sometime.

For best results, the long grain should be gently steamed, rather than boiled 
in excess water: too much liquid and you’ll end up with a sloppy mess, rather 
than slightly sticky separate grains. To this end, rinsing well before cooking, 
as Rootsand Vanessa Bolosier 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/oct/12/french-creole-feast-rum-punch-salt-fish-dumplings>
, author of Creole Kitchen suggest, will see off any excess surface starch.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d49t%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d49t%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F7%2F1444215667439%2F225ab84c-de4f-44f1-9462-1b87680a79a9-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20rice%20and%20peas&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d49t%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+rice+and+peas&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d49t%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F7%2F1444215667439%2F225ab84c-de4f-44f1-9462-1b87680a79a9-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Gora de Couteau’s rice and peas. Photograph: Felicity Cloake 
The peas

The peas in question are generally beans; only Gora de Coteau, whose recipe I 
find in a little booklet of Grenadian recipes, uses anything even vaguely 
pretending to be a pea in the form of pigeon peas, also known as gungo. She 
calls for the fresh variety but, unable to track any down, I have to make do 
with the tinned sort, which experience suggests may well be a poor substitute.

Roots uses black beans, Ramoutar tinned kidney beans, and Willinsky and 
Bolosier the dry kind, soaked overnight then simmered until tender. Generally, 
I’m sceptical of claims that dried pulses and beans are so superior to their 
more convenient counterparts, but here it must be admitted that they make a 
real difference, because their earthy, slightly sweet cooking water then 
flavours the rice, and indeed the entire dish.

What sort of pulse you use is a matter of personal taste, but I’d recommend 
kidney beans, because their larger size commands greater presence in the dish. 
They also have the distinct benefit, as far as I’m concerned, of turning the 
rice a pleasingly dirty pink (though that’s maybe not be a colour that appeals 
to everyone).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d49t%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d49t%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F7%2F1444216525617%2F392ec2d6-f4fa-4b74-aca8-202792e5b8bb-2060x1545.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20rice%20and%20peas&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d49t%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+rice+and+peas&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d49t%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F7%2F1444216525617%2F392ec2d6-f4fa-4b74-aca8-202792e5b8bb-2060x1545.jpeg>
 Helen Willinsky’s rice and peas. Photograph: Ian Paton 
The liquid

The beans are, of course, cooked in water, but the rice allows for a bit more 
creativity. Generally, or at least in the recipes I try, that creativity 
centres on the rotund figure of the coconut.Willinsky uses 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=uT0cya1czkEC&pg=PA121&lpg=PA121&dq=helen+willinsky+rice+and+peas&source=bl&ots=O03S4fo1tM&sig=WT753JZ4s5J-Gkun6YnMq_M6gA8&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0CCYQ6AEwAWoVChMI2vCf4eWjyAIVRrgUCh2VXgZF#v=onepage&q=helen%20willinsky%20rice%20and%20peas&f=false>
 a mixture of coconut milk and the bean cooking water, Ramoutar both coconut 
milk and cream, and Roots demands I track down a fresh coconut, saw it open 
with a bread knife (here, I ad-lib with the tools available) and drain it of 
all liquid, including that in the flesh. It’s hard to resist just drinking the 
coconut water, and for all the flavour it gives the rice I rather regret not 
doing so; it’s subtle, bordering on buried (which may say something about my 
coconut-squeezing skills).

Bolosier and de Coteau eschew coconut altogether, which alters the dish 
completely, making it far more savoury – still indisputably good, but I miss 
its tropical taste. Cream gives the rice a delicious richness, which other 
recipes replicate by adding butter, in Roots’s case, and oil in de Coteau and 
Bolosier’s. For a more everyday dish, I’d leave it out, but for a special 
occasion, like Sunday lunch, a little butter or Ramoutar’s coconut oil, is not 
an unwelcome addition.

The fat

Pork fat is a traditional part of many such recipes, though only two of the 
ones I try use it, in the form of smoked bacon, both in relatively small 
quantities that seem designed more to add flavour and fat than actual meat. 
Though I tend to prefer my stodge simple, I’m won over by the smoky richness of 
Bolosier and Willinsky’s recipes, particularly the former, who simmers the 
bacon with the beans for half an hour before adding the rice to extract as much 
of its porky goodness as possible. If you’d prefer to keep it vegetarian, 
however, I’d recommend cooking the rice in Ramoutar’s mixture of vegetable 
stock and coconut cream instead, to replicate the savoury flavour of the meat.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d49t%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d49t%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F7%2F1444216600722%2F3dc50954-5299-4c4f-9b22-3566ffa63a11-2060x2060.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20rice%20and%20peas&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d49t%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+rice+and+peas&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d49t%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F7%2F1444216600722%2F3dc50954-5299-4c4f-9b22-3566ffa63a11-2060x2060.jpeg>
 Levi Roots’s rice and peas. Photograph: Ian Paton 
The seasoning

Roots stresses the importance of “a well-flavoured base to cook the rice in”, 
and with two such bland main ingredients, you can afford to throw a few big 
hitters into the pot. Bacon clearly has a part to play here, but garlic and 
onion are also popular choices; the softer flavour of the yellow onion proves a 
mellower choice than Willinsky’s spring onion and chives. Thyme is mandatory, 
and it, and Roots and Ramoutar’s sweet, peppery allspice both remind me happily
of my jerk chicken bonanza 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2012/jul/12/how-to-cook-perfect-jerk-chicken>
.

In contrast to jerk, however, heat is not on the agenda here; Willinsky, 
Ramoutar and Roots all use scotch bonnet chillis, but stress that they should 
be left whole and unpierced for the flavour without the heat. It’s thus 
important to push the pepper down into the rice to extract as much of this as 
possible, but ideally not to cackhandedly pull it out by the stem afterwards, 
so it disintegrates into mush, strewing its incendiary seeds throughout the 
dish.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d49t%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d49t%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F7%2F1444216867644%2F833495ee-785b-4cbe-bec7-293bca7fb407-2060x1545.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20rice%20and%20peas&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d49t%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+to+make+the+perfect+rice+and+peas&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4d49t%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F7%2F1444216867644%2F833495ee-785b-4cbe-bec7-293bca7fb407-2060x1545.jpeg>
 Shiva Ramoutar’s rice and peas. Photograph: Ian Paton 
The garnish

Rice <http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/rice> and peas is not a dish, I 
suspect, that generally merits a garnish, but nevertheless, Ramoutar admits 
she’s taken yet more liberties by strewing the rice with pomegranate seeds and 
fried lime peel; both “bring a great tang and cashew nuts add a pleasant 
crunch”. They do indeed; not canonical, perhaps, but if you’d like to dress up 
a dish which is (and I say this very fondly), not a looker, then a scattering 
of garnet seeds and lightly toasted nuts does work wonders. To my mind, though, 
rice and peas are beautiful just as they are; served in a great big bowl, 
accompaniments entirely optional.

(serves 6)

200g dried kidney beans, soaked overnight

1 garlic clove, squashed

1 onion, finely chopped

180g smoked bacon lardons

400ml coconut milk 

¼ tsp ground allspice

400g long grain rice

2 sprigs of thyme

1 scotch bonnet chilli

2 tsp butter or coconut oil (optional)

Put the soaked, drained beans in a large pan with 1 litre water and the 
garlic. Boil for 10 minutes, then turn down the heat, cover and simmer until 
just tender; depending on the age of your beans, this should take between 1 and 
2 hours.

Add the onion and bacon and cook for another 30 minutes. Meanwhile rinse the 
rice well in cold water until the water runs clear.

Stir in the coconut milk and allspice, followed by the rice, then tuck the 
thyme and whole chilli into the rice and add the fat if using. The liquid 
should come about 3cm above the level of the rice and beans. Season, bring to a 
simmer, then cover tightly, turn the heat right down and cook for about 30 
minutes without removing the lid.

Locate and carefully remove the chilli, garlic and thyme. Fork through the 
rice to fluff it up, then season to taste.

Rice and peas, peas and rice; even, perhaps, stretching the concept a bit, 
risi e bisi: how do you make it, and what does it mean to you? How does it vary 
from island to island, even continent to continent, and do you still save it 
for Sundays?

• This article was amended on 9 October 2015. An earlier version said the 
kidney beans should be brought to a simmer before turning down the heat. In 
order to destroy the toxin phytohaemagglutinin that occurs naturally in kidney 
beans,the NHS website <http://www.nhs.uk/Livewell/Goodfood/Pages/pulses.aspx> 
advises that they should be soaked for at least 12 hours, drained and rinsed, 
covered in fresh water and boiled vigorously for at least 10 minutes, then 
simmered for 45-60 minutes.
