
A number of countries have taken steps to make street harassment illegal. 
Portugal’s Social Democratic party hasmade verbal sexual abuse a crime 
<http://www.equaltimes.org/portugal-bans-the-verbal>, with offences incurring a 
fine of up to €120 (£95) or a year in prison. In Peru, a recently passed bill 
defines harassment as any act impacting the freedom and dignity of movement or 
another person’s right to physical and moral integrity, with suchoffences in 
public spaces carrying a maximum sentence of 12 years 
<http://www.peruthisweek.com/news-peru-street-harassment-to-be-condemned-up-to-12-years-in-prison-105452>
. And in Belgium, a law passed in 2014 introducedconsiderable fines and 
imprisonment of up to one year for street harassment crimes 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/volokh-conspiracy/wp/2014/03/21/belgium-bans-a-wide-range-of-sexist-speech/>
.

Why don’t we do the same?

In some ways, we already have: some of the Portuguese legislation actually 
echoes that currently in place in the UK. Exposing yourself in front of 
somebody else in public, for example, is already a crime undersection 66 of the 
Sexual Offences Act 2003 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2003/42/section/66>, while the Protection 
from Harassment Act 1997 <http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1997/40/section/1>
 makes it an offence to engage in a course of conduct you know, or ought to 
know, amounts to harassment of another person. Touching another person in a 
sexual manner without their consent is also illegal.

These provisions do not exclusively relate to street harassment, but could be 
considered to pertain to issues such as being followed or verbally abused in 
public spaces. But the Portuguese law goes further, particularly in respect of 
verbal harassment and unwanted advances, as it specifically highlights 
“formulating proposals of a sexual tenor” as an offence.

In Argentina, activists have argued that legislation relating explicitly to 
street harassment is important in order toclose the loophole that prevents more 
general laws from being applied 
<https://www.vice.com/en_uk/read/can-laws-stop-men-from-harassing-women-in-public-617>
 to the harassment of women in public, because it is not generally considered a 
violent or damaging act.

Certainly, specific street-harassment legislation creates more targeted 
provisions to address the bombardment of abuse, comments and intimidation that 
many women, people of colour and members of the LGBT community 
disproportionately face. It might help those affected to feel better able to 
report incidents, and it could combat the normalisation that currently causes 
the problem to be frequently dismissed. (In reality, it has a huge impact on 
people’s lives, from forcing them tochange their routine and travel plans 
<http://www.stopstreetharassment.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/08/2014-National-SSH-Street-Harassment-Report.pdf>
 topreventing them from exercising outside 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/soraya-chemaly/street-harassment_b_2094307.html>
, to incidents thatescalate into serious violence and even murder 
<http://thinkprogress.org/health/2014/10/09/3578215/street-harassment-escalates/>
.)

But new legislation also carries risks – Debjani Roy, deputy director of 
anti-street harassment organisationHollaback! <http://www.ihollaback.org/> has 
talked about the way in which such lawscould be abused to disproportionately 
target particular communities 
<https://www.vice.com/en_uk/read/can-laws-stop-men-from-harassing-women-in-public-617>
. And legislation won’t necessarily force behavioural change – just as other 
laws haven’t proved a magic bullet in eradicating issues such as workplace 
sexual harassment or maternity discrimination. Nor would it address the media 
portrayal of street harassment, in which the problem is repeatedly downplayed 
and victims ridiculed. One Portuguese news outlet responded to the new 
legislation by describing street harassment aspiropos (“flirting”, or 
“compliments”), and when 23-year old Poppy Smart recently reported a month-long 
experience of daily harassment to the police, the Daily Mailfront-page headline 
<http://ichef.bbci.co.uk/news/660/media/images/82607000/jpg/_82607565_mail.jpg> 
read: “Girl calls in police after wolf-whistles”.

What we really need to see is a cultural shift in the normalisation and 
widespread acceptability of street harassment. We need to change the mindset 
that automatically sees women’s bodies as fair game for comment, judgment and 
public ownership in shared spaces.

The same is true for other offences, such as the euphemistically termed 
“groping”, which is actually defined as sexual assault under UK law, but which 
many victims don’t feel able to report to the police because it is seen as a 
regular occurrence ( as well as the lack of response or support from bystanders 
when it happens).

But deciding that legislation may not be the most effective way forward 
shouldn’t mean shrugging our shoulders and accepting that the problem will 
inevitably continue. Ironically, one preventative measure that could be more 
effective than new legislation would be the discussion of such issues, and of 
young people’s right to bodily autonomy, in compulsory school 
sex-and-relationships classes – a measure the UK government recently rejected,
reportedly in the face of strong objections 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/women/life/david-cameron-just-blocked-compulsory-sex-education---and-the-wo/>
 from female members of the cabinet.

Even if new legislation is not the answer, this is an issue on which our 
political leaders have an opportunity to impact societal norms simply by 
raising awareness of laws that are already in existence and ensuring they are 
taken seriously.
