
The New York Times <http://www.theguardian.com/media/new-york-times> is to 
invest more than $50m in an aggressive international digital expansion to take 
its “without fear or favour” brand of journalism outside the US.

The publisher said that with mounting pressure on international media around 
the world there was an opportunity for the NYT to become an “indispensable 
leader in global news and opinion”.

“At a time when journalism and independent media around the world are under 
acute pressure, from forces both financial and political, the New York Times 
has never had a better opportunity to expand its mission and its reach,” the 
company said in an internal announcement from Times publisher Arthur Sulzberger 
Jr, chief executiveMark Thompson <http://www.theguardian.com/media/markthompson>
 and executive editor Dean Baquet.

“Just as the Times became a truly national news organisation in a previous 
generation, we believe we now have the opportunity to become an indispensable 
leader in global news and opinion.”

The NYT receives about 375m visits from readers globally each month.

However, just 26.6% of web traffic is from outside the publisher’s home market 
of the US, where it is thesixth biggest media site 
<https://www.similarweb.com/blog/u-s-media-publishers-publications-ranked-march-2016>
,according to figures from SimilarWeb <https://www.similarweb.com>.

The UK is set to receive a significant chunk of the NYT’s expansion 
investment, including hiring more staff, as it is estimated to be the 
publisher’s third biggest market accounting for 2.5% of all traffic.


The media organisation is to launch a new division, NYT Global, which will be 
responsible for spearheading a three-year $50m digital growth strategy.

The new “international digital growth team” will be led by international 
editor Joe Kahn and international president Stephen Dunbar Johnson.

“A team of our top editors and business executives has identified a large, 
untapped, international audience for Times-style ‘without fear or favour’ 
journalism’,” the memo said. “While we are already seeing significant growth in 
consumer revenue from international markets, we believe we can achieve much 
more by better engaging our non-US readers and reporting for them as well as 
about them.”

The company said that its aim was to double total digital revenues to about 
$800m by 2020 and that it was setting even more ambitious targets for 
international growth.

“Every part of the company, the newsroom, product and technology, advertising 
and consumer marketing, and data and analytics, among others, needs to think 
creatively about attracting and retaining a bigger non-American audience and 
growing revenue outside the US,” the memo says. “We intend to cultivate a much 
larger and deeper readership in core markets abroad and set up teams to pursue 
cross-market, pan-regional topics we believe the Times can dominate 
journalistically, appealing to readers and advertisers alike.”

Last year, the NYT broke through the 1 million digital subscriber mark 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/aug/06/new-york-times-digital-subscribers>
. The publisher launched its digital paywall in 2011.
