
Government ministers will be free to campaign on either side of the referendum 
on Britain’s membership of the EU,David Cameron 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> has confirmed.


The prime minister told the House of Commons that the government would make a 
clear recommendation on whether the UK should stay in the EU or leave, 
following the conclusion of therenegotiation of the terms 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jan/05/european-commission-david-reject-cameron-eu-migration>
 of its membership.

But he told MPs it would be open for individual ministers to oppose the 
recommendation without quitting their government posts, in a significant 
departure from the usual principle ofcollective responsibility 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jun/08/david-cameron-u-turn-britains-eu-membership-referendum>
.

Related: Cameron has freed his ministers on the EU vote. Now his problems 
begin | Matthew d’Ancona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/05/david-cameron-ministers-eu-european-union-vote-referendum-tories>

The move will throw a spotlight on senior Tories such as the home secretary, 
Theresa May, the work and pensions secretary, Iain Duncan Smith, the leader of 
the Commons, Chris Grayling, and the London mayor, Boris Johnson, who will all 
face increased pressure to declarehow they will vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/20/tories-brexit-liam-fox-eu-david-cameron>
.

In a statement to the Commons on last month’s European council summit, Cameron 
said: “My intention is that at the conclusion of the renegotiation, the 
government should reach a clear recommendation and then the referendum will be 
held. But it is in the nature of a referendum that it is the people, not the 
politicians, who decide.

“As I indicated before Christmas, there will be a clear government position, 
but it will be open to individual ministers to take a different personal 
position while remaining part of the government.

“Ultimately, it will be for the British people to decide this country’s future 
by voting in or out of areformed European Union 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/26/eu-reform-member-countries-david-cameron-european-union-treaty>
 in the referendum that only we promised and that only a Conservative-majority 
government was able to deliver.”

Cameron said December’s summit set out a pathway for agreement among EU 
national leaders meeting in Brussels in February on a package of reforms to 
satisfy UK concerns. He has previously indicated that this could set the scene 
fora referendum 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/01/eu-referendum-polling-results-depend-methods>
 later this year, with many observers speculating on a date in June or July.

The prime minister has made it clear he will campaign for continued UK 
membership if his renegotiation is successful. But he repeated his insistence 
that, if a satisfactory package cannot be agreed, he “rules nothing out”.

Related: The real problem with Brexit: nobody knows anything 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/jan/04/real-problem-with-brexit-nobody-knows-anything>

Cameron had come under mounting pressure to suspend collective cabinet 
responsibility, with several senior Eurosceptic figures thought to beready to 
quit 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/20/liam-fox-david-cameron-under-pressure-brexit-support>
 if they were forced to back an in vote.

His party remains deeply divided, with the MP Steve Baker, of the Conservatives
 <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> For Britain group, 
recently suggesting that more than half of his colleagues were “strongly 
leaning to leave”.

Sir John Major, the former prime minister, had previously urged the PM to 
maintain collective responsibility throughout the campaign, while the former 
deputy prime ministerMichael Heseltine 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/21/michael-heseltine-lambasted-by-former-colleague-for-eu-stance>
 warned that a free vote would make Cameron a “laughing stock”.

The former chancellor Kenneth Clarke said frontbenchers should resign if they 
disagree with the government 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/05/eu-referendum-david-cameron-to-allow-ministers-to-campaign-for-either-side>
, and firm ground rules were needed to ensure cabinet ministers campaigned 
“moderately” and did not “get carried away”.

Clarke, a staunch pro-European, told BBC Radio 4’s World at One that Cameron 
faced a “very difficult task” if he was to avoid splitting the party and 
claimed he had been forced into his announcement by ministers who briefed the 
media that they could quit.
