
The power struggle for control of media conglomerate Viacom 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/viacom> escalated on Monday with the most 
trusted aide of the company’s chairman suing his boss, alleging he is being 
squeezed out of the business by the boss’s daughter.

Philippe Dauman, chief executive of MTV and Comedy Central owner Viacom, and 
George Abrams, a Viacom director, are suing over their unexpected removal last 
week from the trust that will control Viacom when its driving force,93-year-old 
Sumner Redstone, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/10/sumner-redstone-trial-lawsuit-shari-manuela-herzer>
 dies.

Dauman, Redstone’s one-time protege, alleges that the billionaire media mogul 
is being manipulated by his daughter Shari Redstone. The spot on Redstone’s 
private trust is an incredibly valuable one: the trust controls Redstone’s 
company National Amusements, which owns 80% of both Viacom and TV network CBS.

Over the weekend Dauman called his removal “illegal” and alleged the move had 
been made “to accomplish her [Shari Redstone’s] long-held goal, which Mr 
Redstone has always opposed, of gaining control of National Amusements and 
Viacom”.

Shari Redstone has made no secret of her dislike for Dauman, at one time 
Viacom’s general counsel, who was elevated to the CEO spot in 2006.

Redstone has already named 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-redstone-trust-replacements-idUSKCN0YE03G> 
replacements for Dauman and Abrams. One is a current National Amusements 
executive, general counsel Ted Jankowski, another is family friend Jill Krutick.

Related: 'A living ghost': Health questions haunt reclusive mogul Sumner 
Redstone, 92 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/18/sumner-redstone-health-viacom-cbs-lawsuit>

The latest ructions at Viacom come after Dauman himself was sued by an 
ex-girlfriend of Redstone’s, Manuela Herzer, in a nearly identical claim: 
Herzer alleged Dauman had tricked Redstone into removing her from his advance 
health directive – and subsequently cutting her out of his will. The resulting 
court hearings revealed that Redstone was barely able to speak, but that he was
definitive and emphatic 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/06/sumner-redstone-competency-trial-viacom>
 about his desire to see Herzer ejected from the trust. The lawsuit was tossed 
out, but it was not a complete victory for Redstone, whose competence to run 
Viacom was central to the suit. The board of Viacom voted to stop paying 
Redstone a salary last week.

Industry reports suggest a less personal reason for the fracture between 
Dauman and Redstone: Viacom’s stock has lost more than a third of its value in 
the previous 12 months, and Redstone’s focus on the stock price amounts to an 
“obsession” according to high-level former Viacom employees. There’s also the 
matter of Viacom trying to sell of Paramount Pictures, a move Redstonesaid 
publicly 
<http://deadline.com/2016/05/sumner-redstone-oppose-sale-paramount-charges-false-unfair-1201761141/>
 he opposes.

In a statement to industry website Deadline Hollywood, 
<http://deadline.com/2016/05/sumner-redstone-oppose-sale-paramount-charges-false-unfair-1201761141/>
 Viacom said it was clear Redstone “is being shamefully manipulated”.

But as recently as February, Dauman had nothing but praise for his mentor’s 
acumen. “Sumner and I have a more than 30-year history, side by side, building 
his media empire,” Dauman said in an earnings call. “He and the board of 
Viacom, believing in my ability and my character, have entrusted me with 
weighty responsibilities, none of which are inconsistent or incompatible.”

In a statement Redstone said he “regrets that Mr Dauman has diverted resources 
to these baseless attacks and misrepresentations, rather than focusing on the 
continuing challenges that are faced by Viacom. Mr Redstone will continue to 
act in what he believes are the best interests of Viacom’s shareholders.”
