
We’ve read and heard scandalous stories of hidden sugar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/23/fruit-juices-smoothies-contain-unacceptably-high-levels-sugar>
 in food and drinks,horsemeat <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/horsemeat-scandal> 
making its way into our food anddoping scandals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/mar/07/maria-sharapova-failed-drugs-tennis-video>
. Alongside these are stories of our own sector – charitiesbeing badly run 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/01/kids-company-collapse-mps-pacac-report-blame-negligent-trustees>
, havingunethical fundraising practices 
<http://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/jul/10/everything-you-need-to-know-charity-fundraising-crisis>
 andpaying high salaries 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/11435754/32-charity-bosses-paid-over-200000-last-year.html>
.

The recent criticism of charities has led to tougher self-regulation 
<http://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/sep/23/charity-fundraising-regulation-review-stuart-etherington>
 and is believed to have contributed to a drop infundraising revenue 
<http://www.civilsociety.co.uk/fundraising/blogs/content/21631/under_pressure_the_pfras_latest_figures_are_further_proof_of_the_damage_done_by_the_events_of_the_summer>
. While other sectors have not escaped unscathed, a united front, increased 
transparency and a reframing of the narrative has helped them weather the storm.

What’s your beef?

During the horsemeat scandal 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/jan/07/horsemeat-scandal-food-safety-uk-criminal-networks-supermarkets>
 in 2013, traces of horsemeat were found in products sold in a number of UK 
supermarkets, including four ofTesco’s own-brand meat products 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/jun/05/tesco-sales-fall-horsemeat-scandal>
. Like the charity sector, it led to a loss in profits and trust and the 
company introduced new safeguards. So how did the industry respond and could 
lessons be learned for the charity sector?

Related: Handling communication in a crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2011/mar/31/charity-communications-crisis>

Retailers’ quick response, decisiveness and good communication with consumers 
helped them regain trust, says Neil Saunders, retail analyst atConlumino 
<http://conlumino.com/>, a retail research agency.


“Although financially disadvantageous, the industry knew it needed to take 
action and didn’t delay,” says Saunders. “It took products off the shelf. It 
quickly launched an investigation into supply chains and kept consumers updated.
Tesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> took out full-page newspaper 
adverts explaining to consumers what it was doing and underlined what they had 
done in terms of putting in safeguards to ensure standards were being upheld.”

Saunders believes this increased transparency can be applied to charities. 
“The public holds charities to a much higher standard than corporations,” he 
says. “They need to have an honest relationship with supporters and donors.

“When it comes to things like running costs, it’s very important to be clear. 
If something isn’t transparent it becomes a big issue. When people find out the 
money they donated to a charity wasn’t used for the purpose they thought it 
was, they feel misled.”


 The importance of transparency is echoed by David Carter, director and head 
of issues and crisis atOgilvy PR <https://www.ogilvypr.com/>, who says charity 
operations have become a story because they’re not explained.

 “With exposés, there is a sense that charities do good, but secretly they are 
also stockpiling money for remunerating executives and marketeers,” says 
Carter. “Unless the public is more aware of commercial realities, it’s more 
difficult for us to reconcile the money we give.

 “People often see businesses that raise funds for charities as taking money 
from them rather than the positive commercial impact they have. Being more 
open, honest and educative about partnerships and how they help charities do 
more is important.”

 Carter says charities can learn from commercial enterprises on being creative 
and bold in the face of criticism. “In a recent response to a sugar tax,Mars 
Group added to the labels of their products 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/apr/14/dolmio-pasta-meal-kits-mars-occasional-food-warning-health>
 with a high level of unhealthy content that they are for occasional use only,” 
says Carter.

 “It’s an incredibly clever way of showing they are eager to self regulate and 
prepared to take a stand apart from their own industry and take a lead.”

Related: Is your charity's reputation ready for a media crisis? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2014/jul/18/is-your-charitys-reputation-ready-for-a-media-crisis>

Be vocal about spending

While most charities would say they do a good job at demonstrating impact and 
talking about the positive nature of their work, Carter believes they could do 
more.

 “Creativity gets people talking about issues in a more positive way,” says 
Carter. “Our relationships with consumer brands are often positive, so we are 
well deposed to them before a crisis happens.”

 “Charity campaigns often are quite harrowing and guilt us into donating, but 
by focusing more on positive impact through personal and emotional success 
stories, it builds good will into the bank so charities are better perceived 
when a crisis occurs,” he adds.

The same sentiment is offered by Saunders: “Charities need to be more vocal on 
why they do what they do and engage people more positively. Fundraisers on the 
street want money without offering anything. Share a story; educate supporters 
on why it’s important to get the money.

“Charities should be more vocal about how they spend money. Many charities are 
large organisations helping people live better lives. It’s reasonable that a 
confident and effective person should be remunerated fairly; otherwise, you 
will be an ineffective organisation.”

Beat them too it

 Accepting responsibility for wrongdoing quickly in a crisis situation is 
paramount, saysRaymond Notarangelo 
<http://www.holyroodpr.co.uk/who-we-are/raymond-notarangelo/>, director of 
Holyrood PR, who extols tennis star Maria Sharapova’shandling of the doping 
scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/mar/07/maria-sharapova-failed-drugs-tennis-video>
that threatened to end her career. Instead of waiting for the media to approach 
her, she held a conference andbroke the news 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/early-lead/wp/2016/03/08/by-breaking-her-own-scandal-maria-sharapova-tried-to-take-control-of-the-story/>
 herself.
 Former tennis world No1 Maria Sharapova announced that she had failed a drug 
test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/07/maria-sharapova-failed-drugs-test-australian-open-2016-tennis>
 at this year’s Australian Open in a live press conference. 
 “Her handling of the initial announcement is a textbook object lesson in 
crisis PR,” says Notarangelo. “Go public to get ahead of an inflammatory issue 
and work fast to starve it of the oxygen of publicity as quickly as possible. 
Fill the vacuum and leave the media with no where else to go with the story.”

 It’s fair to say charities lacked speed in responding to charges of 
misconduct over the last two years, resulting in a plethora of stories often 
limited input from the charities being criticised. Notarangelo says charities 
often don’t realise that their wider communications and cause marketing 
strategies have helped lay the groundwork by creating a network of passionate, 
engaged and loyal supporters, and it to these people they should turn to when 
in crisis.

 “Listen to them. They will be vocal in telling you when your organisation is 
doing something wrong or that they disapprove of. That gives you a chance to 
squash the threat while it is small,” say Notarangelo.

 “When it’s too late and the crisis is out there, they will also be the people 
to forgive and to spread the message, when you say a heartfelt ‘sorry’.”

A charity’s reputation is at the heart of its ability to fundraise and deliver 
services to those who need them. While every sector comes under criticism at 
one time or another, it’s the way they deal with it that decides their future.

For more news, opinions and ideas about the voluntary sector, join our 
community <https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/>.
