
The UK prime minister reaffirmed on Tuesday Britain's pledge to spend 0.7% of 
gross-national income on aid by 2013. David Cameron's statement, at the UN 
general assembly in New York, comes despite growing calls from members of his 
own party to rein in Britain's aid spending.

Over the last two weeks, conservative British newspapers, including the Sunday 
Telegraph and the Daily Mail, have attacked the Department for International 
Development (DfID) for spending millions of British aid money on a group of 
highly profitable consultancy firms 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/9545584/Poverty-barons-who-make-a-fortune-from-taxpayer-funded-aid-budget.html>
. The drama hasresurrected 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/9560326/British-still-giving-hundreds-of-millions-of-pounds-in-aid-to-wealthy-countries.html>
 a long-standing question, highlighted last year overUK aid to India 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/global-development/2011/feb/16/uk-government-aid-india-strategy?intcmp=239>
, about whether donors should spend money on middle-income countries.

Here are five key datasets to help understand the debates:

How big is the UK aid budget?

Last year, the UK spent $13.7bn (£8.57bn) on official development assistance 
(ODA) – what the rest of us call "aid". Note that DfID,which spent £7.6bn on 
ODA last year 
<http://www.dfid.gov.uk/Documents/publications1/departmental-report/2012/Annual-report-accounts-2011-12.pdf>
 isn't the only government department in charge of UK aid. The Foreign and 
Commonwealth Office and the UK Border Agency, for example, also contribute 
towards the 0.7% target.

The UK is the world's third largest donor from countries of the Organisation 
for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), following Germany ($14.5bn) 
and the US ($30.7bn). But as a percentage of gross national income (GNI), 
British aid spending was 0.56% in 2011 – far greater than the US equivalent of 
0.20%. Only five OECD countries – Sweden, Norway, Luxembourg, Denmark, and the 
Netherlands – have already met the 0.7% commitment.

What does this mean for the UK taxpayer? With a population of about 62.6 
million, last year's £8.57bn spend works out at roughly £137 per head.

• Get the data 
<https://docs.google.com/spreadsheet/ccc?key=0ApF51UgS889tdDRIRGg3V2dWNEJoR1dLWVRreVphOUE>

Which countries get UK aid?

Last year, DfID announced that 16 countries would no longer receive bilateral 
aid from Britain by 2016 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/global-development/2011/mar/01/uk-cuts-aid-poorest-countries?intcmp=239>
, as a result of the department's spending reviews.

The biggest announced increase 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/datablog/2011/mar/01/uk-aid-review-cuts-dfid> 
in aid was for Somalia, with a 208% rise planned between 2010 and 2015. This 
was followed by Nigeria, with an increase of 116%. By 2015, Pakistan would 
receive the largest chunk of UK aid – £1.4bn, up 107% from 2010.

Billions of aid are also spent through groups such as the World Bank, the EU, 
and UN agencies. Last year, the UK spent£5bn on bilateral aid programmes and 
£3.5bn on multilateral aid 
<http://www.dfid.gov.uk/Documents/publications1/departmental-report/2012/Annual-report-accounts-2011-12.pdf>
. Sometimes funding through international organisations is classified as 
bilateral aid – the distinction depends, roughly, on how much control the donor 
has over that money.

• Get the data  
<https://docs.google.com/a/guardian.co.uk/spreadsheet/ccc?key=0AonYZs4MzlZbdHlLaVZaWjlsbHExVmpnbU41ZDJhYmc&hl=en#gid=0>

Health or wealth? What are Britain's foreign aid priorities?
 DfID bilateral aid by sector. Source: DfID, 2011. Click to explore the 
interactive map 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/global-development/interactive/2011/oct/05/dfid-future-aid-plans-interactive>
Last year's aid spending reviews gave us headline figures on how UK aid would 
concentrate on an increasingly small pool of developing countries. But it 
didn't tell us exactly how money would be spent in those countries.

To get a better sense of how British aid spending would break down over the 
coming years, the Guardian pulled out all the data from the country-level 
operational plans published by DfID, which included tables dividing budgets 
across the different sectors – from governance and security to education, 
health, water and sanitation.

Health and education remain among the top areas for UK bilateral aid. But 
within sectors, interesting trends are apparent. For example, according to the 
data, reproductive, maternal and newborn health will consume nearly 64% of 
DfID's global health funding by 2015, while the share of bilateral aid for HIV 
and Aids will drop from 16% in 2010-11 to less than 6% in 2014-15.

• Read more 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/global-development/datablog/2011/oct/05/datablog-future-plans-uk-aid>

How has UK aid spending changed over time?

The UK has a long-standing foreign aid programme. But how has the geography of 
UK aid spending changed over time? Last year, the Guardian pulled out all the 
data on UK aid spending since 1960 to follow the money trail.

In 1960, among the top recipients of UK aid were Cyprus and Malta. One year 
later, this had already changed dramatically: in 1961, Kenya and India were top 
recipients. India received the largest chunk of UK aid for most of the 1960s 
and 1970s. The turn of the new millennium saw an explosion in the number of UK 
aid recipients.

• Get the data 
<https://spreadsheets.google.com/ccc?key=0AonYZs4MzlZbdGY4VXR1RmRkY0dOUG9jejNEM0JNaEE&hl=en>

• Read more 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/datablog/2011/apr/14/uk-aid-spending-history>

The business of UK aid
 Location of DfID's top contractors. Source: Contracts Finder, 2012. Click to 
explore the interactive map 
<https://www.google.com/fusiontables/DataSource?snapid=S682702Yf3k> 
The UK fully "untied" its aid budget in 2001, opening up its aid-funded 
contracts to international competition. "Buy local" campaigners hoped this move 
would offer developing country firms a larger share of the aid-funded business, 
and bring taxes, jobs and the development of local manufacturing and expertise.

But data compiled by the Guardian shows the vast majority of DfID's contracts 
are still going to companies based in the UK. Of nearly 120 major contracts and 
procurement agreements (together worth almost £750m) published on the 
government's contracts portal since January 2011, only nine include non-UK 
firms among the grantees. An Indian company, Kran Consulting, is the only firm 
from a developing country on the list to win a full contract.

Earlier this month, the shadow development secretary Ivan Lewis pressed the 
department for details 
<http://www.theyworkforyou.com/wrans/?id=2012-09-05b.119238.h&s=ivan+lewis#g119238.q0>
 on how much UK aid has been spent in the private sector. This would go above 
and beyond UK aid spending through consultants. In a written response, the 
international development secretary, Justine Greening, said the department 
didn't hold this information centrally and it "could be obtained only at 
disproportionate cost".

• Read more 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/global-development/datablog/2012/sep/21/why-is-uk-aid-going-to-uk-companies>

More data

More data journalism and data visualisations from the Guardian 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/data>

World government data

• Search the world's government data with our gateway 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world-government-data>

Development and aid data

• Search the world's global development data with our gateway 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/data-store/global-development-data/search?q=>

Can you do something with this data?

• Flickr Please post your visualisations and mash-ups on our Flickr group 
<http://www.flickr.com/groups/1115946@N24/>
• Contact us at data@guardian.co.uk <mailto:data@guardian.co.uk>

• Get the A-Z of data <http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/page/2009/jun/17/1>
• More at the Datastore directory <http://www.guardian.co.uk/data-store>
• Follow us on Twitter <http://twitter.com/guardiandata>
• Like us on Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/pages/Guardian-data/155291341187950>
