
The government has been accused by a Tory donor of a “massive misuse of public 
funds” after spending £11.75m buying land for afree school 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/free-schools> in west London without 
having obtained planning permission to build it.

A deal signed in February 
<https://www.dropbox.com/s/fnog24x688uxv13/osterleylandsaledoc.pdf?dl=0> with 
the Jersey-based company that owns the site in Osterley, Hounslow, in west 
London, also seems to include clauses that would see the firm, run by the Earl 
of Jersey, receiving half of any increase in the site’s value should it be 
resold in the next 50 years.

The land has been passed to the government’s Education Funding Agency (EFA), 
which supervises free schools, to house the Sikh-ethos Nishkam School WestLondon
 <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, which opened in 2013 and is currently 
housed in an office block.

Related: More children go to inadequate free schools and academies than 
others, Labour says 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/nov/02/more-children-inadequate-free-schools-academies-labour-says>

Some 100 documents 
<http://planning.hounslow.gov.uk/Planning_CaseNo.aspx?strCASENO=P/2015/2516> 
setting out the plans are registered on Hounslow council’s planning website. No 
date has been set for the planning application to be heard. Meanwhile the 
government has also hired a public relations firm, Forty Shillings, to 
publicise the case for the school.

IT consultant Laurence Hawcroft, a member of the campaign group Keep Osterley 
Green, who is also a Conservative party member and donor, said the EFA seemed 
to have paid hugely over the odds for the site – and complained that the PR and 
legal costs must be spiralling. “The land would struggle to be worth £1m on the 
commercial market, given the constraints on its development. This is a massive 
misuse of public funds. It seems as if the EFA is not subject to any meaningful 
limits on the spending of public money.” The campaign has compiled a 1,200 
signature petition against the plans.

In an email to Hawcroft, the Department for Education said metropolitan open 
land could be developed if the developer could demonstrate there were “very 
special circumstances” requiring this. That had to include showing there were 
no other local sites. Hounslow council had written to accept that was the case 
before the land was sold, it said.

A DfE spokesman said the department did not wish to respond.

DfE’s shortcut to being ‘well established’


How can an academy sponsor that has just been handed an unspecified share of 
£5m for school improvement possibly be seen as “well established, with a proven 
track record” when it has only been running schools for 22 months? The question 
arises after a DfEpress release 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/nicky-morgan-no-tolerance-of-areas-where-majority-of-pupils-fail>
 last week identified Stockport-based Bright Tribe as one of five winners of 
the cash awarded with the aim of “driving up standards in the north of England”.

Bright Tribe opened its first school in January 2014. None of its seven 
academies has been open long enough to have had a full Ofsted inspection under 
its management. And the two secondary schools it was running as of the start of 
this year saw dramatic falls in headline GCSE results when provisional data was 
published last month.

Bright Tribe said: “We look forward to supporting schools in Northumberland 
with their improvement journeys,” adding that six of its seven schools were 
either rated “requires improvement” or “inadequate” when the chain took them 
on. “Bright Tribe schools all have an individual improvement pathway, based on 
their starting point at conversion and the unique challenges they face,” it 
said. “We are confident all our schools are well established on their pathways 
and are demonstrating improvements, even in these early stages.”

But is two years enough to be “well established” … or is there a serious 
shortage of academy sponsors in the north?

Reports that gather dust on the shelves


Is the DfE getting into a habit of commissioning reports and then not 
publishing them? We wonder, after hearing of three documents that have been 
gathering dust on shelves with seemingly no prospect of seeing the light of day.

Last month, Schools Week 
<http://schoolsweek.co.uk/the-report-that-nicky-morgan-doesnt-want-you-to-see-teaching-assistant-standards-dfe-report/>
 reported the non-publication of a review of professional standards for 
teaching assistants. Now we have learned that a report on the logistics of 
providingfree school meals 
<http://www.theyworkforyou.com/wrans/?id=2015-10-20.HL2789.h> in small schools, 
completed last year, has also not yet been released.

Meanwhile, in a blog <http://cprtrust.org.uk/cprt-blog/face-the-music/> two 
weeks ago, the leader of the largest independent review of primary education in 
recent times, Robin Alexander, alluded to the non-publication of a DfE inquiry, 
which he said was carried out in 2010-12, into schools’ capacity to teach well 
across the curriculum.

We would love, of course, to see any of these documents.

• This article was amended on 13 November 2015. An earlier version said the 
deal to acquire land for the free school was signed by Eric Pickles, the then 
local government secretary. Although central government assets are held in the 
name of the Department of Communities and Local Government, it has no liability 
or responsibility for the land and Pickles had no involvement in the 
transaction.

