
The BBC is set to unveil proposals for a significant expansion of the BBC 
World Service <http://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc-world-service>, including 
potentially a satellite TV service for Russian speakers and a daily radio news 
programme for North Korea.

The proposals, which will be announced by director general Tony Hall 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/tony-hall> on Monday, include beefing up the 
BBC Arabic service to offer more regional content, with increased coverage of 
north Africa and the Middle East.

The BBC argues that the expansion is about “democracy and the free press” at a 
time which has seen the rise of big state-sponsored rivals, such as al-Jazeera 
and RT (previouslyRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> Today), 
both of which now have UK operations, and China Central Television.

“This is about Britain’s place in the world,” said a BBC source. “It is above 
the politics of the debates about the BBC’s future. It has to be a national 
priority. Other news outlets are growing globally and many do not share our 
traditions and values. We have a strong commitment to uphold global democracy 
throughaccurate, impartial and independent news 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2013/feb/22/bbc-world-service-censorship>
. There should no longer be any no-go countries for the World Service.”

The proposals include looking at a satellite TV service for Russian speakers 
or ramping up digital presence on YouTube or Rutube, the Russian equivalent, 
and TV bulletins for neighbouring eastern European states. In addition, the 
corporation intends to extend its digital and mobile offerings for the Indian 
and Nigerian markets.

The BBC <http://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> was forced to take on the £245m 
annual cost of the World Service, which had been funded by the Foreign and 
Commonwealth Office, from last year as part of the 2010 licence fee settlement 
with the government.

In an ironic twist, the BBC is to seek financial support from the government 
for the expansion. The BBC will offer to match any increase in public funding 
for the World Service if it can be allowed to more heavily-commercialise its 
Global News operation outside the UK, which generates more than £100m in 
revenues annually from sources including advertising and sponsorship.

Earlier this year, the BBC published its Future of News report 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jan/28/bbc-world-service-cuts-uk-global-soft-power>
, which warned the government that cuts to the World Service would reduce the 
UK’s global “soft power” in the face of the growth of rivals such as RT and 
al-Jazeera.

“The World Service faces a choice between decline and growth,” the report said 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jan/28/bbc-world-service-cuts-uk-global-soft-power>
. “If the UK wants the BBC to remain valued and respected, an ambassador of 
Britain’s values and an agent of soft power in the world, then the BBC is going 
to have to commit to growing the World Service and the government will have to 
recognise this.”
