
Social work <http://www.theguardian.com/education/socialwork> supports 
individuals and families at pivotal moments in their lives. While there is a 
perception it only involves children and families, the profession works with 
complex issues across the life span, covering mental health, mental capacity, 
adult protection, dementia, substance misuse, and physical and cognitive 
difficulties, to mention but a few. This is both complex and challenging.


While those who work in the sector are passionate about the changes their 
practice can make to individual and family lives on a daily basis, government 
and the general public rarely see, or speak, about those positive 
contributions. When things go wrong, quite rightly, questions are asked; 
however, the questioning often leads to the vilification of the profession and 
individual social workers in the media, which closes down any real dialogue on 
the profession’s future.

 The last major review 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/munro-review-of-child-protection-final-report-a-child-centred-system>
 of the profession, by Prof Eileen Munro, suggested the child protection system 
required significant reform. While it focused on children and families, many of 
the recommendations extended to working with adults. However, Munro’s 
recommendations have not been implemented in their entirety, and since then we 
have seen the focus shift to the role of higher education.

 This has led to the introduction of fast track schemes, such as Frontline, to 
address the perceived failure of the social work profession. The government 
wants more than 2,000 children’s social workers to be trained on fast track 
schemes by 2021.

 Will fast track routes make a difference? Frontline will be reviewed next 
year, and while it may be successful in some areas, will it really address 
issues of recruitment and retention, which arguably exacerbate the ability of 
the profession to deliver the quality of provision it works hard to achieve.
Research suggests the average working life for social workers is under eight 
years 
<https://www.google.com/url?url=https://www.rip.org.uk/download/272/RiP_Strategic_Briefing_social_work_retention_web.pdf&rct=j&frm=1&q=&esrc=s&sa=U&ved=0CBQQFjAAahUKEwivve6ZrPTIAhWIOBQKHeTGBvs&usg=AFQjCNEQDB3xx9HbQtJ3nDgiuppDM7O0Yw>
 [pdf], compared with 16 for a nurse and 25 for a doctor. Clearly, this 
represents a low return on the investment in training, and real challenges for 
building and retaining professional expertise.


Related: One year on, how has Frontline fared? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/jun/16/mistakes-weve-made-a-few>

 Fast track schemes are unlikely to be the panacea government expects, given 
Frontline has established links with the civil service fast stream for 
participants who decide they do not want to be involved in direct social work 
practice. So those who do two years can go straight into policy/government 
rather than working on the frontline of child protection, which will not help 
the poor retention rates we already have.

 While the content and structure of social work education is clearly of great 
significance, any reform will be meaningless if it is the sole focus. The 
research identifies issues such as a culture of blame, high caseloads, overly 
bureaucratic systems, high levels of stress and burnout and lack of clarity 
around roles as factors for social workers leaving.

Social worker Joanna Nicolas highlights “role clarity” as a key issue in 
children’s services 
<http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/oct/20/why-pretend-social-work-is-about-social-justice-its-not>
, asking what the purpose of social work is in the context of social justice 
and human rights. This question could be extended to adult services to ensure 
reform provides a coherent approach to social work practice across the lifespan.

 As an educator, I believe issues such as social justice and human rights are 
core to the social work profession across all disciplines. This involves 
educators and students engaging emotionally with moral issues such as justice 
and care, and their relevance to real people’s lives. Our curriculums 
arestructured accordingly.

 However, if government does not believe these are core to the profession, and 
indeed wishes to promote an approach more concerned with“instrumental 
rationality” 
<http://scholarworks.wmich.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1997&context=jssw> 
that prioritises efficiency and social work engagement with “the system”, 
rather than with people who require social work services, then there is clearly 
a gap between what is currently taught and government’s understanding of social 
work and expectation of social work practice.

Related: Don't take social work training away from universities 
<http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog/2015/jun/17/dont-take-social-work-training-away-from-universities>

 The relationship between social work practice, government and policy, 
organisational contexts and resources determines professionals’ practice across 
both adult and children’s services. While arguments can rage about the efficacy 
of social work education, the organisation and delivery of social work services 
across both children’s and adult services have issues, which mean authentic 
change must extend far beyond the parameters of social work education.

 Successive governments’ philosophical and ideological approaches not only to 
social work education, but also welfare, housing, mental health, employment and 
the economy, for example, all impact on social work practice, in terms of those 
who use services and how those services are delivered. Changes in social work 
education in isolation from wider social and structural factors, are unlikely 
to create a system of social work provision the government will be happy with.

 The truth is social workers are in many cases already providing a good 
standard of practice under increasingly difficult conditions. Arguably the 
problem is not about social workers failing the system – but that the system is 
failing them.
