 Just before the massacre in Tiananmen last week, a Peking resident whose work 
for a foreign employer gives him a material life even high-ranking officials 
would envy, said, 'Help me to leave. I don't want my baby son standing in 
Tiananmen in 20 years demonstrating for democracy.'
But this mild-mannered man, who was willing to spend everything he had on a 
passport from the most discredited banana republic if it would get him out of
China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, was also a bit of a hero. On 
the night of 20 May, when Premier Li Peng's voice, thundering out of the night 
from the Tiananmen loudspeakers, declared that the People's Liberation Army was 
going to enter Peking to stop the 'chaos', Mr Wang (not his real name) cycled 
over to the roadblock local residents had built to halt the soldiers. 'My wife 
tried to stop me. I told her I wouldn't risk my life standing in front of the 
army, but I thought that if the soldiers began shooting people I should be a 
witness.'

I thought it was admirable that Mr Wang, in his quiet way, had been prepared 
to take such a risk, but by the time he told me about it I had seen citizens 
clambering over army lorries both inside Peking and in the suburbs, where they 
harangued the soldiers while supplying them with food and water.

I had also seen an army major leaning out of such a lorry to tell a local TV 
reporter how pleased he was that his column had been ordered to turn around and 
return to base. The reporter had been pleased, too. 'This is really good news,' 
he said, facing the camera. 'The People's Liberation Army loves the people, and 
the people love the Army.' When I saw that, I remembered, but put out of my 
mind, the words of a tank commander I had encountered with his squadron about 
20 kilometres east of Tiananmen early one morning. He said that the students 
were like his younger brothers and sister, but said that they were also his 
duixiang, his target. Why? Because Deng Xiaoping, who was giving the orders, 
'is my father.'

Two weeks later, tanks were crushing the tents of the demonstrators in 
Tiananmen, and soldiers were tumbling out of their armoured personnel carriers 
ready to gun down and bayonet the students clustering bedraggled at the foot of 
the Martyrs' Memorial, around which the great protests had swirled since 
ex-party general secretary Hu Yaobang's death on 15 April.

I thought of the tank commander's words as I watched the Dantean scene through 
the orange glare of the fires in the square: the sparks of the AK-47 bullets 
hitting the stones around us, and the screams and yells of the crowd. I also 
heard another voice howling out of the loudspeakers, the implacable announcer 
who had been haranguing the demonstrators for days, telling them, for example, 
as they were erecting the 30-foot high Goddess of Liberty so that she faced 
Mao's portrait on the Gate of Heavenly Peace, 'Your movement is bound to fail. 
It is foreign. This is China, not America.'

But if the masses of Peking, before the Saturday night massacre, maintained 
order, discipline and good humour matched only by that of the students, and 
confined their demands to shouts of 'Down with Deng Xiaoping!' and 'Li Peng 
resign!', and their resistance to a non-violent determination worthy of a 
Quaker organiser, why did senior leader Deng Xiaoping, President Yang Shangkum 
and the rest of the geriatric thugs now in control order them to be gunned down 
that Saturday night?

And not just that night. Last Sunday morning, in the warm dawn and the growing 
heat, why did the soldiers continue to shoot? Frantic parents of those who had 
been gunned down and bayonetted the night before (many of whose bodies would 
never be found because the army death squads were plucking them off the streets 
and burning them in great pyres whose smoke darkened the sky) clustered around 
the roadblock in front of the Peking Hotel, a couple of hundred yards from the 
square. There they could see the massed tanks, with their guns depressed and 
aimed straight down Changan Avenue towards the agitated crowds.

Soon they saw soldiers trot out and fire a volley over their heads. The crowd 
retreated, hesitated and reassembled. Then the soldiers fired again, but 
straight into the crowd. Many were killed and wounded. Soon two ambulances 
appeared, and doctors and nurses in flapping white gowns ran among the bodies, 
kneeling down, feeling for wounds. The soldiers fired again, and now there were 
white-clothed bodies, too, on Changan Dajie, the Avenue of Perpetual Peace.

So, again, why have Deng, Yang and the rest of the Gang done it? Except for 
their glove puppet, Premier Li Peng, all of them suffered at Mao's hands during 
the Cultural Revolution, lost comrades and relatives (one of Deng's sons was 
thrown from a window and paralysed for life) and have condemned the years 
1966-1976 as the greatest tragedy China suffered in modern times. He was the 
man who had shaken hands with Mrs Thatcher and the Queen and was hailed as the 
originator of the Hong Kong settlement formula, One Country, Two Systems, 
intended to assure the inhabitants of the territory that their future was safe 
in Peking's hands.

But all this is to misread Deng Xiaoping and render impossible, except as an 
instance of crazed old age, any understanding of why he gave the order for the 
PLA, for the first time in 40 years, to defend the regime by killing its 
citizens. Deng is almost 85, and although he is frail, deaf and has to 
concentrate his strength for a few precious hours every day, he remains in 
supreme control. That devotion to Party discipline, the conviction that the 
Party and the Party alone stands between the Chinese people and luan, or chaos, 
is the key to Deng's character and to the bloodshed of last week.

But do we learn then, as we secretly feared in our racist youth, that the 
Chinese are unusually cruel rat-eaters who slide bamboo under finger nails, 
kill with a thousand cuts or with countless drips of water? Are their leaders, 
as a British diplomat said recently, just a bunch of thugs, who sometimes 
murder in the dark, one by one, or in the daylight in heaps which are then 
stacked up in hospital morgues or burned secretly at night?

There are such Chinese. They gave the orders for the Saturday night massacre. 
They drove the tanks which clanked over the students in Tiananmen, they fired 
the AK-47s which knocked over the doctors and nurses, and they tortured the 
wounded and bound students.

But then there are the non-cruel Chinese, the great mass. These have emerged 
during the last months as politically sensitive and in their great numbers so 
non-violently disciplined that they could have been trained by Quakers. They 
brought into Tiananmen the statue of Liberty of the Goddess of Freedom, 
explaining that whereas the Statue of Liberty holds her torch with one hand, 
the defence of freedom in China is tougher and therefore requires two. There 
were doctors who risked immediate execution for permitting the BBC to bring its 
cameras into a hospital morgue to see the piles of dead. And there were the 
people who tried to persuade me to leave Tiananmen when the soldiers began 
firing at us, and patted me kindly after the police had slugged me 
half-senseless with their truncheons.

There is also Hou Jedian, the singer from Taiwan who is a pop idol in Peking, 
and who came to Tiananmen to start a hunger strike with three companions. He 
had composed a song about the protests which he taught the crowd and which it 
rapturously sang. He also composed a statement, which I listened to him discuss 
at dinner. It said that he was coming to the Martyrs' Memorial to show the Li 
Peng Government that the Chinese had for too long listened and not spoken; and 
that Hou and his comrades were giving up food not for death but for life.

Hou was lucky to escape at the last moment as the soldiers charged towards the 
Memorial. But it is true, nonetheless, that what happened in Tiananmen, 
beginning in mid-April and continuing until the massacre, was indeed for life. 
This is what the old men could not stand, and it is what they will continue 
attempting to snuff out in the dark period ahead.

Â•Jonathan Mirsky was The Observer 's China specialist for many years. This is 
an edited version from the original article
