
An examiner with years of experience marking Sats 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/sats> papers for 11-year-olds is warning 
of confusion over a new system this year in which all test scripts will be 
marked on screen. The marker of reading tests says she and her colleagues “have 
not got a bloody clue what we are supposed to be doing”.

English and maths Sats tests for some 600,000 pupils in England began 
yesterday and run until Thursday. For the first time this year, instead of 
examiners receiving hard-copy scripts in the post, pupils’ papers are being 
electronically scanned for markers to grade on screen.

The examiners will no longer mark all of a pupil’s script, only individual 
questions. The onscreen system has long been in operation at GCSE and A-level, 
but our source says she was told only three weeks ago that the Sats system, 
administered by marking company Pearson, was changing. After trying – and 
failing – to get to grips with software designed to familiarise markers with 
it, she says she still does not feel confident about how the new system works – 
despite repeated calls to Pearson’s helpline. Two colleagues were so concerned 
by the same problems that they have dropped out, she says.

Her last hope comes on Saturday, when markers undergo some final training. “At 
this stage, we have no understanding, no clear training, and therefore I’m just 
very concerned.”

The last time there were major changes to Sats marking, in 2008, results were 
releasedweeks late 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2008/aug/15/sats.schools> and the 
contractor sacked.

Pearson says it has been successfully introducing onscreen marking for Sats 
since 2013. It highlights repeated communications to markers, and no reported 
problems so far.

When is a consultation not a consultation?

Families, pupils and teachers feel “completely disenfranchised” after being 
denied a ballot on the future of three London secondary schools, a parent tells 
us. The parent, Ned Boulting, has also written anopen letter 
<https://www.facebook.com/StopAcademiesinLewisham/posts/1811512685741428> to 
the governors of the federated Prendergast schools in south London about their 
handling of a move to academy status.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F488jp%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F488jp%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F8%2F1431096202935%2F1f8d3098-0da7-4623-a473-e00000cfe3bc-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98We%E2%80%99ve%20no%20understanding%20of%20new%20system%20and%20no%20clear%20training%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20Sats%20examiner&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F488jp%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98We%E2%80%99ve+no+understanding+of+new+system+and+no+clear+training%E2%80%99+%E2%80%93+Sats+examiner&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F488jp%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F8%2F1431096202935%2F1f8d3098-0da7-4623-a473-e00000cfe3bc-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Ned Boulting in action at the Tour de France. 
Governors are consulting on a plan to turn the three schools into academies, 
but theconsultation <http://www.prendergast-school.com/245/parent-feedback-form>
 does not allow stakeholders to tick a yes/no box as to whether they favour the 
plans. There is no requirement in law for governing bodies to give parents or 
pupils a ballot on academy status.

Boulting, familiar to cycling fans as a reporter in ITV’s Tour de France 
coverage, tells us: “I struggle to reconcile the statements of the governors 
that they will take on board the views of stakeholders, and the fact that we 
are not being given a voice. The school management and governors have created a 
rift [with] parents, staff and students. This has undermined trust. It is 
unsettling for the students. And it will raise questions with good teachers as 
to whether they want to stay on at the school.”

The comments come after pupils at one of the schools, Prendergast Hilly Fields 
college, staged the latest in a series of protests against the plans. Teachers 
have held four days of strikes.

David Sheppard, the federation’s executive headteacher, says five meetings 
have been held with parents, four with staff and two with students, with more 
due to take place before the consultation ends on 8 June. “The board is aware 
of Mr Boulting’s feelings,” he adds.

Wanted: a doppelganger for academy head

Is the transfer of a comprehensive school in Norwich into an academy trust a 
done deal, despite “consultation” on the plans not having started? Fears that 
the outcome is preordained were stoked after a remarkable find by campaigners 
against the academisation of theHewett school 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/mar/10/norwich-school-forced-conversion-academy>
. Ministers said in March they wanted it to be sponsored by the Inspiration 
Trust – which has links to Conservative ministers – but this is subject to a 
consultation starting next month.

Campaigners noticed that an advert 
<https://www.dropbox.com/s/diwi298kgutjvx0/hewettad.pdf?dl=0> posted two weeks 
ago, seeking applicants for head of the Hewett, is strikingly similar to an
advert for the head of another school 
<https://www.dropbox.com/s/qn88brgc8vehxmq/charlesdarwinad.pdf?dl=0>, posted 
earlier in April by the Inspiration Trust, seeking a “principal designate” for 
Charles Darwin primary free school, also in Norwich.

The first two sentences of the two job ads are identical. Three bullet points 
on qualities sought – including that they should be “committed to traditional 
values” – are near word-for-word the same. Application packs for the two 
headships – posted on the websites of theInspiration Trust  
<https://www.dropbox.com/s/njpi5ukjd4vsdcj/Charles%20Darwin%20Primary%20Application%20Pack.pptx?dl=0&force_no_preview=1>
andNorfolk county council 
<https://www.dropbox.com/s/q132fgc3v8zctad/hewettjobdescription.docx?dl=0> – 
feature identical wording in many places.

So is the Inspiration Trust already taking control of the appointment of the 
Hewett head? An email from Paul Mitchell, chair of the interim governors’ board 
appointed to run the consultation, to Hewett parent Lindsey White says no.

But White tells us: “I feel we’re being played for fools. I cannot imagine how 
the board will defend themselves against this mounting evidence.”

Asked to comment, Mitchell tells us that the IEB “is required to liaise with 
the proposed sponsor” and so an IEB colleague asked it for examples of adverts, 
with the resulting materials used “with the permission of Inspiration Trust”. 
The IEB, he adds, “has a duty to make candidates aware of the expectations of 
Inspiration as, if the secretary of state were to decide that the school would 
become an academy, the person appointed would be employed by Inspiration 
Trust”. The head of the trust is Theodore Agnew, who until recently was a DfE 
non-executive director and chair of the DfE’s academies board.

Premature end for Stockport free school

Finally, students at a free school in greater Manchester are having to find 
places elsewhere mid-way through their courses as it is to close a year early.

Stockport Technical school is to shut in July, only two years after it opened. 
Earlier this year, it was announced that the school, which specialises in 
“apprenticeship skills” for 14- to 19-year-olds, was to close in July 2016, 
having failed to attract enough students.

Now the school has announced that funding difficulties caused by the small 
roll mean it cannot move into its intended long-term home in a former grammar 
school for its final year. Instead it is to close, with students, including 
those in year 10 and year 12, needing places in other schools and a college. A 
sad tale indeed.
