
Walking stiffly down the shoulder of a busy road on the outskirts of 
Indianapolis on a sweltering June afternoon, Robert Young moved into the shadow 
of a slow-moving RV to get some relief from the beating sun. Thirty-four days 
into his journey from Huntington Beach, California, to New York City, the 
long-distance British runner was more than 2,000 miles from his starting point 
and still had 700 miles to go, in his attempt to break the record for the 
fastest run across the United States.

About a mile down the road, a team of observers waited for Young to pass, 
including 62-year-old Gary “Lazarus Lake” Cantrell and several other longtime, 
respected runners who dubbed themselves “The Geezers”. But they weren’t there 
as fans, or to offer encouragement or moral support. They had a more dire 
intention: to determine whether or not the 33-year-old athlete was cheating.

On 14 May, Young set out from the Pacific coast with the ambition to run 3,000 
miles in 45 days. This goal would shave one day off the fastest 
transcontinental crossing ever achieved by a person on foot, which has stood 
since 1980 despite numerous attempts.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m3bn%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m3bn%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1bcce6e523ccef545be4db9a6d3fc64643af0e9%2F0_102_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Runner's%20lie%3A%20cheating%20rumors%20didn%E2%80%99t%20stop%20Robert%20Young%20%E2%80%93%20but%20something%20else%20did&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m3bn%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Runner%27s+lie%3A+cheating+rumors+didn%E2%80%99t+stop+Robert+Young+%E2%80%93+but+something+else+did&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m3bn%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1bcce6e523ccef545be4db9a6d3fc64643af0e9%2F0_102_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Robert Young: marathon man. Photograph: Marathonmanuk Facebook page 
Growing up in a small village in Yorkshire, Young was subjected to years of 
abuse at the hands of his father. As hedescribed in an interview 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/sport/2016/03/man-who-could-not-stop-running>
 earlier this year, much of his ambition stems from a drive to overcome his 
harrowing past. According to his autobiography, Young considers himself to be 
an ordinary runner with an extraordinary ability to endure pain.

Young is relatively new to the sport, but his compelling backstory has gained 
a wide following. He ran his first marathon on a dare in 2014, then proceeded 
to run 370 moreover the course of a year 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/sport/12166515/Marathon-man-Robert-Young-eyes-the-long-road-ahead.html>
. The feat is documented in his popular autobiography, Marathon Man, and his 
fans regard him as something of an endurance savant.

But however fit and talented Young might be, there’s a reason the 
transcontinental record hasn’t been broken for 36 years. Three thousand miles 
in 45 days breaks down to 67 miles a day – that’s two and a half marathons 
every day, for a month and a half. Even for Young, that’s a stretch.


And yet, according to posts on Young’s blog 
<http://www.marathonmanuk.co.uk/blog-3/> documenting his progress, the first 
weeks of Young’s run were dominated by 70-mile and 80-mile days. Photos of 
Young looking relaxed and confident accompanied his updates, which raised 
suspicions in a mailing list for professional runners, Ultra List.

“[His] tracker and GPS data are cans of worms,” Robert Lopez wrote to Ultra 
List subscribers. “There is a day that Rob’s RV got stuck in the desert. The 
location is known. [...] Whether he legged out the 40-plus road miles or 
somehow orienteered his way through the brush without navigational aids, [his] 
time is incredible. And I mean that in the literal sense.”

Delmott went to meet Young, only to find his RV driving slowly down the road 
with no runner in sight

Young made running across America look easy. Too easy, many skeptics argued on 
LetsRun.com. Among the criticisms were detailed analyses of Young’s claims, 
including speeds that had never been achieved before.

“As he was claiming really big mileage, the doubts grew,” said Wouter 
Hamelinck, a Belgian ultrarunner. “Either he was exaggerating or he was 
throwing in world-class performances. For me, the most damning part is that his 
run totally changed after he knew that he was in the spotlight.”

Indeed, after murmurs of Young cheating spread within the community, his speed 
began to decline.

Young’s last 70-miler happened on 7 June, when he clocked 71 miles running 
through the Missouri heartland, the same day a Kansas runner named Asher 
Delmott posted accusations of cheating onLetsRun.com <http://letsrun.com/>. 
Delmottwrote <http://www.letsrun.com/forum/flat_read.php?thread=7355147> that 
he went to meet Young, only to find his RV driving slowly down the road with no 
runner in sight. He then tracked down surveillance cameras of the RV doing the 
same thing in different locations along his route.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m3bn%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m3bn%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93caaa493398df2a0e00b87ac1167edb63c6b3a0%2F0_67_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Runner's%20lie%3A%20cheating%20rumors%20didn%E2%80%99t%20stop%20Robert%20Young%20%E2%80%93%20but%20something%20else%20did&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m3bn%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Runner%27s+lie%3A+cheating+rumors+didn%E2%80%99t+stop+Robert+Young+%E2%80%93+but+something+else+did&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m3bn%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93caaa493398df2a0e00b87ac1167edb63c6b3a0%2F0_67_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 This photo taken by Gary Cantrell captures Robert Young walking near his RV 
outside Indianapolis, Indiana, on 15 June. Photograph: Marathonmanuk 
“After it drove by, I ran into the highway, turned on my headlamp to strobe 
mode, and started running behind the RV,” he wrote. “It was driving running 
speed, so I was making progress, but they saw my light and stopped.”

Delmott suggested that Young was occasionally riding in the RV when he claimed 
to be running. Rumors began to spread even more.

Young’s team fervently denied the speculations on their Facebook page 
<https://www.facebook.com/marathonmanuk/?fref=ts>, and posted videos explaining 
why the incidents were a misunderstanding. However, theydeclined 
<http://www.runnersworld.com/general-interest/runner-attempting-trans-america-record-denies-cheating-allegations>
 to release GPS data until after the run had finished. This emboldened critics, 
who took their claims to popular running media such as Runner’s World,Outside 
Magazine <http://www.outsideonline.com/2089906/robert-young-run-across-america> 
andSports Illustrated 
<http://www.si.com/edge/2016/06/15/marathon-man-uk-robert-young-faking-world-record-run-cheating-doubts>
.

As cheating speculation spread, Young’s team reported compounding physical and 
mental strain. His daily mileage plummeted. He clocked 44 miles on 9 June and 
40 miles on 10 June.

On 11 June, Cantrell said he believed Young had entered 'the death spiral'

Meanwhile, “The Geezers” were becoming aware of Young’s story. Spurred on by 
encouragement from the community, Cantrell rallied a group of longtime runners 
and launched a crowd-funding campaign to cover expenses. Their intent: to 
shadow Young’s every move for the remainder of the run, observe his progress, 
and document what they saw. Their observations wouldn’t prove or disprove the 
allegations, but they would provide credibility – or lack thereof – to Young’s 
effort.

“I was an accountant for 35 years and look at this as an auditing job,” 
Cantrell said. “[Young’s team] welcomed us when we got here. They want an 
independent record.”

On 11 June, Cantrell’s “Team Geezer” watched Young battle to finish a meager 
41-mile day in Illinois. Cantrell said he believed Young had already entered 
“the death spiral”.

•••

For five days in early June, Cantrell and The Geezers drove behind Young’s 
support team RV through Indiana and Illinois, and parked at various pullouts 
alongside the road, observing Young as he passed by.

Weeks into his journey, Young was struggling to run 40 miles a day – a far cry 
from what he’d accomplished at the beginning of his journey. Cantrell, a 
guru-like figure with a long gray beard, watched sympathetically as Young 
strained through every mile, frequently hobbling at a slow walking pace. On 15 
June, Cantrell watched as Young fell face-down ont o a road just outside of 
Indianapolis, cutting his forehead. When his crew reached him, Young’s face was 
covered in blood and he was asleep.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m3bn%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m3bn%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd69138c4be51b82f67d3c02424c41e265aeac9d%2F42_8_678_847%2F678.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Runner's%20lie%3A%20cheating%20rumors%20didn%E2%80%99t%20stop%20Robert%20Young%20%E2%80%93%20but%20something%20else%20did&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m3bn%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Runner%27s+lie%3A+cheating+rumors+didn%E2%80%99t+stop+Robert+Young+%E2%80%93+but+something+else+did&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m3bn%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd69138c4be51b82f67d3c02424c41e265aeac9d%2F42_8_678_847%2F678.jpg>
 Robert Young has his feet checked in Indiana. Photograph: Marathonmanuk 
“But he did get up, every time,” Cantrell said. “At times his pace slowed to a 
mile an hour. To be perfectly honest, if he were an entrant in a race I 
directed, I would have pulled the plug. But whatever the outcome … it is a 
shame that no one may ever appreciate the sheer determination that it took to 
get 40 miles today.”

Cantrell said he respected Young’s grit and sheer stubbornness, as well as his 
remarkable ability to recover after appearing utterly broken. But in five days 
of following Young’s every move, Cantrell didn’t witness any indication that he 
was capable of achieving the mileages he claimed in the first days of his 
transcontinental run. Young was good, but not great, Cantrell said.

Despite his injuries and his tenacity, the question of whether or not Young 
had cheated early on in his journey remained. The discrepancies in his pace – 
from 70 miles a day to less than 40 – were just too big to believe that Young 
had ever been able to run at such high speeds in the first place.

“There remain serious questions about the first part of the run. I hope they 
do have the data that will present a believable explanation for all of the 
discrepancies.” Cantrell said.

Still, in the days Cantrell spent with Young, he grew fond of him. He offered 
the struggling runner advice and gear, including one of his own cotton dress 
shirts, which he explained would help keep Young cooler in the heat. He also 
instructed Young to cut holes in his shoes to relieve pressure from his swollen 
feet.

The discrepancies in his pacing were just too big to believe that he had ever 
run at such high speeds in the first place

On 16 June – 34 days into his run – Young donned Cantrell’s shirt, shoes and 
hole-riddled socks, then proceeded to gut out 61 miles. Cantrell marveled at 
this late comeback after five days of running only 40 miles or so. Sixty-mile 
days are what Young needed to stay on record pace.

“I was doing the math to see when it would be over,” Cantrell said. “But 
Robert Young was not over. He came out and walked for a while. Then he started 
to run and run and run.”

Later that evening, Young checked into an emergency room in Indianapolis, 
where he was diagnosed with a fracture in the fifth toe on his right foot, as 
well as cellulitis – a painful and potentially serious bacterial skin 
infection. His team vowed to “battle on”.

And then they went silent. The blog and social media accounts went quiet and 
his online tracker stopped moving.

Cantrell said Team Geezer abandoned the watch.

“I am done because I do not want to be a party to putting Robert Young in the 
hospital,” Cantrell wrote in an email. “This much I will say. It seems to be a 
consistent part of this pattern, to make claims that an individual is somehow 
physiologically different from everyone else. They are not.

“What I saw was the same thing I have seen from multi-day runners for decades. 
The bright-eyed, chipper runner that I first saw last Sunday was reduced to a 
shambling, hollow-eyed shell.”


Young waited until 20 June to officially announce the end of his record 
attempt “for medical reasons”. He continued to deny accusations of cheating.

“In order to clear up this matter, in the next few days all data from the 
trip, which should exonerate me from any suggestion of wrongdoing, will be made 
available for examination by all concerned parties,” he wrote. Young insisted 
he would provide data from his GPS watches – as well as reasonable explanations 
for the suspicious surveillance videos.

Several of Young’s most fervent critics said that if his watch data checks 
out, they will concede their suspicions that he cheated. But Cantrell, remains 
a skeptic. As a self-proclaimed “old-timer”, he tends to credit officially 
recorded race performances over what he views as dubious technologies.

But Cantrell knows his questions might be falling on closed ears. Young’s fans 
are eager to see him pull through.

“The overwhelming social media response has been adulation and accolades, with 
the few dissenting voices effectively drowned out. He does not need credibility 
with the ultrarunning community. They are not the target market.”

