
Yonge Street is Toronto’s spine – and the longest street in the world too 
[recognised by the Guinness Book of Records in 1988], going on for hundreds of 
miles into northern Ontario. It starts at Lake Ontario and from there you can 
stroll up to the Eaton Centre, a massive, rather spectacular, mall. Follow 
Yonge up to Bloor Street and once you get to the intersection you’ll be in a 
shopping district of mainly high-end stores. But Bloor Street also has a little 
pocket neighbourhood, called Yorkville, that’s great to explore.

On a clear day you can see Niagara Falls from the top of the CN Tower. It’s 
still one of the tallest buildings in Canada, and if you’re brave enough you 
could try itsEdgeWalk 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kIPdzmSfNkk&list=UU8wTZhwABPQKTvMVHQEIkQw>, 
where you can walk on and around the roof of the tower’s main pod – 356 metres 
up.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F424ne%2Fsfb%23img-1&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F424ne%2Fsfb%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F2%2F1412252230419%2F785d6c22-b51e-4106-9e5a-d12aa8e0e251-2060x1815.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Linwood%20Barclay%20on%20Toronto&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F424ne%2Fstw%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Linwood+Barclay+on+Toronto&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F424ne%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F2%2F1412252230419%2F785d6c22-b51e-4106-9e5a-d12aa8e0e251-2060x1815.jpeg>
 Linwood Barclay. Photograph: Ulf Andersen/Getty Images 
The best green space in the downtown area is High Park – all 161 hectares of 
it. It’s perfect for picnics and relaxing, there’s a small zoo and also 
Shakespeare in the Park outdoor performances here during the summer.

There is a spectacular view of the city from the Toronto Islands. They are 
just a 10-minute ferry ride from downtown (C$7 return). Once you’re there, you 
don’t hear the city traffic anymore. There are a lot of old cottages on the 
islands that people actually live in – they have leased them from the city. You 
can rent a bicycle and ride along little laneways. You’re only a mile or so 
from the city but it feels like they are 200 miles north, in the countryside.

Public transport is a subject of much debate here. There are only four subway 
lines and two of them are really short. You can easily find a cab, and there’s 
a network of surface transport, such as buses and streetcars (trams) but these 
can often get caught in traffic. It can sometimes take time to get to where you 
want to go but you will get there – it’s not horrendous all the time.

The Frank Gehry redesign of the Art Gallery of Ontario on Dundas Street West 
is spectacular, and the gallery is one of many gorgeous buildings around the 
city. Behind it is OCAD University (formerly the Ontario College of Art and 
Design), which looks like an immense rectangular box, with black and white 
squares all over it. The impression it gives is of being suspended in the air 
by these red and blue toothpick-like legs. People either love it or hate it.

At the Library Bar of the Fairmount Royal York they have several drinks named 
after Canadian authors. I discovered that you can even have a Linwood Barclay 
negroni (C$16). I’m not much of a drinker, so I only just got through it, but I 
know others who have loved it. I thought getting my name on a book cover wasn’t 
bad, but now there’s a cocktail named after me I feel I’ve made it!
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F424ne%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F424ne%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F2%2F1412252015556%2Ffa7096c4-f421-493f-96f8-3b0aa828a45c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Linwood%20Barclay%20on%20Toronto&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F424ne%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Linwood+Barclay+on+Toronto&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F424ne%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F2%2F1412252015556%2Ffa7096c4-f421-493f-96f8-3b0aa828a45c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Ontario College of Art & Design. 
Toronto is a city that loves its books. There’s a rich literary heritage here 
and some wonderful bookshops, too – in particular for crime fiction atSleuth of 
Baker Street <http://sleuthofbakerstreet.ca/> on Millwood Road. There are also 
two book festivals to check out. In September there’sThe Word on the Street 
<http://www.thewordonthestreet.ca/wots/toronto>, which takes up this huge park 
area north of the provincial legislature building at Queen’s Park Circle. Then, 
there’s the International Festival of Authors, starting on 23 October. It draws 
writers from all over the world: Stephen King was there last year, and Ian 
Rankin regularly attends. It’s one of the most highly regarded authors’ 
festivals in the world.

A Toronto hidden gem would have to be the rooftop bar at the Park Hyatt on 
Avenue Road in downtown. It’s actually called the Roof Lounge and is on the 
18th floor, so has fantastic views over Yorkville and the rest of the city. The 
patio is heated so you can enjoy it pretty much all year round.

If you’re an adventurous eater there’s everything you could want in Toronto 
because there are so many cultures represented. However, I’m the kind of guy 
who goes to the same restaurant all the time and orders the same thing. I love
Terroni <http://www.terroni.com/> – it’s a family-run chain and they have three 
restaurants in the city serving great Italian food.

The majority of what you’ll want to see is in downtown, but Toronto is a city 
that sprawls out into a lot of interesting neighbourhoods. The region is mostly 
flat, certainly the area around Lake Ontario that heads off towards Buffalo, 
New York state. It’s like pouring a glass of water on a flat table … it just 
keeps spreading out.

People have preconceptions about Toronto. They probably think there are 
Mounties in red coats everywhere, that there is tons of snow in July and that 
it’s heavily French. None of these is true. Summers are hot and humid, you are 
unlikely to spot a Mountie unless there is a ceremony of some sort, and French 
is not a major language here. It’s probable that more people are speaking 
Italian and Chinese in Toronto than they are French.

I think that if architecture doesn’t get in your face sometimes, nobody will 
pay any attention to it. And people definitely have a love-hate situation going 
on with Daniel Libeskind’s The Crystal, which became the new main entrance to 
the Royal Museum of Ontario in 2007. It is such a juxtaposition of 
architectural styles – because this big, glass crystal bursts out of what is 
otherwise an old-fashioned, classic museum building.

• Linwood Barclay <http://linwoodbarclay.com/>’s new thriller, No Safe House, 
is out now in hardback (published by Orion, £16.99). To buy a copy for £12.64 
including UK p&p visitbookshop.theguardian.com 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/no-safe-house.html> or call on 0330 333 6846
