
The battle for editors of women's glossies now will not be how to put on new 
readers, but how to maintain existing ones. While last week's circulation 
figures revealed the significant fact that OK! has finally overtaken its arch 
rival Hello! with a quite remarkable year-on-year increase in sales of 37.7% 
(what are they doing right?), the trend for the traditional titles in the past 
10 years has been a downhill one. The overall loss of readers since 1987 is 
well over a million readers.

This fact has not passed without the requisite amount of paranoia behind 
closed doors, reflected by the redistribution of human resources - or large 
number of sackings - in major publishing houses. In news-papers, the perennial 
debate about the state of women's magazines has reached fever pitch in the past 
two years: from the Daily Mail to the Guardian, they have been denounced as "an 
insult to womanhood", "sex-crazed and salacious", or just boring and old hat.

Are they really that bad, or are there just too many out there? In an 
over-saturated, oxygen-depleted marketplace, even the more illustrious titles 
such as Elle have been forced out on to the sawdust of the market floor to 
scrap for readers: fighting mere "sex" coverlines with "bigger, bolder sex" and 
resorting to plastering free goods all over the front of the magazine.

Reader loyalty seems to be a luxury of the past - according to some estimates 
it is down 30% compared to five years ago. As for advertising loyalty - was it 
ever there in the first place? With women readers accounting for 30% of the 
sales of men's magazines, a market growing ever stronger (a growth rate of 674% 
between 1993 and 1998) and more pornographic, the women's sector looks like a 
universe in decline.

There have been some launches since 1996: Frank, which settled at around 
40,000 and was effectively folded by Wagadon; and Red and B, launched with the 
full muscle of Emap and Attic Futura respectively behind them. But more 
newcomers have arrived over the same period in the healthier men's market, 
which has supported the launch of Maxim, Bizarre, Front and several health 
titles.

Sally O'Sullivan, ex-editor of Good Housekeeping and chief executive of Cabal 
- the star of the BBC2 series Trouble Between the Covers - believes that 
ever-fewer women's magazines reflect the life, aspirations and emotions of the 
readers: "Eventually the gap between the lifestyle of the readers and the 
static nature of the current brands will show - unless they can move fast 
enough. The magazines with longevity are the ones that have grown with society 
- evolution is what it's all about."

Amidst all the Ab Fab-style panic and the desperate sales-boosting tactics, 
one title stands out. Vogue's sales figures are more robust than ever at 
202,668, with 25,000 more readers put on since editorAlexandra Shulman 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/alexandra-shulman> came on board, and it has 
so far resisted the fads and faux pas of the marketplace. Its millennium issue 
was a sell-out.

While others fought for celebrities on their covers, Vogue left its own blank, 
using self-reflective mirrored silver. The fashion journal which launched in 
1916, monitored hemline movements through two world wars, and met the challenge 
of women's lib, effortlessly claimed "A Century of Style" as its own. It 
confidently straddled the millennium with one Blahnik heel resting in the 20th 
century and the other lodged firmly in the future.

Although its rival Elle sells more copies (210,076), it is not Elle that 
fashion devotees turn to to find out what's in. Only Vogue has the gravitas to 
sweep the board clean and start a new look. Just as we've spent our wages in 
haberdashery trying to get "the shamanic look", the February issue heralds "The 
New Chic", a return to 70s smart.

It's enough to make other editors sick. "There's Vogue on this one level and 
then there's all the rest," says Andrew Wiles, head of advertising at Harrods, 
which sponsored the February catwalk guide. "Vogue has the authority in terms 
of fashion positioning - it's stuck to its identity." Advertisers use it as the 
trade showcase for repositioning brands.

What is it about Vogue? Its readers are the same pill-popping, stressed and 
overworked women, worried about men and their bodies, who read other glossies, 
but Vogue doesn't stoop to their level or try to be their best friend. It 
inspires them to jump up to those misty spires: the perfect pair of legs clad 
in the most divine dress.

"We have to be more luscious than every other magazine," says Shulman. "People 
are going to carry on buying Vogue for all the same reasons: something to 
wallow in . . . an enormous treat." Shulman was employed to keep "Vogue as 
Vogue", but that's not as simple as it sounds. "You have to hard-sell every 
issue," she says. Vogue has a core readership - about two-thirds - who are very 
loyal, but the rest, mainly aged 26 and under, are floaters. Despite the 
pressure from rivals, Shulman has so far shunned covermounts: "I edit a 
magazine, not a supermarket."

She has, to some extent, resisted the all-consuming pull of Celebrity. The 
biggest threat to Cond√© Nast titles in the US has been the sweeping success of 
In Style, a super-glossy lifestyle magazine which focuses on celebrities and is 
soon to launch in Britain. Shulman's January issue had a roll-call of "now" 
celebrities on its cover, but she is quick to dismiss this as "a one-off".

"Vogue doesn't sell on celebrity covers - we only do about four to five a 
year." She is not prepared to guarantee a front cover in return for an 
interview and is "bloody minded" in dealing with PRs. "In Style is a brilliant 
magazine - we have elements of it in that we give people a view into a 
glamorous world. But the US is a bigger market and more commercial. We are able 
to be more edgy, less formulaic." There are certainly more celebrities than her 
predecessor Liz Tilberis allowed (a former employee remembers pushing hard to 
get Madonna during her voguing phase and was told firmly "not in this 
magazine").

Vogue has been modernised by Shulman, who in 1992 returned to the magazine, 
where she had been features editor, after editing GQ. "I thought it had become 
a little irrelevant - showing gorgeous models and nothing else." Society has 
also changed. Vogue once appealed to a narrow echelon of British society. Now 
we are all supposed to be middle class.

"Vogue is classless. It's not about class, it's about style. When I took over, 
England was in the midst of a recession - the fallout from the good-time 80s. 
It was straight out of glittery power suits into grunge, with photographers 
wanting to take more realistic photos. Luckily, it was more my taste."

Fashion literacy has improved enormously since then. "Vogue used to be either 
for very rich people, or people who looked at it with their noses pressed up 
against the window," says Lisa Armstrong, the Times's fashion editor and a 
Vogue contributor. "Now women want to buy into the whole thing - if they can't 
get the clothes, they'll buy the handbag."

"If you've got the privilege of editing Vogue, then you've got to make sure 
that every now and then you do something that ups the trend," says Shulman. 
Such moments might include the Kate Moss-in-tiny-knickers shock, followed by a 
shoot with a size 16 model, or more recently an article about "bi-try", 
inspired by the rumours of threesomes among the glamorous London set.

"Vogue transcends the demands that other mags have. People buy it to be 
different, to be special. We are not out there clawing away, trying to get a 
circ of 400,000." She does not want a gigantic circulation ("that would be more 
people than could possibly be relevant to our advertisers") but selling more 
copies makes her feel good.

"When I came here, there was this ethos that the magazine really didn't need 
more readers. It didn't matter as long as we were Vogue and I've always thought 
that was nonsense."

She saw off the competition from Frank, when it was launched directly at 
intelligent, fashion-fascist Vogue readers. "Frank wanted to be more upmarket 
than us but it was not very commercial in its approach." Shulman had already 
stolen the middle ground. "Guardian woman makes up a huge section of our 
readers," says Shulman. "It's my newspaper, after all." Vogue now has two key 
ex-Frank staff on the team.

Although Emap is relaunching Frank as a bi-annual codenamed Project Fashion 
and IPC is reviving Nova, the cult women's magazine of the late 60s, Shulman is 
not bothered by other publishers' plans. "Nova was of its time and having to 
reinvent something is a nightmare. It has to be something different otherwise 
you're selling on people's nostalgia and you'll not live up to it.

"I'm not quite convinced that there isn't a gap for a more upmarket, 
high-fashion magazine than Vogue, but if there is, it won't sell more than 
80,000 copies." Vogue could stretch to another 20,000 sales, "but it's not 
something I would try to do - our challenge is to stay where we are."
