
Few countries embrace their national stereotypes as wholeheartedly as Georgia. 
Ask the average Georgian about the traditions of this former Soviet nation in 
the Caucasus and you’ll get a rhapsody about calorific 12-hour supra 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Supra_(feast)> feasts, wine downed at a gulp 
from hollowed-out rams’ horns, loquacious toasts to the Virgin Mary and Saint 
George, and Kalishnikov-toting mountain shepherds who drink moonshine out of 
hand grenades. Souvenir stands in the capital, Tbilisi, hawk felt hats and 
daggers, and the city’s restaurant menus are full largely of cheese-drenched
khachapuri bread and khinkali dumplings, approximating the rustic mountain 
style. Until now.

I’ve lived off and on in Tbilisi for five years now, and I’ve seen its 
historic heart transform (though prices remain remarkably low – a room in a 
guesthouse can be as little as £15, the cost of a decent meal in a midrange 
restaurant half that). Unpaved alleys populated by stray dogs are now pastel 
boulevards leading to speakeasy-style cafes. Old-guard restaurants with a 
casino aesthetic are giving way to more eclectic places catering for 
middle-class Tbiliseli, rather than wealthy foreigners.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cntn%2Fsfb%23img-1&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cntn%2Fsfb%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F1%2F1443703958900%2F1d37dad7-0e84-452b-9bf7-0b17bc6d8fa5-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tbilisi's%20cultural%20revolution&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cntn%2Fstw%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tbilisi%27s+cultural+revolution&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cntn%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F1%2F1443703958900%2F1d37dad7-0e84-452b-9bf7-0b17bc6d8fa5-2060x1236.jpeg>
 O Moda Moda bar and vintage store 
In the wake of regime change – the nationalist Georgian Dream party was 
elected in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/oct/02/georgia-president-saakashvili-election-defeat>
, ousting pro-western President Mikheil Saakashvili – one might be forgiven for 
expecting Georgia to be more culturally conservative than ever. Chef Tekuna 
Gachechiladze is at the forefront of a cultural revolution: a generation of 
young, often foreign-educated artists and entrepreneurs who long to revive 
Tbilisi’s 19th-century status as a cultural cosmopolis.


“Georgian people don’t like change,” he says. “Georgian people don’t like me.”

Gachechiladze has two outposts – Culinarium 
<https://www.facebook.com/Culinarium.ge> (1/17 Lermontov Street, +995 322 430 
103), a restaurant and cookery school, andCafé Littera 
<https://www.facebook.com/Cafe-Littera-%E1%83%99%E1%83%90%E1%83%A4%E1%83%94-%E1%83%9A%E1%83%98%E1%83%A2%E1%83%94%E1%83%A0%E1%83%90-2037156936423342/timeline/>
, newly opened in the oldSoviet Writers’ House 
<http://writershouse.ge/eng/text/> – from which she challenges what she sees as 
her country’s stagnant cuisine. She serves traditional Georgian river trout as 
a tartar, and replaces lamb with mussels in her thyme-richchakapuli stew.

“Look at any 19th-century Georgian cookbook,” she says. “Before the 
restrictions of the Soviet Union, we were using béchamel sauce, and all sorts 
of European recipes. Look at Café Littera’s architecture – all the art nouveau. 
We were importing ideas from France, from all Europe.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cntn%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cntn%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F1%2F1443703675308%2F96e82e04-d920-4e63-a01d-a85aa942645a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tbilisi's%20cultural%20revolution&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cntn%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tbilisi%27s+cultural+revolution&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cntn%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F1%2F1443703675308%2F96e82e04-d920-4e63-a01d-a85aa942645a-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Gabriadze Cafe, nex to the puppet theatre 
Gachechiladze is not alone in her ambitions. In the backstreets of the city’s 
old town – all art nouveau angels, crumbling facades, and black-skirted women 
hawking bunches of coriander from street tables – new galleries and bars 
(invariably unmarked) cater for Georgian artists and activists seeking an 
alternative to traditional ways.

This is often done with an edge of knowing nostalgia. O Moda Moda 
<https://www.facebook.com/omodamoda> (64 Barnov Street) is equal parts bar and 
vintage clothes boutique. It serves traditional, syrupy, tarragon-infused 
Lagidze lemonades from the sort of countertop glass funnels popular at the turn 
of the 20th century.Café Gabriadze <http://gabriadze.com/en/cafe> (13 Shavteli 
Street, ), which is operated by the director of the adjacent puppet theatre, 
has images of William Shakespeare woven into its lace curtains.Cafe Gallery 
<http://info-tbilisi.com/cafe-gallery/> (48 Rustaveli Street) is one of the 
first gay-friendly venues in this notoriously conservative city and hosts 
regular tango evenings. Last week, the city’s first biker bar,Cross Riders 
<https://www.facebook.com/Cross-Riders-Bar-463957463753212/timeline/> (Revaz 
Lagidze Street), opened near the Ottoman-style opera house.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cntn%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cntn%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F1%2F1443703879960%2F538b3dfe-5133-44fb-8421-9ecd5cb9089d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tbilisi's%20cultural%20revolution&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cntn%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tbilisi%27s+cultural+revolution&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cntn%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F1%2F1443703879960%2F538b3dfe-5133-44fb-8421-9ecd5cb9089d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Rooms Hotel 
Reinvention has also made its way to the hospitality sector. Last year, the 
design-drivenRooms Hotel <http://roomshotels.com/tbilisi> opened in the offices 
of a former Soviet publishing company. Preserved frescoes are still visible on 
its conference room ceilings, and the desks all have retro rotary-dial 
telephones. On my bedside table, a Marshall guitar amp doubled as a 
Bluetooth-enabled speaker. In a nod to the building’s literary past, the 
overflowing shelves of the lobby hold what may be the largest collection of 
English-language books in Georgia.

Oto Berishvili, the hotel’s marketing manager, sees Rooms as the embodiment of 
the “new” Georgia: one making a definitive break with its past. “If a person 
has previous hotel experience,” he says, “we don’t hire them.” They would, he 
believes, be “brainwashed” by the famously surly Soviet style of customer 
service. “We hire musicians, and people from the drama school.” He likes the 
idea that his staff will finish their shift in the hotel, then go and perform 
in a play or DJ at a local club.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cntn%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cntn%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F1%2F1443704027206%2F77762b13-5fbe-45b8-8bb0-6154b8430281-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tbilisi's%20cultural%20revolution&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cntn%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tbilisi%27s+cultural+revolution&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cntn%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F1%2F1443704027206%2F77762b13-5fbe-45b8-8bb0-6154b8430281-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Frescos in Tbilisi’s Sioni Cathedral. Photograph: Alamy 
That’s not to say Tbilisi has entirely transformed. Between the pastel houses 
and brick-domedabanos (bathhouses whose natural sulphur pools Georgians hold to 
be therapeutic) taxi drivers will routinely ignore a potential fare, preferring 
to continue playing backgammon on a board perched atop a rubbish bin. Inside 
the 13th-century Sioni cathedral young and old press their lips to the gilded 
icons of saints; outside, bearded Orthodox priests queue up for freshtonis bread
 <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tonis_puri>, baked on the side of a cylindrical 
oven, from the bakery in the seminary basement.

At the Dry Bridge weekend flea market, sellers hawk Soviet medals and old 
propaganda posters of Stalin and Lenin. And in restaurants such as Alani (1 
Gorgasali Street), the sound of toasts being drunk is drowned out only by the 
synth-played Russian pop. You might still find yourself abducted, as my partner 
once was, by a supra party and forced to down 10 shots ofchacha (brandy) at one 
go.

But nowhere exemplifies Tbilisi’s ambiguous relationship with its past like the
Sofia Melnikova’s Fantastic Douqan restaurant 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Sofia-Melnikovas-Fantastic-Douqan/186216914838587#_=_>
, which we find hidden behind a hand-scrawled sign in the garden of the city’s
Literature Museum <http://www.literaturemuseum.ge/>. Among mismatched antiques 
and plush leather chairs, I spy one of Georgia’s leading anti-homophobia 
activists alongside a famous contemporary writer. Women with close-cropped blue 
hair and piercings sit next to expats giving English lessons.
 Traditional khinkali dumplings, stuffed with meat. Photograph: Alamy 
But rather than ordering anything innovative, my companion urges me to try the 
traditional khinkali dumplings “They brought an old woman down from Khevsureti 
[the mountain province associated with the best dumplings] and she does nothing 
but make khinkali all day.” And so, according to locals, the Douqan has the 
best khinkali in all of Georgia.

For visionaries such as chef Tekuna Gachechiladze, this cultural blend may be 
what Tbilisi is all about. “People say I make fusion cuisine,” she says. “But 
we already have fusion cuisine.”

After centuries of invasion, Arabs, Mongols, Persians, Greeks and Russians 
have all left their mark. Even khinkali, as Gachechiladze points out, aren’t 
originally Georgian. “The Mongols brought the dumplings first.”

• Accommodation was provided by Rooms Hotel (doubles from $140 B&B, 
roomshotels.com <http://roomshotels.com/tbilisi>). Pegasus Airlines 
<http://www.flypgs.com/en/> and Turkish Airlines 
<http://www.turkishairlines.com/> fly from Gatwick to Tbilisi via Istanbul, 
Ukraine International <http://www.flyuia.com/eng/uk.html> via Kiev
