
Related: AFL grand final: five things to look out for 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/oct/02/afl-grand-final-five-things-to-look-out-for>

Australia <http://www.theguardian.com/weather/australia> is set to experience 
a heady cocktail of glorious weather and climactic sporting contest this 
weekend, with much of the south-east of the country bathing in pre-summer heat.


Sydney is expected to reach 28C on Saturday, followed by three days over 30C, 
whileMelbourne <http://www.theguardian.com/weather/melbourne> is forecast 28C 
for the weekend with temperatures rising to 32C by Tuesday, according to the 
Bureau of Meteorology.

Adelaide <http://www.theguardian.com/weather/adelaide> will be even warmer, 
with a string of days over 30C culminating in a forecast 35C on Monday. The 
warm weather, caused by a high-pressure system moving across Victoria and NSW, 
is relatively unusual for this time of year, with Sydney’s average maximum 
October temperature sitting at 22.1C.

In southern Tasmania, forecast strong winds and high temperatures have sparked 
the state’s first total fire ban for the season. The Tasmanian Fire Service has 
declared the ban for all of Saturday when the mercury will reach up to 30C.

“With the dry conditions already influencing the bush and grass and predicted 
winds of over 100km/h, no fires are permitted in the open,” chief officer Gavin 
Freeman said.

Daylight savings will also begin, with clocks moving forward at 2am on Sunday 
in New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia, Tasmania and the ACT.

Related: NRL grand final 2015: Broncos and Cowboys set for intriguing showdown 
| Paul Connolly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/oct/02/nrl-grand-final-2015-broncos-and-cowboys-set-for-intriguing-showdown>

The early blast of summer is perfectly timed for a number of major sporting 
contests, with both the AFL andNRL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> 
grand finals taking place this weekend.

In Melbourne, thousands of football fans gathered along the route to the 
Melbourne Cricket Ground on Friday for the traditional pre-grand final parade. 
The culmination of the AFL season will seeHawthorn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/hawthorn>, in its fourth consecutive final, 
take on West Coast.

The parade is the first since the Victorian government created a new grand 
final public holiday. Victoria now has more public holidays, at 13, than any 
other state.

Prime minister Malcolm Turnbull, riding a sparsely populated number 11 tram, 
tweeted his dismay 
<https://twitter.com/TurnbullMalcolm/status/649700119806214144> at a lack of 
people on Melbourne’s streets on Friday.
— Malcolm Turnbull (@TurnbullMalcolm) October 1, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/TurnbullMalcolm/status/649700119806214144> 
Very peaceful trip on no 11 tram - eerily quiet on a public holiday! Miss the 
people & excitement of grand final evepic.twitter.com/HINW9VqQkm 
<https://t.co/HINW9VqQkm>
 <https://twitter.com/TurnbullMalcolm/status/649700119806214144> 
Business groups have also criticised the new day off, with the Victorian 
Employers Chamber of Commerce and Industry labelling it a “very expensive 
party” that would cost businesses $600m and shut down much of Melbourne’s CBD.

However, the holiday appears to not have reduced numbers attending the grand 
final parade and tourism operators have hailed the extra long weekend for 
drumming up new business.

England will tumble out of the tournament it is hosting if it loses to 
Australia

A warm grand final will also be played out in Sydney, where the Brisbane 
Broncos take on theNorth Queensland Cowboys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/north-queensland-cowboys> in the final NRL 
match of the season on Sunday evening.

Sandwiched between the two finals will be a key encounter in the Rugby World 
Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rugby-world-cup>, with Australia facing 
England. The contest, which will see England tumble out of the tournament it is 
hosting if it loses, will take place at 6am on Sunday, Australian eastern time.

Of course, the sunshine can be enjoyed in a multitude of ways that don’t 
involve men crashing into each other, with many Australians planning to flock 
to beaches and fire up back yard barbecues.

People heading to Sydney’s beaches may want to watch out for stinging 
bluebottles, however, after a flotilla of the brightly-coloured cells was
reported to have arrived this week 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-09-30/bluebottles-take-over-sydney-beaches-in-annual-invasion/6815796>
.

Bluebottles sting more than 10,000 Australians each year, with popular past 
remedies including ice, vinegar and urine. Hot water is, however, the best 
treatment,according to research by Sydney University 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD009688.pub2/abstract>.
