
The New York Times <http://www.theguardian.com/media/new-york-times> is scrap 
its editing and prepress print production facilities in Paris as part of an 
ongoing shift of its international operations to London.

The move will see up to 70 roles eliminated or relocated, but the Paris bureau 
and advertising operations will be unaffected and the International New York 
Times, formerly the International Herald Tribune, will continue to be 
distributed in Europe.

According to an internal memo sent by international president Stephen 
Dunbar-Johnson, international assistant masthead editor Joe Kahn, and NYT 
Europe editor Dick Stephenson to staff of the International New York Times and
quoted in the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/27/business/media/new-york-times-co-plans-to-close-editing-and-press-operations-in-paris.html?hp&action=click&pgtype=Homepage&clickSource=story-heading&module=second-column-region&region=top-news&WT.nav=top-news>
, the move is designed to ensure the viability of the print edition.

“Only by moving ahead with this proposal can we assure our ability to maintain 
our international print presence for the coming years and do so in a way that 
will best serve our international readers,” said the memo.

“France remains a vital market for us and we will maintain a robust news 
bureau in Paris as well as a core international advertising office there,” 
wrote NYT publisher, Arthur Sulzberger Jr, chief executive Mark Thompson, and 
executive editor Dean Baquet in a note to staff.

“We regret that the proposal includes the elimination of jobs in Paris and we 
want to express our appreciation to colleagues – past and present – who through 
their hard work have contributed to maintaining a tradition of excellence in 
global journalism at the IHT and INYT.”

The move comes days after the NYT announced a $50m global digital expansion 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/14/new-york-times-to-invest-50m-on-global-digital-expansion>
 with a new unit called NYT Global, andreports that the company was looking to 
cut hundreds of jobs 
<http://nypost.com/2016/04/23/new-york-times-plans-to-cut-hundreds-of-jobs-later-this-year/>
 later this year.
