
While the benefits of volunteering are well known - making a difference, 
giving back to the community, and developing new skills, for example - there is 
less clarity about what psychological aspects make a volunteer and how 
charities can use this knowledge to attract more people to their cause.

Related: Is it time for doctors to prescribe volunteering? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/jan/18/is-it-time-to-prescribe-volunteering>

These insights could prove invaluable. In the last 15 years, the overall 
number of volunteers has stayed largely the same 
<https://www.ncvo.org.uk/policy-and-research/volunteering-policy/what-research-tells-us>
, with the exception of spikes in 2012 (during the London 2012 Olympic and 
Paralympic Games), and in 2005, which experts suspect is linked to protests 
against the Iraq war.

Starting young

Emily Dyson is the evidence and strategy manager for the #iwill campaign 
<http://www.iwill.org.uk/about-us/step-up-to-serve/>, which aims to drive youth 
participation in volunteering in the UK. The charity publishes an annual 
report, monitoring social action among 10-20 year olds and providing 
recommendations to improve engagement with this group.

“We have an ambitious goal to increase the number of young people taking part 
in social action by 1.5million by 2020,” Dyson says.


The latest findings 
<https://www.ipsos-mori.com/researchpublications/publications/1775/Youth-Social-Action-in-the-UK-2015.aspx>
 showed that 70% of the 2021 young people surveyed were likely to participate 
in social action in the future, but 41% said that they weren’t sure how to get 
involved – a clear opportunity for organisations to improve communications with 
this group.


The analysts also classified the respondents into three groups based on their 
current, previous and intended participation in social action – committed, 
potential and reluctant – and identified a recommendation for each. The goal 
for the committed group is to encourage them to do more by celebrating the 
impact they have; the reluctant group could be engaged by promoting 
volunteering opportunities to their parents and teachers; and the reluctant 
group may participate if introduced to social action while they’re still young. 
The survey found that those in the committed group had their first volunteering 
experience before they turned 11.


Related: How to engage and retain volunteers like me 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/dec/08/how-to-retain-charity-volunteers-tips>

More research is needed here, Dyson admits, but it’s an interesting theory 
that “if you get people participating in social action at a young age, then 
they will continue to do that for the rest of their lives”.

The Scout Association has made good use of the report’s data to create their 
youth social action programmeA Million Hands <https://www.amillionhands.org.uk/>
, and have successfully applied to the Department of Education to pilotscouting 
in partnership with schools <https://futureprepared.org.uk/>.

Part of an everyday routine

Innovation is important when it comes to recruiting and retaining adult 
volunteers too. Justin Davis Smith, a senior lecturer on volunteering atCass 
Business School <http://www.cass.city.ac.uk/>and the former chief executive of 
Volunteering England, says that there are examples of charitable startups 
making good use of technology to help people fit volunteering into their lives.

“One of the biggest barriers to volunteering is lack of time, or more 
accurately a perceived lack of time,” he says. “The hope is that if you can 
engage people through smaller opportunities, they will go on to volunteer in 
more formal ways over a longer period of time.”

Davis Smith cites examples such as the Casserole Club 
<https://www.casseroleclub.com/>, which encourages people to make an extra 
portion at dinner and distribute it to lonely people in their community, and
GoodGym <https://www.goodgym.org/>, where runners lend a hand at projects along 
their jogging route. “It’s about this notion of how can we try and wrap 
volunteering around what people are doing in their leisure time,” he says.

Related: 10 ways to change the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/dec/01/giving-tuesday-10-ways-to-change-the-world>

More established charities are also thinking outside the box. Last year, Oxfam 
launched a five minute campaign in a number of its shops, asking customers 
“what can you do in five minutes?”. Suggestions included having a cup of tea 
with a neighbour or reading to someone struggling with literacy. More 
importantly, the charity directly challenged the notion that volunteering will 
take a lot of time.


Make it meaningful, attractive and worthwhile

Principles of behavioural science can be used to overcome other perceived 
barriers to volunteering. TheJoin In initiative <https://www.joininuk.org/>, of 
which Davis Smith is a trustee, has identifiedsix behavioural principles 
<https://www.joininuk.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/JI-Making-Time-Handout-final-lores.pdf>
 in their Making Time report that can be used to attract more volunteers.


Those are: growth (provide training and the opportunity to learn new skills); 
impact (allow volunteers to interact with beneficiaries to see the difference 
they’re making); voice (think about the way you ask people to volunteer); 
experience (make finding, enrolling and participating in programmes easy and 
flexible); recognition (say thank you); and social factors (encourage 
socialising with other volunteers, staff and beneficiaries).


Ultimately, “it’s about constructing a really worthwhile, meaningful 
opportunity for people where they can make a difference,” Davis Smith says. 
“Don’t do that in isolation, do that with volunteers. They can help co-produce 
and co-construct the experience they engage in. Make it meaningful, make it 
attractive, make it worthwhile.”


For more news, opinions and ideas about the voluntary sector, join our 
community <https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/>.
