
The government is to drop a controversial proposal to change trade union 
funding arrangements after a threatened rebellion in theHouse of Lords 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/lords>.

Under plans included in the trade union bill all civil servants and staff in 
the wider public sector who belong to a union would have had toswitch to direct 
debits or make other arrangements to pay their fees 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/aug/06/public-sector-workers-stopped-automatically-union-subscriptions-pay-cheques>
.

But a cabinet office minister admitted the government had failed to convince 
Tory peers to vote for the proposal and said it would be dropped from the bill.

The decision will be seen as a major victory for public sector unions which 
had claimed the proposal was a vindictive attack on their finances.

Related: Tories forced to rethink trade union crackdown after Lords defeat 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/16/trade-union-crackdown-lords-defeat-labour-party-funding>

Critics had warned that a switch to direct debit payments would see members 
leave trade unions and no longer be able to access services they provided such 
as help with cheap loans, debt advice and legal aid.


In the report stage debate in the Lords,the cabinet office minister Lord 
Bridges acknowledged many Tory peers opposed the measure.

“I fear that my trying to convince you of our case may simply add grist to the 
mill of those who see this measure as a means of undermining trade unions 
themselves. This is certainly not and never has been the government’s 
intention,” he said.

Bridges said the government would instead support an amendment that would 
allow the “check-off” system, whereby members have their subscription deducted 
from their salaries, to continue where there was agreement with the employer 
and the union met the cost.

The decision comes too late for many civil servants in local and central 
government, whose system was dismantled before the bill was brought forward.

Speaking outside the chamber, the TUC <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/tuc>
 general secretary, Frances O’Grady, said: “Banning workers from choosing to 
pay subs in a convenient way through their payroll would, as many have warned, 
have damaged industrial relations and morale in key services.”

 The Unison general secretary, Dave Prentis, said: “Banning unions from using 
the check-off system to collect membership fees from employees in the public 
sector was among the mostmean-spirited of [the bill’s] proposals 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/aug/06/tories-labour-trade-union-funding-public-sector>
.

 “But thanks to a good deal of union campaigning behind the scenes, Unison and 
the TUC have built an effective coalition.”

The remaining bill will still mean unions require a 50% turnout threshold for 
industrial action ballots, a 40% threshold of eligible workers for any form of 
industrial action in “important” public services including education and border 
security, and new rules on picketing.

Len McCluskey <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/len-mccluskey>, the leader 
of Britain’s biggest union, Unite, said the remaining bill would continue to 
undermine workers’ rights. “We would urge the government not to stop here but 
to think again on the entire trade union bill for it will set back industrial 
relations in this country by decades.”

