
Vote Leave, Britain Stronger in Europe and the Treasury have all been accused 
of misleading voters in the EU referendum campaign in a report by a cross-party
House of Commons <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/houseofcommons> committee.

The Treasury committee was particularly scathing about the leave camp’s 
flagship assertion that exiting the EU would save £350m a week that could be 
spent on the NHS, saying that the public should discount the claim and that 
Vote Leave’s decision to persist with it was “deeply problematic”.
Brexit explained: campaign rules 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/05/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?sheet=intermediate&id=campaigning_rules>
The 83-page report, agreed unanimously by a committee that includes MPs on 
both sides of the referendum debate, will make awkward reading for all the 
major players.

Andrew Tyrie, the Conservative MP who chairs the committee, said: “The arms 
race of ever more lurid claims and counter-claims made by both the leave and 
remain sides is not just confusing the public – it is impoverishing political 
debate.”

The report says it is highly misleading for Vote Leave to suggest that leaving 
the EU could free up £350m a week for the NHS,as it does on the side of its 
battlebus 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/11/boris-johnson-launches-the-vote-leave-battlebus-in-cornwall>
, because that is a gross figure, making no allowance for the rebate and for EU 
contributions to the UK. The net figure would be about £110m a week, it says.

But even this does not take into account that Britain could end up having to 
make continued contributions to the EU to secure access to the single market if 
there was a leave vote, it says.

Related: ‘I don’t want to go back with nothing’: the Brexit threat to Spain’s 
little Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/27/brexit-threat-to-spains-secret-little-britain>

Speaking on BBC Radio 4’s The World at One, Tyrie, who has not yet said how he 
will be voting, said the £350m figure was not true. Asked what Vote Leave 
should do about its battlebus, he replied: “Repaint it immediately.”

The report says it is misleading for Vote Leave and Leave.EU to claim that 
£600m a week, or £33.3bn a year, could be saved by not having to comply with EU 
regulations, because it is not a net cost.

“To persist with such a claim is a tendentious representation of the research 
on which it is based,” says the report, which quotes £12.8bn a year as a more 
plausible figure for the maximum regulatory savings from a potential Brexit.

The report criticises Vote Leave’s chief executive, Matthew Elliott, and its 
campaign director, Dominic Cummings, for not being fully cooperative with the 
committee as it conducted its inquiry, saying their conduct was appalling and 
at odds with Vote Leave’s claim to respect the primacy of parliament.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F27%2Fdavid-cameron-urges-uk-to-listen-to-our-friends-over-eu-membership-video&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F27%2Fdavid-cameron-urges-uk-to-listen-to-our-friends-over-eu-membership-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Cameron%20urges%20UK%20to%20'listen%20to%20our%20friends'%20over%20EU%20membership%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F27%2Fdavid-cameron-urges-uk-to-listen-to-our-friends-over-eu-membership-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David+Cameron+urges+UK+to+%27listen+to+our+friends%27+over+EU+membership+%E2%80%93+video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F27%2Fdavid-cameron-urges-uk-to-listen-to-our-friends-over-eu-membership-video&media=>
David Cameron urges UK to ‘listen to our friends’ over EU membership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/may/27/david-cameron-urges-uk-to-listen-to-our-friends-over-eu-membership-video>
On the Treasury, the report says its decision to argue in a report that Brexit 
could cost households £4,300 a year by 2030 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/18/eu-referendum-reality-check-uk-households-worse-off-brexit>
, because of reduced economic growth, was misleading because the figure relates 
to the impact of lower GDP on households and is not a projected figure for 
lower disposable income.

“The average impact on household disposable incomes would be considerably 
smaller than this number, which refers to the impact on GDP per household,” the 
MPs say in their report.

“Neither government departments nor other spokespeople for the remain side 
should repeat the mistaken assertion that household disposable income would be 
£4,300 lower than if we were to remain in the EU ... To persist with this claim 
would be to misrepresent the Treasury’s own work.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jmxz%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jmxz%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59b013250b68e64b9bc981a622069278f2edd802%2F0_251_4194_2516%2F4194.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=MPs'%20report%20condemns%20'misleading'%20EU%20referendum%20campaigns&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jmxz%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=MPs%27+report+condemns+%27misleading%27+EU+referendum+campaigns&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4jmxz%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59b013250b68e64b9bc981a622069278f2edd802%2F0_251_4194_2516%2F4194.jpg>
 Matthew Elliott, Vote Leave’s chief executive. Photograph: Peter 
Nicholls/Reuters 
The report says that the Britain Stronger in Europe campaign’s claim that the 
cost of imports 
<http://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/apr/26/brexit-effect-on-trade-deals>
 could rise by at least £11bn in the event of Brexit is implausible and that 
its suggestion that 3m jobs are dependent on EU membership is “misleading.

The committee, which includes Steve Baker, the co-chair of Conservatives for 
Britain, andJacob Rees-Mogg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2015/dec/02/owen-jones-jacob-rees-mogg-no-easy-answers-syria>
, a prominent pro-Brexit Tory, accepts that leaving the EU could trigger 
short-term economic difficulties.

“Following a vote to leave 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/28/if-britain-voted-to-leave-the-eu-what-would-happen-next>
, there would be a period during which the UK’s future relationship with the EU 
is uncertain. As with much economic uncertainty, it is plausible to suppose 
that this could weaken the pound, reduce domestic and foreign direct 
investment, and increase borrowing costs,” the report says.

Related: Vote Leave launches £50m football prediction competition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/27/vote-leave-launches-50m-football-prediction-competition-euro-2016>

Looking further ahead, it says: “The balance of recent submissions seen by the 
committee is that Brexit is likely to have a net negative impact in the long 
term because the costs of a fall in trade exceed the gains in other areas, 
although the size of that impact varies considerably between different studies. 
Those who favour leaving the EU would argue that these studies are 
insufficiently optimistic or imaginative about how the UK would fare outside 
the EU. They could be right.”
