
That a city famous for its spas and its nightlife should decide to combine the 
two will come as no surprise to those who have visited Budapest. The Hungarian 
capital, comprised of the districts Buda and Pest, bisected by the river 
Danube, sits on a fault line. As a result, its numerous and architecturally 
varied thermal baths are fed by 120 hot springs, and are ideal destinations for 
both tourists and locals intent on relaxation. At the neo-Baroque Széchenyi 
baths, the city’s residents chat breezily, while octogenarians gather in groups 
around floating chessboards in an image as identifiably Budapest as the 
magnificent parliament building. But once the sky darkens and the spas close, 
the city’s hedonistic side comes to the forefront, with various basement bars, 
clubs, and – of course – Budapest’s famousruin bars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/mar/30/budapest-hungary-insiders-cultural-guide-hedonism-ruins>
 (kerts) all beckoning.

So it makes total sense that a Hungarian party producer should have the bright 
idea to combine the two and organise a massive rave in a spa. And that is why 
my boyfriend and I are here: to Sparty.
 Before and after … Széchenyi baths (slide the screen to see the 
transformation) 
Sparties <http://www.spartybooking.com/> combine well-known DJs playing 
electro, trip-hop, hip-hop, funk and trance with light, video and laser visual 
effects and unlimited alcohol. And thanks to founder Laszlo Laki, whose company 
Cinetrip began specialising in nightclub silent film projections shortly after 
the fall of communism, they have been running for almost 20 years. Nowadays, 
there’s a party almost every Saturday; in the summer at the aforementioned
Széchenyi baths <http://www.szechenyibath.hu/> (known as “Szecska” to 
Budapeštas,it’s Europe’s largest thermal baths, with temperatures ranging from 
27C to 38C), and at residents’ favouriteLukács <http://www.lukacsbath.com/> in 
the winter months. There are also two Cinetrip “mega parties” annually: one in 
August and one pre-New Year’s Eve.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k3na%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k3na%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a8c6f72148384b59b1b271bb884118aecbe5c7d%2F0_101_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Budapest%3A%20where%20a%20spa%20and%20cool%20sounds%20makes%20it%20'sparty'%20time&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k3na%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Budapest%3A+where+a+spa+and+cool+sounds+makes+it+%27sparty%27+time&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k3na%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a8c6f72148384b59b1b271bb884118aecbe5c7d%2F0_101_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Matrjoska restaurant

We arrive at the Hotel Palazzo Zichy in downtown Pest two nights ahead of the 
Sparty, and are pleased with its pretty location near Krúdy Gyula utca, where 
students from the nearby university sit drinking in the unseasonably warm sun 
(and in local bars that open their doors in evening).

The hotel is within walking distance of the Great Market Hall, the Hungarian 
National Museum and the Jewish quarter. There, on our first night, we have a 
delicious dinner atSpinoza <http://www.spinozacafe.hu/index_Eng.html>, 
accompanied by a cheerful pianist, with the matzo ball soup, goulash and 
strudel proving why the restaurant is something of an institution. The hotel is 
also opposite modern Russian restaurantMatrjoska 
<http://www.matrjoskabisztro.com/>, which serves excellent pelmeni (dumplings), 
as well as various vodka tasting options.

Over the next couple of days, we combine the sights with atmospheric 
meandering, and daytime stints in the thermal baths (most have women- or 
men-only days, though some are always mixed, so check online before visiting). 
The art nouveauGellért Bath <http://www.gellertbath.com/>, which has one of the 
most beautiful swimming pools I’ve ever seen, is my favourite. Our time there 
is so tranquil that it’s difficult to imagine a spa acting as a backdrop to 
hundreds of drunken partygoers. We’re not sure what to expect from the Sparty – 
would it be a crazy continental piss-up, or a “lads on tour” nightmare?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k3na%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k3na%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2c8a75273bdfa3a77ce59d07ae23b6d480d438c%2F0_125_4146_2488%2F4146.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Budapest%3A%20where%20a%20spa%20and%20cool%20sounds%20makes%20it%20'sparty'%20time&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k3na%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Budapest%3A+where+a+spa+and+cool+sounds+makes+it+%27sparty%27+time&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k3na%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2c8a75273bdfa3a77ce59d07ae23b6d480d438c%2F0_125_4146_2488%2F4146.jpg>
 ‘It’s difficult to imagine a spa acting as a backdrop to hundreds of drunken 
partygoers.’ Rhiannon’s favourite spa, the Gellért Baths. Photograph: David 
Levene for the Guardian 
After a couple of martinis at the hotel and some more sensible drinks at local 
barDarshan Udvar 
<http://www.worldsbestbars.com/bar/budapest/city-center/darshan-udvar>, we head 
for Lukács at around 11pm. I’ll admit I’m slightly concerned about claims 
online that the Sparty’s gender balance is in no way 50-50 (the phrase “sausage 
fest” is used), but I’m reassured by the fact that all-male stag parties are 
not admitted.

After queueing for a short time, we are allocated a shared, lockable cabin in 
which to get changed and, clutching our drinks tokens ( plastic cards that you 
can top up, to avoid using a wallet), we head to the bar.

As soon as we descend the stairs, we are surrounded by drunk semi-naked people 
drinking lethally strong mojitos. It’s freezing cold and raining a bit but 
we’re fine once we’re in the water – which is so hot it creates a cloud of 
rising steam above everyone’s heads. If it weren’t for the pumping music, the 
flashing lights and lasers, it would be a bit like having a beer in a hot bath, 
which is not unpleasant. The crowd itself is young – I spot one bemused couple 
in their 50s, but generally everyone is under 30. People come from all over 
Europe, and there are quite a few Brits, though not many locals (a Sparty is 
obviously a bit of a tick box on the Interrailing itinerary).

We have a good dance but, as the night wears on and the pool becomes even more 
packed, we decide we’ve had enough. My boyfriend says he senses the atmosphere 
change as people get more hammered. Certainly on TripAdvisor there are posts 
mentioning problems with groping, and condoms in the pool. We don’t witness any 
of that and the organisers take security very seriously, but as I’m accompanied 
by a 6ft 3in bloke who goes to the gym, as opposed to five of my 
twentysomething female friends, I’m not really one to comment.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k3na%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k3na%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8aa18f3d12835549af0106cdc254fbceaa5fbbc9%2F0_34_966_580%2F966.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Budapest%3A%20where%20a%20spa%20and%20cool%20sounds%20makes%20it%20'sparty'%20time&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k3na%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Budapest%3A+where+a+spa+and+cool+sounds+makes+it+%27sparty%27+time&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k3na%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8aa18f3d12835549af0106cdc254fbceaa5fbbc9%2F0_34_966_580%2F966.jpg>
 Repair to ruin … Rhiannon visited Instant after a splash of Lukács.

Having decamped to a ruin pub called Instant <http://instant.co.hu/en/> to 
dance out the remainder of the night, I reflect that, while I had fun, I 
probably wouldn’t go again, nor make it the central focus of a trip to 
Budapest. The fact that I enjoyed the Russian avant-garde painting exhibition 
at the Hungarian National Gallery more than the Sparty is probably a sign I’m 
getting old. But if you’re under 30, enjoy dance music, alcohol, and ogling 
other partially clothed under-30s, you’ll have a good time. A Sparty in 
Budapest is certainly something I’ll only experience once in a lifetime.


• Accommodation was provided by Hotel Palazzo Zichy (doubles from £70 B&B, 
hotel-palazzo-zichy.hu <http://hotel-palazzo-zichy.hu>). Flights were provided 
byWizz Air <https://wizzair.com/en-GB/FlightSearch>, which flies from several 
UK airports to Budapest from about £25. Sparty tickets cost €35 from
spartybooking.com <http://www.spartybooking.com/>
