
As the millennium development goals (MDGs) draw to a close, we’re taking stock 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/series/millennium-development-goals-the-final-countdown>
 of what progress has been achieved and what remains to be done. First up we 
looked at MDG1, which set out to halve 1990 poverty and hunger rates by the end 
of this year. You can read anexplainer  
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/feb/19/millennium-development-goal-one-poverty-hunger>
on the goal’s progress, see howsmall-scale farmers in Kenya 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/feb/19/feed-the-world-small-farmers-big-agriculture-mdgs>
 have become part of the solution, and read the view of UN special rapporteur 
on the right to food, Hilal Ever, onwhy hunger persists 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/feb/19/why-hungry-people-food-poverty-hunger-economics-mdgs>
. After you’ve read up on the first MDG, test your knowledge with ourquiz on 
the fight to end poverty and hunger 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/quiz/2015/feb/20/ending-poverty-hunger-millennium-development-goals-quiz>
.

You can also read more about the UK government’s decision to withdraw support 
for an Ethiopian scheme 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/feb/27/british-support-for-ethiopia-scheme-withdrawn-amid-abuse-allegations>
 amid abuse allegations. The Department for International Development will no 
longer back a $4.9bn project that critics claimed involved a brutal 
resettlement programme. Plus, six months after the ceasefire, find out how aid 
agencies are calling for the international community tokeep their promises on 
rebuilding Gaza 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/feb/26/aid-agencies-sound-alarm-on-gaza-amid-fears-rebuilding-could-take-a-century>
.

Elsewhere on the site

 * Namibia’s president wins $5m African leadership prize 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/02/namibias-president-wins-5m-african-leadership-prize>
 * Young Afghans strive for education and better lives after years of turmoil 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/02/afghanistan-education-university-places-kankur-exam>
 * The best books on Burma: start your reading here 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/feb/27/best-books-burma-world-library>
 * Vulnerable families bear the brunt of Norway’s crackdown on asylum seekers 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/feb/26/norway-crackdown-asylum-seekers-afganistan-immigration>
 * Failing global war on drugs disastrous for low-income farmers, claims study 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/feb/26/global-war-drugs-havoc-farmers-environment-womens-rights-health-poverty-action>
Opinion

Nobel peace laureate Leymah Gbowee 
<http://www.theguardian.com/profile/leymah-gbowee> argued there could be no end 
to South Sudan’s civil war 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/feb/23/south-sudan-women-peace-talks-leymah-gbowee>
 without women playing a greater role in peace talks.Jonathan Glennie 
<http://www.theguardian.com/profile/jonathan-glennie> took a closer look at 
climate finance 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/feb/24/climate-finance-the-focus-must-be-on-quality-not-quantity>
, claiming it’s not too late to reach a deal that would help poorer countries 
adapt to climate change. Meanwhile, the editors of Turkish women’s magazine 
5Harflierexplained the historical context 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/feb/24/turkish-outcry-at-of-young-woman-has-been-a-long-time-coming>
 behind current protests in the country against sexual violence.

Multimedia

Podcast: Two sides of the same bitcoin: are virtual currencies a plus for poor 
countries? – podcast 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/audio/2015/feb/27/kenya-africa-leading-world-bitcoin-podcast>

Interactive: Global land deals: where foreign companies are investing in the 
developing world 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/feb/19/global-land-deals-where-foreign-companies-are-investing-in-the-developing-world-interactive>

Gallery: How Bangladesh turns toilet waste into high-value compost – in 
pictures 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2015/feb/27/bangladesh-toilet-waste-high-value-compost-in-pictures>

Gallery: Nepal’s women of the Terai Arc become forest conservationists – in 
pictures 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2015/feb/25/nepals-women-of-the-terai-arc-become-forest-conservationists-in-pictures>

What you said: top reader comment


On the piece 15 achievements on poverty and hunger 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/feb/19/mdg1-millennium-development-goal-poverty-hunger-achievements#comments>
,Henforthe wrote:

Also apt in this discussion is the fight against infectious diseases. A plan 
was implemented in the early 2000s to eradicate malaria in Africa by this year. 
Unfortunately, this has failed – efforts against this and other diseases have 
been heroic but so far inadequate. Efforts to fight yellow fever seem to have 
stalled in the last few decades, and Aids still evades a cure. The pressure 
needs to be kept up.

Having said that, the overall picture is certainly positive. Life for most in 
the developing world has improved, thanks both to economic development and 
targeted efforts. In the grand scheme of things, this is pretty big news.

Highlight from the blogosphere

Triple Crisis: Why the humanitarian community needs to take regional 
organisations seriously 
<http://www.odi.org/comment/9287-regional-organisations-humanitarian-aid-response>

And finally …

Poverty matters will return in two weeks with another roundup of the latest 
news and comment. In the meantime, keep up to date on theGlobal development 
website <http://www.theguardian.com/global-development>. Follow @gdndevelopment 
<https://twitter.com/gdndevelopment> and the team – @swajones 
<https://twitter.com/swajones>,@LizFordGuardian 
<https://twitter.com/lizfordguardian>, @MarkC_Anderson 
<https://twitter.com/MarkC_Anderson> and @CarlaOkai 
<https://twitter.com/CarlaOkai> – on Twitter, and join Guardian Global 
development on Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardianglobaldevelopment>.
