
It began, as character-defining crushes so often do, on French exchange. I was 
13, immersed in Frenchness for the first time, and it was fabulous. First 
because each morning for breakfast we were given a bowl of hot chocolate and a 
stack of creamy, scallop-edged biscuits to dip into it. But also because of the 
stationery. I fell madly, deeply in love with the school exercise books, which 
were A5-sized, sewn-spined, the pages chequered with a faint quadrille. So 
elegant, so precise, so chic. WHSmith’s spiral-bound lined notebooks were dead 
to me from that day onward, and a lifelong love affair was born.

Stationery is more emotional than fashion, notebooks and diaries more intimate 
than your knicker drawer. I can measure out my life in paper, from those flimsy 
notebooks to the ludicrously expensive Smythson ones I use now. My teenage 
diaries are even now redolent with the pointless intensity of childhood 
secrets. The Filofax and Mont Blanc fountain pen I had as a sixth former are 
unthrowable still, despite or perhaps because of the painfully earnest 
copied-out quotes and in-jokes scrawled in the margins. I have a treasured 
folder filled with notepaper from every swanky hotel I have ever stayed in: the
Savoy <https://www.roccofortehotels.com/hotels-and-resorts/hotel-savoy/> in 
Florence, with its tiny terracotta duomo motif;Claridge’s 
<http://www.claridges.co.uk/>, where we stayed on my husband’s 40th. And I have 
the giveaway organisational safety harnesses of every overwrought modern 
professional. (Current obsession: theLeuchtturm 1917 pencil loops 
<https://www.leuchtturm1917.com/notebooks-diaries/accessories/pen-loops/>, 
fixed in the back of every notebook and diary to save precious seconds on 
endlessly updating my to-do lists.)

This is how I know I’m in the right industry, because a stationery fetish 
seems a prerequisite for working in fashion. Years ago, whenTom Ford 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/tom-ford> was helming Gucci 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gucci>, I witnessed a mini crisis at the 
London office. A new hire had arrived, and placed a box of yellow pencils on 
his desk; Ford, who had an all-black rule on pens and pencils, had to be asked 
for consent. (Reader, he gave it.) The late Yves Saint Laurent worked at the 
desk at which his great-grandfather, a lawyer, had drawn up Napoleon and 
Josephine’s wedding contract. On it lived two vintage lamps, a vase of flowers 
and a pot of blue HB pencils; nothing else was allowed. Last year, when I 
interviewedDiane von Furstenberg 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2014/jul/01/diane-von-furstenburg-stuido-54-google-wrap-dress-oprah-warhol-anna-wintour>
, she seemed mildly pleased I was wearing a vintage DVF blouse (oh yes, I do 
that, flattery gets you everywhere) but it was when I whipped out my diary, an 
exact match for hers, in grain and sunshine yellow and arrow-snipped silk 
ribbon, that she gave me a warm smile of fellowship.
 Illustration: Kate Copeland 
Ten years ago, fashion’s fetish for stationery was perhaps only to be expected 
from an industry founded on turning retail into ritual. What is extraordinary 
is how the fetish has survived the rise of technology that should have rendered 
it obsolete. Why sketch, when you can video the finale from your seat? Why 
bother with a diary, when you can iCal?

Because we’re Luddites? No. Fashion industry people are as tediously obsessed 
with their phones as the rest of the world. Yet the lust for beautiful 
stationery lives on.

Well, you know what? Practicality isn’t everything. (I give you: high heels.) 
If someone throws a great party, it’s quick and easy to say thanks by email, 
but only a soulless shell of a human being would imagine that it was the same 
as a handwritten card. Thank you notes (always on headed correspondence cards, 
surname struck through with a flourish) are still alive and well in the fashion 
industry. This is in part because its silverbacks – your Toms, your 
Christophers, your Stellas – still do it, and the rank and file follow suit. 
Which suits me down to the ground, because I was brought up to believe thank 
yous are next to godliness.

Not that it is entirely high-minded. Snobbery definitely comes into it: 
Smythson’s appeal is closely linked with its status as the calling card of the 
Right Sort of Person. On the other hand, many cult items –Sharpie pens 
<http://www.sharpie.co.uk/>, Field Notes notebooks <http://fieldnotesbrand.com/>
 – have a potent democratic appeal. Like Levi’s or Converse, the connoisseur 
recognises them simply as best in their class.

A new wave of stationery boutiques has emerged in the most fashion-forward 
cities. In Paris, the 2013 opening ofLouis Vuitton’s Cabinet d’Ecriture 
<http://www.gq-magazine.co.uk/style/articles/2013-12/17/louis-vuitton-cabinet-decriture-writing-store>
 was followed this spring by a stationery pop-up at destination boutiqueMerci 
<http://www.merci-merci.com/en/>. In London, no fashion editor’s stroll down 
Mount Street <http://www.mountstreetmayfair.co.uk/> is complete without a 
detour into theMount Street Printers <http://www.mountstreetprinters.com/#1> 
for initial-embossed notecards in tissue-lined envelopes.

A few years ago, visitors to New York fashion week headed straight to the 
Apple store; this September, there will be a pilgrimage toCW Pencil Enterprise 
<http://cwpencils.com/>. The CW is 24-year-old Caroline Weaver, who has a 
tattoo of a pencil running the length of her forearm and whose specialist 
boutique sells Swiss beechwood pencils and Portuguese ones scented with lily of 
the valley, displayed on glossy shelves. It looks more like an exclusive beauty 
salon than a WHSmith. Indeed these pencils are, as one wag noted, “begging to 
be Instagrammed”.
