
For most theatre-goers, the noise and spectacle of a big West End show can be 
thrilling. For many autistic people, however, to whom every sight and sound can 
seem magnified, it can be overwhelming to an unbearable degree.

In order to make sure everyone can benefit from the joys of live theatre, 
enlightened producers are making changes to their productions on special 
autism-friendly nights. “We know how important and inspiring a live theatre 
experience can be and we want to share that as widely as we can,” says Michael 
McCabe, producer of the award-winning West End musical, Wicked, who is 
preparing the London show’s first dedicated autism-friendly performance on 14 
May.

Related: Experience the world through an autistic boy’s eyes – video 
<http://www.theguardian.com/tmi/2016/apr/01/experience-the-world-through-an-autistic-boys-eyes-video>

Taking advice from the National Autistic Society as well as cues from a 
successful experiment by the Broadway production of Wicked, the volume and 
lighting of some parts of the show will be lowered, and loud or sudden sound 
effects and strobe lights removed. “There are no shocks or surprises,” explains 
McCabe. “Everything is adjusted just enough to make it a comfortable experience 
for anyone with sensory difficulties.”

 Online ‘visual stories’ will allow theatregoers to familiarise themselves 
with what to expect before the show, while chill-out and activity areas – with 
trained staff – will offer support should they need to leave the auditorium on 
the day. “We just want people to relax and enjoy the experience, knowing that 
no one among the staff or the audience is judging them.”

According to mother Lizi Jackson, who has taken her autistic son to several 
autism-friendly performances in the past, this last aspect is almost the most 
important. “The relief of being surrounded by people who understand is 
indescribable,” she says. “I spend so much of my life explaining my son’s 
behaviour to strangers. At these special performances we can just relax: for a 
few hours he is free to react in public however he needs to, and I can let go 
of the anxiety that I will be misjudged as an inept mother unable to control 
her unruly son.”

McCabe says that there has been a growing realisation in the theatre world 
that productions have a duty of care to provide the right environment for 
everyone. And more than that, this seems like something of which Elpheba, the 
misunderstood, green-skinned, misfit heroine of Wicked, would approve.

“Our story is about friendship and doing right,” says McCabe, “so doing this 
feels particularly rewarding.”

The autism-friendly performance of Wicked is on Saturday 14 May. For details 
seehttp://www.wickedthemusical.co.uk/AutismFriendly/ 
<http://www.wickedthemusical.co.uk/AutismFriendly/>

Discover how you can help: meet 10-year-old Alex 
<http://www.theguardian.com/tmi/2016/apr/01/autism-and-the-overload-effect>, 
star of the National Autistic Society’sToo Much Information film 
<http://www.theguardian.com/tmi/2016/apr/01/experience-the-world-through-an-autistic-boys-eyes-video>

To find out more about autism, the person, and what to do visit 
autism.org.uk/tmi <http://www.autism.org.uk/tmi>
