
Moving from a stately home, surrounded by servants, to a van, surrounded by 
filth, may seem like an extreme fall from grace. But for Dame Maggie Smith, 
playing the lady in the van had one big advantage over playing the Dowager 
Countess of Downton Abbey: she didn’t have to wear a corset.

“I feel closer to the lady in the van than the lady with the hat on,” Smith 
says. “It was easier playing Miss Shepherd because she didn’t mind how she 
looked, and it was such a relief. For comfort alone, it was nicer.”

Not that the accommodation was all that comfortable.

“Shooting in the van was hideous,” Smith says, “but that really made me think 
what she lived through. Just a day shooting in the van was a long time. When 
you think how long Miss Shepherd was in there, it was mind-blowing.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y2em%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y2em%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feca77b303f4af7698935aeb824827e677f88a27f%2F0_23_1300_780%2F1300.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Maggie%20Smith%20rises%20to%20the%20fall&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y2em%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Maggie+Smith+rises+to+the+fall&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y2em%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feca77b303f4af7698935aeb824827e677f88a27f%2F0_23_1300_780%2F1300.jpg>
 Maggie Smith as ‘The Lady in the Van’. Photograph: Nicola Dove/NDOVE 
The real Miss Shepherd, an irascible, eccentric homeless woman, lived in a van 
in playwright Alan Bennett’s north London driveway for 15 years before her 
death in 1989. When Bennett wrote a play about the experience, The Lady in the 
Van, 10 years later, he did so with Smith in mind.

Smith played Miss Shepherd so successfully on stage that when a movie version 
was mooted, there was only one candidate for the role, says producer Kevin 
Loader.

“A film made complete sense, providing you could get Maggie, ” Loader says.

Remarkable performance

Fortunately for the filmmakers, Smith was keen to get back on board, and in 
2014-15 reprised the role of Miss Shepherd for the movie The Lady in the Van, 
filmed in and around Bennett’s same old house inCamden Town 
<http://www.theguardian.com/universal-sony-pictures-home-entertainment-the-lady-in-the-van/2016/jun/01/shooting-the-lady-in-the-van>
.

For Loader, the fact that one of Britain’s most esteemed actresses - an 
octogenarian at that - was willing to take the role was almost as admirable as 
her performance.

“It’s quite a brave thing for an actress who could now be retreating into the 
role of national treasure, to come out and play this rather grumpy woman,” 
Loader says.

“Maggie is brilliant at riding the line between being Miss Shepherd in all her 
unapologetic grumpiness and breaking our hearts when she peels back a layer or 
two.”

Director Nicholas Hytner was also blown away by Smith’s performance.

“What she does with The Lady In The Van, scene by scene, over the architecture 
of the movie, the way she slowly reveals the sense of waste and the sense of 
regret, it’s something else,” he says. “It’s something completely remarkable.”

Role model

Smith has pursued a career of consistent excellence since making her stage 
debut as Viola in Twelfth Night at the Oxford Playhouse in 1952.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y2em%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y2em%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F994b877c1ad041d72b5727f7511b1232490914e4%2F212_0_693_866%2F693.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Maggie%20Smith%20rises%20to%20the%20fall&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y2em%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Maggie+Smith+rises+to+the+fall&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y2em%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F994b877c1ad041d72b5727f7511b1232490914e4%2F212_0_693_866%2F693.jpg>
 Maggie Smith as ‘The Lady in the Van’. Photograph: Nicola Dove/NDOVE 
Theatrical highlights have included playing Desdemona opposite Laurence 
Olivier at the Royal National Theatre in the 1960s, while cinema roles have 
included the lead in The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie in 1969 (for which Smith won 
one of her two Academy Awards), and more recent incarnations such as Professor 
McGonagall in the Harry Potter series.

As well as multiple acting awards, including Oscars, BAFTAs and Golden Globes, 
Smith has received a number of honours including Dame Commander of the British 
Empire and Companion of Honour for achievements in the arts.

Though their lives couldn’t be much different, she finds something admirable 
about the character of Miss Shepherd.

“She was always fighting her corner,” Smith says. “She isn’t subtle; I think 
that’s her basic problem… Loud and ghastly though she was, there’s a terrible 
tragedy there.”

As well as tragedy, there is humour in Smith’s Miss Shepherd.

“Maggie has got a sense of humour, whereas Miss Shepherd didn’t at all,” 
Bennett says. And for Hytner, the way Smith subtly employs that humour is 
masterly.

“Maggie has a ferocious wit but Alan is looking for an actor who can suggest 
how funny they are without acting funny,” Hytner says. “That’s one of the 
things Maggie does better than anyone else on the planet.”

From stage to screen
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y2em%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y2em%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faec6295bb8b4d68c78eb25ae72467cc654627513%2F0_43_1300_780%2F1300.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Maggie%20Smith%20rises%20to%20the%20fall&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y2em%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Maggie+Smith+rises+to+the+fall&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4y2em%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faec6295bb8b4d68c78eb25ae72467cc654627513%2F0_43_1300_780%2F1300.jpg>
 Maggie Smith as ‘The Lady in the Van’. Photograph: Nicola Dove/NDOVE 
Compared with the play, The Lady in the Van film was “much more concentrated, 
a whole different thing”, Smith says. Transferring a character as big and 
eccentric as Miss Shepherd from one format to another was a challenge.

“That was what was odd, going from stage to screen,” Smith says. “It was very 
hard to gauge, because she was so forceful.

“You can’t take it back, which is what you always feel you do on film, reduce 
things, but there was no way of reducing that woman.”

For Bennett, one thing is clear: he had the right actress in mind when he 
first wrote the part 
<http://www.theguardian.com/universal-sony-pictures-home-entertainment-the-lady-in-the-van/2016/jun/01/the-real-lady-in-the-van>
. “I couldn’t imagine anyone doing Miss Shepherd better,” he says.

The Lady In The Van is out now on Blu-ray, DVD and Digital. Find out more 
<https://theviewingloungestore.com.au/title/the-lady-in-the-van/>.
