
A rumble of thunder is always a cue to unplug computers in our district. 
Everyone remembers when the local power lines got struck by lightning a decade 
ago and wiped out the innards of most computers, even some that were switched 
off but still plugged into the mains. New computers are supposed to be fitted 
with anti-surge devices but anyone ever seriously inconvenienced by a lightning 
strike is unlikely to take the risk again.

Last week’s daily thundery showers meant being unplugged a great deal of the 
time, which is not a problem with modern computer batteries, but which led to 
discussions about how often the UK gets this number of thunderstorms. It turns 
out that by the weekend most of the country had already exceeded the average 
for a whole year.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flightning-storms-from-space-timelapse-video&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flightning-storms-from-space-timelapse-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F9%2F1455020143855%2FKP_1786940_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lightning%20storms%20from%20space%20-%20timelapse%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flightning-storms-from-space-timelapse-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lightning+storms+from+space+-+timelapse+video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flightning-storms-from-space-timelapse-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F9%2F1455020143855%2FKP_1786940_crop_640x480.jpg>
Lightning storms from space - timelapse video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/video/2016/feb/09/lightning-storms-from-space-timelapse-video>
According to the Tornado and Storm Research Association 
<http://www.torro.org.uk/lightning_info.php#5> the south and east of England 
get more thunder than the north and west. London is in the 15-to-19-days-a-year 
belt, while Cornwall, Wales and Scotland have five to nine days a year when 
thunder is heard. Most of these storm days occur in summer – June, July and 
August.

The worst year on record for storms was 2006 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2006/aug/19/weather.world>, when our local 
computers were wiped out, and nearly 400 lightning strikes were reported 
nationally that damaged people, animals and property, or blacked out 
electricity supplies. In 2010 there were less than 50 such strikes, so annual 
variations are enormous.

Scientists say that as the climate heats up there is more water and energy in 
the atmosphere, but so far there is no discernible trend in thunderstorm 
numbers over the last 25 years.
