
The period party

Lammily, also dubbed the “anti-Barbie”, is the doll that was created by 
Nickolay Lamm and crowd funded into existence last year to promote the message 
that “average is beautiful”. Unlike Barbie, Lammily is modelled on the average 
measurements of a 19-year-old woman. Launched with her own “Lammily Marks 
<http://lammily.com/product/lammily-marks/>” – a set of freckles, acne, 
bruises, stretch marks and cellulite stickers – Lammily isdesigned to promote 
how women really look.

And now she has her period. Billed as “the fun way to explain the menstrual 
cycle to kids”, thePeriod Party pack <http://lammily.com/product/period-party/> 
contains a pair of doll-sized pants, 18 reusable sanitary pad stickers, a 
calendar, stickers to track Lammily’s period and a guide on what happens during 
the menstrual cycle.

Speaking to TIME <http://time.com/4042833/normal-barbie-period/?xid=homepage>, 
Lamm explained: “It’s just what happens in real life. We wanted to put it on 
the doll so it’s not a scary thing.” The idea took hold after Donald Trump 
recently described a journalist as having“blood coming out of [her] eyes, blood 
coming out of her wherever” 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/aug/10/menstruation-revolution-donald-trump-periods-stigma>
. Lamm said:

“I don’t want to make this a whole political project or anything, but I think 
when [Trump] said that, it was just an example of the overall culture where 
menstruation is very taboo, and not only taboo, but some people use it as an 
insult.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cynh%2Fsfb%23img-1&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cynh%2Fsfb%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F25%2F1443195916973%2F5e50e217-f121-4be6-80ac-00c8a1bf49bb-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Get%20real%3A%20Lammily%20-%20the%20doll%20with%20acne%20and%20cellulite%20-%20now%20gets%20her%20period%2C%20too&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cynh%2Fstw%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Get+real%3A+Lammily+-+the+doll+with+acne+and+cellulite+-+now+gets+her+period%2C+too&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cynh%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F25%2F1443195916973%2F5e50e217-f121-4be6-80ac-00c8a1bf49bb-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Reason to celebrate? They might have their degrees, but female graduates still 
earn significantly less than their male counterparts. Photograph: Alamy 
Qualifications matter, to a degree 

As freshers’ week up and down the country draws to a close today, it’s worth 
reminding students that the hangover will (eventually) be worth it, as anew 
study 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/sep/24/women-with-degrees-earn-three-times-as-much-as-those-without>
 confirms that those with degrees will earn more than those without. And for 
women, in particular, degrees appear to be especially valuable, with female 
graduates earning on average three times as much as their non-graduate 
counterparts. Male graduates, on the other hand, only earn twice as much as non 
graduates. The study, carried out by the Institute of Fiscal Studies, shows 
that while 10% of male graduates are earning more than £55,000 10 years after 
graduating, the same number of women are taking home £43,000. The contrast is 
even starker in the top 1% of graduates, with men earning £148,000 and women 
£89,000.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cynh%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cynh%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F25%2F1443196624365%2F9f885463-bf80-4e8b-8dc7-016737cf5bfe-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Get%20real%3A%20Lammily%20-%20the%20doll%20with%20acne%20and%20cellulite%20-%20now%20gets%20her%20period%2C%20too&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cynh%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Get+real%3A+Lammily+-+the+doll+with+acne+and+cellulite+-+now+gets+her+period%2C+too&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4cynh%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F25%2F1443196624365%2F9f885463-bf80-4e8b-8dc7-016737cf5bfe-2060x1236.jpeg>
 In France, 85% of judges are women, so why not in the UK? Photograph: Paul 
Bradbury/Getty Images/Caiaimage 
Judged equally 

Gender equality in the UK’s judiciary system is not something that should be 
rushed, according to one supreme court judge, warning that increasing the 
number of female judges too quickly might make men who want a place on the 
Bench feel the “cards are stacked against them”.

Lord Jonathan Sumption argued that 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/uk/rush-for-gender-equality-with-top-judges-could-have-appalling-consequences-for-justice-a2952331.html>
 “Eighty-five per cent of newly appointed judges in France are women because 
the men stay away. Eighty-five per cent women is just as bad as 85% men.” 
Sumption believes an equal mix of men and women judges will be reached – but in 
50 years, not 20.

Related: Judge's comments on gender equality 'show problems women face in law' 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/sep/24/judge-lord-sumption-comment-gender-equality-problems-women-face-law>

Sumption goes on to say that it is “lifestyle choices” that tend to deter 
women from the Bar, and that “it is incredibly demanding in the hours of work 
and the working conditions are frankly appalling. There are more women than men 
who are not prepared to put up with that.”

Unsurprisingly, Sumption’s remarks have raised a few eyebrows. Charlotte 
Proudman wrote inthis paper  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/24/sumption-law-sexism-quotas-male-privilege-women-judiciary>
that, “His comments encapsulate his deepest fears that power vested in the old 
boys’ network could come under siege.”

#MasculinitySoFragile

In this week’s Twitter trending news, a sociology student has caused a 
gender-based storm around his hashtag#MasculinitySoFragile 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23MasculinitySoFragile&src=tyah>. Anthony 
Williams started the hashtag in a bid to get people to talk about the violence 
and harassment women suffer at the hands of men owing to their sense of 
masculinity.

Talking to the LA Times 
<http://www.latimes.com/fashion/alltherage/la-ar-masculinity-fragile-20150923-htmlstory.html>
, Williams said:

 “When you challenge masculinity, it hits a nerve. It makes some men nervous. 
But violence against women is a result of the fragility of masculinity. A woman 
can say ‘no’ to a man on a date, and she could end up dead. That’s what women 
have to deal with. And we, as men, have to recognise that.”

But, sometimes, hashtags go wrong (We only need to remind ourselves of the 
Susan Boyle album launch partyTwitter fiasco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/shortcuts/2012/nov/22/twitter-susan-boyle-susanalbumparty>
 to be sure of that). While some used the hashtag as Williams intended, others 
accused “feminazis” of an unnecessary attack on masculine males. But, as the
Huffington Post 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/masculinity-so-fragile-hashtag_5602d4cae4b0fde8b0d0bdee>
 points out, the backlash is exactly why the movement is so necessary.

Dalai Lama’s ‘sexist’ quip ruffles equality activists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/24/dalai-lama-sexist-quip-ruffles-equality-activists>

Why women need to shout about sexual pleasure 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/womens-blog/2015/sep/24/women-sexual-pleasure-porn-sex>

NHS reports 1,026 new cases of female genital mutilation in three months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/23/nhs-new-cases-female-genital-mutilation-fgm-three-months>

British women have second worst life expectancy in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/23/british-women-second-worst-life-expectancy-in-europe>

• This article was amended on 13 October 2015 to correct Anthony Williams’s 
name, from Ashley as an earlier version said.
