
Monday morning came with clear signs the pace of referendum campaigning had 
stepped up again after decisions on both sides to ease up afterthe death of Jo 
Cox on Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/19/jo-cox-memorial-service-birstall-labour-mp>
.


Related: 'Our votes will cancel each other out': the families falling out over 
Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/20/our-votes-will-cancel-each-other-out-families-falling-out-over-brexit>

We learned that Sayeeda Warsi was no longer supporting the leave campaign 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/20/sayeeda-warsi-quits-leave-campaign-over-hateful-xenophobic-tactics>
, and heard reaction toDavid Cameron’s solo appearance on Question Time on 
Sunday evening 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/19/david-cameron-case-remain-eu-referendum-bbc-question-time-special>
 before MPs paying tribute to Cox during a special session at Westminster. 
Here, we look at your reactions to those and other key stories today, including 
memories of Cox as well as controversialallegations of campaigners trying to 
exploit her death 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/20/eu-referendum-live-warsi-leave-parliament-recalled-jo-cox?page=with:block-5767adb0e4b01f3be8716be2#block-5767adb0e4b01f3be8716be2>
.


Click on the links at the end of each section to get involved, or head over to 
ourEU referendum live blog 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/20/eu-referendum-live-warsi-leave-parliament-recalled-jo-cox>
 to follow the news and discussion as it happens. Guardian readers have also 
contributed tothis article, looking at the divisions in their families 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/20/our-votes-will-cancel-each-other-out-families-falling-out-over-brexit>
 the referendum has highlighted.


1. Sayeeda Warsi quits leave campaign over ‘hateful, xenophobic’ tactics 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/20/eu-referendum-live-warsi-leave-parliament-recalled-jo-cox>

Related: EU referendum morning briefing - sign up here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/31/eu-referendum-morning-briefing-sign-up>

Warsi, the former chair of the Conservative party, said she would no longer 
support the campaign to leave theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> just days before the referendum, 
accusing it of “hate and xenophobia”. She citedNigel Farage’s anti-immigration 
poster 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/16/nigel-farage-defends-ukip-breaking-point-poster-queue-of-migrants>
 and“lies about Turkey’s accession to the EU” 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/20/sayeeda-warsi-quits-leave-campaign-over-hateful-xenophobic-tactics>
 as a turning point for her and other moderate Eurosceptics. She said leave’s 
tacticswould create a more divided and xenophobic UK 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/20/sayeeda-warsi-leave-tactics-will-create-more-divided-and-xenophobic-uk>
.

There was some discussion over whether she had indeed been as strong a 
campaigner for a leave vote as was being made out, but your conversation 
reflected her decision’s significance with just days remaining. But many 
readers echo Warsi’s concerns.

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4213706> ID9373111  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4213706> 20 June 2016 7:19am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/76706019> 
I have for years advocated leaving the E.U. due to it's undemocratic ways and 
free market ideology but the leave campaign has descended into outright lies 
and xenophobia though so it is pushing me towards remain.

In response to analysis above the line in our fast-moving live blog 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/20/eu-referendum-live-warsi-leave-parliament-recalled-jo-cox?page=with:block-5767a9a8e4b01f3be8716bcf#block-5767a9a8e4b01f3be8716bcf>
, some highlighted how the Times had seeminglyrowed back on its Warsi scoop 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/20/eu-referendum-live-warsi-leave-parliament-recalled-jo-cox?page=with:block-5767a9a8e4b01f3be8716bcf#block-5767a9a8e4b01f3be8716bcf>
 between editions – changing language to better reflect her new position.

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16131629> riptide93  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16131629> 20 June 2016 7:21am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/76706110> 
Hold on. It's taken until three days before the referendum for a member of 
parliament to work out where they stand on Britain being in the EU? How does 
this tally with the received wisdom of recent days that MPs are the very best 
of us?
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2802758> nancynoonoo  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2802758> 20 June 2016 7:19am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/76706038> 
Not trusting this at all. Still voting to leave. Warsi jumping ship is very, 
very suspicious.

But for many of you this was the wrong focus.

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14180779> tastethehappy  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14180779> 20 June 2016 8:55am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/76712141> 
Interesting that the response to Warsi's defection is 'she wasn't ever a 
member', rather than 'she's wrong to say we're xenophobic and racist'. Have 
they just given up on that? Or are they tacitly accepting it? Especially now 
it's clear she was a Brexit supporter. Means they literally don't have any 
response to her comments.
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/938956> milinovak  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/938956> 20 June 2016 8:55am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/76712113> 
She also objected to Gove's constant lies about Turkey's supposed imminent 
joining of the EU, and during the Mayoral election she complained bitterly 
about the Goldsmith campaign against Sadiq Khan. There is also evidence ATL 
that she shared a Brexit platform early on with Daniel Hannan who is claiming 
he didn't know she was on his side. I think as a prominent Muslim politician, 
she must be extremely concerned by direction of both leave campaigns, and must 
be particularly concerned that those Tory politicians leading vote.leave will 
undoubtedly be in a position to determine the kind of society that will will 
have if leave wins. This is something that I suspect must be increasingly 
concerning remain voters, and those who are still making their minds up.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m4gk%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m4gk%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d6e00511a37cbe0f3c5153891f0129be79d5749%2F0_84_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We%20should%20all%20be%20ashamed'%3A%20readers%20on%20the%20EU%20referendum&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m4gk%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We+should+all+be+ashamed%27%3A+readers+on+the+EU+referendum&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m4gk%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d6e00511a37cbe0f3c5153891f0129be79d5749%2F0_84_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Sayeeda Warsi delivers a speech during the Conservative conference in 2010: 
note the slogan used at the time. Photograph: Ben Stansall/AFP/Getty Images 
We often see discussions that focus on fact checking, and those around 
Farage’s poster 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jun/19/michael-gove-shuddered-nigel-farage-anti-migrant-poster-video>
 were no exception.
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16299598> AjdaXX  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16299598> 20 June 2016 8:15am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/76709156> 
she said: How is that poster even defensible? … It is perpetuating lies about 
who those people are.

I am from Slovenia and unlike Farage, I worked for several months with the 
refugees shown on the evil poster.

As far as I could find out, the photo on the UKIP poster comes from Rigonce 
(in Slovenia) and was shot on 25 October 2015.

Some people pointed out that there are only men on the poster, implying that a 
vast majority of the refugees are single men. Well,single men walk faster than 
women and children, hence they were always in front of the line. People with 
children also tend to prefer to be in less exposed places for safety reasons.
-
This is the PHOTO used by UKIP 
<https://d.ibtimes.co.uk/en/full/1477231/2015-migrants.jpg?w=1180>.
-
Here are some more photos shot in Rigonce at the same time as Farage's poster:

THIS PHOTO <http://www.planet.si/imgs/f/1150x1150/2015/43/031750jzp64.JPG> 
shows how families with children walk at the back of the line. Note the front 
of the line in the distance, led by police on horses.

THIS PHOTO 
<http://cdn.kme.si/public/images-cache/750xX/2015/10/22/6818b3781317385050cf76f510860bbd/562e3b2c7faaf/6818b3781317385050cf76f510860bbd.jpeg>
 shows quite many children also in the middle of the line.

THIS PHOTO 
<http://www.delo.si/assets/media/picture/20151024/Delo_Foto-20151024154546-61408900.jpeg?rev=2>
 is a close-up of some walking refugees. Not quite as scary as Farage's poster, 
is it.
-
Evil dangerous divisive extremist demagoguery coming from Farage.

After Hungary closed its borders to the refugees, Slovenia was the first 
country on the Balkan route which systematically registered all refugees 
crossing its borders.

There were more than 400,000 refugees, of which

45% Syrians
30% Afghans
17% Iraqis

49% men
51% women and children (under 18)
-

Source: official figures of the government of Slovenia 
<http://www.vlada.si/fileadmin/dokumenti/si/projekti/2015/begunci/160202_migranti_ang.pdf>
-

I should also add that being in front of the line made no difference. Slovenia 
adopted a policy to first allow families with children and vulnerable people 
across the border so that we could first take care of them, while single men 
were left to wait.

Join the debate here 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/20/eu-referendum-live-warsi-leave-parliament-recalled-jo-cox#comments>
.


2. Farage accuses Cameron of trying to exploit Jo Cox’s death to help remain 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/20/eu-referendum-live-warsi-leave-parliament-recalled-jo-cox?page=with:block-5767adb0e4b01f3be8716be2#block-5767adb0e4b01f3be8716be2>

Before tributes were paid to Jo Cox in parliament on Monday afternoon, Nigel 
Farage <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage> decided to defend his 
anti-immigration poster in the context of her death.

From Andrew Sparrow’s live blog on Monday morning: 


On LBC Nigel Farage has just claimed that when he launched his “Breaking 
Point” poster on Thursday there was “no controversy at all”. He suggested it 
only became controversial after the killing of Jo Cox.

He is wrong. Before Cox was killed Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, 
said the poster was “disgusting”. 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/16/eu-referendum-live-osborne-brexit-budget-leave-tories?page=with:block-57628625e4b04ceead989053#block-57628625e4b04ceead989053>
 It was also condemned before the attack on Coxby the Green party 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/16/eu-referendum-live-osborne-brexit-budget-leave-tories?page=with:block-57629e87e4b096841ef39e72#block-57629e87e4b096841ef39e72>
 andby Britain Stronger in Europe.  
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/16/eu-referendum-live-osborne-brexit-budget-leave-tories?page=with:block-57629fb3e4b02d7fb43eb2f4#block-57629fb3e4b02d7fb43eb2f4>

 Further quoting Farage 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/20/eu-referendum-live-warsi-leave-parliament-recalled-jo-cox?page=with:block-5767adb0e4b01f3be8716be2#block-5767adb0e4b01f3be8716be2>
 here, one reader wasn’t impressed at all:

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/11062443> muttley79  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/11062443> 20 June 2016 12:35pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/76731270> 
Farage accused David Cameron of trying to exploit the death of Jo Cox to help 
Remain. He said:

What we are seeing here is the prime minister and the Remain campaign trying 
to conflate the actions of one crazed individual with the motives of half of 
Britain who think we should get back control of our borders and do it sensibly. 
And I think that’s quite wrong the way it’s been done ...

I think there are Remain camp supporters out there who are using this tragic 
death to try to give the impression that this isolated, horrific incident is 
somehow linked to arguments that have been made by myself, or Michael Gove or 
anybody else in this campaign. And frankly that is wrong.

Good to see that the promise to improve the tone of the referendum has lasted 
more than a few days...
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m4gk%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m4gk%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7bd4b53cc64da155fdaf5a3041ebd70fae4e12dd%2F0_176_4480_2688%2F4480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We%20should%20all%20be%20ashamed'%3A%20readers%20on%20the%20EU%20referendum&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m4gk%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We+should+all+be+ashamed%27%3A+readers+on+the+EU+referendum&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m4gk%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7bd4b53cc64da155fdaf5a3041ebd70fae4e12dd%2F0_176_4480_2688%2F4480.jpg>
 Nigel Farage at the launch of Ukip’s EU referendum poster campaign on 16 June. 
Photograph: Rex/Shutterstock  <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13609872>
nick10  <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13609872> 20 June 2016 12:36pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/76731386> 
What people like Farage and others fail to appreciate is the fact there are 
some individuals who harbour hatred and loathing towards others. The tone of 
the debate, which is the responsibility of the politicians, is so important. 
For if the debate centres around intolerance and plays into the narrative where 
certain individuals have a mindset of hatred then you have a big problem. Take 
Farage and his poster which deliberately plays into nationalistic sentiment and 
brings about overtones that are very hostile, you don't have to be a genius to 
understand where such sentiments lead. So politicians cannot get away from the 
fact that they create the sentiment which overshadows how some will act towards 
each other and how politics is conduct.
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13998394> borderben  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13998394> 20 June 2016 1:07pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/76734845> 
It is not long ago that farage's poster would have resulted in a charge of 
racism. How the country has changed. We should be ashamed. Do we seriously want 
the leave people running the country?
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12982734> psingh1  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12982734> 20 June 2016 12:42pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/76732036> 
Politicians are indeed exploiting Jo Cox's tragic death: to revise public 
opinion on politicians.

The referendum is a false choice; it only serves to benefit politicians 
through divide and rule, a red herring to distract from real issues etc. Issues 
exist, but they are not going to be solved by this referendum. Politicians 
meanwhile are laughing all the way to grabbing/holding on to power and all the 
way to the bank.

Join the debate here 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/20/eu-referendum-live-warsi-leave-parliament-recalled-jo-cox?page=with:block-5767ab9ae4b0b4b233941b9f#comments>
.


3. European neighbours want Britain to remain – but only just 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/20/european-neighbours-want-britain-to-remain-but-only-just>

A survey of almost 11,000 Europeans found support for continued British 
membership at 54%, according to the Bertelsmann Foundation, and you have been 
discussing its implications. The piece says that the justice secretary, Michael 
Gove’s, vision of a British exit from the European Union sparking “the 
democratic liberation of a whole continent” 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/19/brexit-could-spark-democratic-liberation-of-continent-says-gove>
, on this evidence, falls short of reality.
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13194437> Oskar Jaeger  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13194437> 20 June 2016 2:19am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/76699000> 
This was quite obvious all along. If you want to stay, fine, but if need be we 
can get along without you very well too. Any consequences of Brexit, good or 
bad, would be much greater for Britain than for the EU. At the end of the day, 
you are not as important as you think you are.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F20%2Frichard-branson-disaster-britain-leave-eu-remain-referendum-video&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F20%2Frichard-branson-disaster-britain-leave-eu-remain-referendum-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Richard%20Branson%3A%20it%20would%20be%20a%20disaster%20for%20Britain%20to%20leave%20EU%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F20%2Frichard-branson-disaster-britain-leave-eu-remain-referendum-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Richard+Branson%3A+it+would+be+a+disaster+for+Britain+to+leave+EU+%E2%80%93+video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F20%2Frichard-branson-disaster-britain-leave-eu-remain-referendum-video&media=>
Richard Branson: it would be a disaster for Britain to leave EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jun/20/richard-branson-disaster-britain-leave-eu-remain-referendum-video>
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16040992> Malgalad  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16040992> 20 June 2016 12:38am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/76696273> 
They want the UK to grasp the nettle and be first out, leading the way for 
their own countries to escape the EU.

You can click on the links on any of these comments to join the conversation.

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1357969> RulerOfTheForums  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1357969> 20 June 2016 6:48am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/76704938> 
If many continental European want Britain to leave, it's not that we're 
thinking "good riddance!" But if Remain wins, what kind of member will the UK 
be? If it's a choice between the UK leaving and having a divided, 
obstructionist UK as a member, I prefer the former.
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13920528> Alex Dregan  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13920528> 20 June 2016 6:46am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/76704862> 
What Brexiters fail to realise is that whilst Europeans are also unhappy about 
certain EU aspects, they are willing to fight together to get better. We're 
begging them in 60's and 70's to take us as we were economically collapsed, and 
now we want out because our economy is temporarily better. If EU countries 
decide to make French or German the main business language in EU, we can forget 
favourable trade deals with China or India.

Join the debate here 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/20/european-neighbours-want-britain-to-remain-but-only-just#comments>
.


Finally, readers have been paying tribute to Jo Cox over the past few days, 
after we asked you toshare your memories and the stories of vigils and events 
that you had attended 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/17/share-your-tributes-and-memories-of-jo-cox>
.
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13675666> feliciafarrel  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13675666> 16 June 2016 8:28pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/76531117> 
I didn't know Jo Cox, or much about her until the last few hours. But reading 
about her achievements, her views and aspirations, one word struck me as 
appropriate, a 'uniter' - one who unites.

She seems the sort of person who would go out of her way to build bridges and 
to help people. And in these times where we see division opening up everywhere 
- in and between nations, in politics and political parties and even within our 
traditional culture - we need people like Jo.

Her loss is tragic, and whatever the motive of her killer, our nation is 
poorer for her absence.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m4gk%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m4gk%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa7d8d5a6444581f7c8db41a6b62a22a6538b15b1%2F78_0_2301_1381%2F2301.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We%20should%20all%20be%20ashamed'%3A%20readers%20on%20the%20EU%20referendum&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m4gk%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We+should+all+be+ashamed%27%3A+readers+on+the+EU+referendum&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4m4gk%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa7d8d5a6444581f7c8db41a6b62a22a6538b15b1%2F78_0_2301_1381%2F2301.jpg>
 A photo from a vigil for Jo Cox held in Manchester Piccadilly on Friday sent 
by reader Haythan Alhamwi, who says: ‘Syrian people will never forget you!’ 
Photograph: Haytham Alhamwi/GuardianWitness 
We’ll be back tomorrow with another roundup of what you’re talking about in 
the comment sections on theEU referendum 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>. You can help inform what 
we report on by filling in the form below.
