
Higher education in the UK is on the brink of a crisis but the nation is 
distracted. The homepages of major media outlets are dominated by Brexit 
mud-slinging and Johnny Depp’s divorce. You have to search to find news of 
academic staffstriking over pay and working conditions 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/25/uk-university-lecturers-strike-over-pay>
.

Related: Students! Your lecturers are on strike because they are struggling to 
survive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/may/26/students-your-lecturers-are-on-strike-because-they-are-struggling-to-survive>

The government is not interested in improving the working conditions of 
lecturers. In fact, the reforms proposed in the recentwhite paper 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/523396/bis-16-265-success-as-a-knowledge-economy.pdf>
 threaten to further degrade working conditions of junior academics. In the 
extreme, these could lead to the creation of an underclass of teaching-only 
staff, drawn from the mobs of recently-minted PhDs students desperately 
competing for positions with absurdly low pay.

These reforms are intended to introduce free market principles into higher 
education. Universities will soon be allowed to charge home students more than 
£9,000 per year. It is only sensible – or so the white paper’s logic goes – 
that those paying consumers are completely satisfied with the education that 
they receive.

Blood, sweat and tears

The white paper misses a crucial point: the “knowledge economy” can’t survive 
on the blood, sweat, and tears of teaching staff who struggle to make ends meet 
themselves. Students’ learning conditions are inextricably linked to the 
demands placed on their lecturers.

The student is – quite rightly – at the heart of the reforms. The student 
should come first, lecturers should provide the highest quality education for 
them, and universities should monitor the employability of their graduates. But 
slavish deference towards student satisfaction (as proposed in the Teaching 
Excellence Framework) and back-breaking prostration before the idol of student 
choice do not hold up under criticism.

Related: Higher education white paper: the big changes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/may/16/higher-education-white-paper-the-big-changes>

The student-first principle goes awry when student satisfaction scores are 
used to justify increases in tuition fees and, by extension, inform management 
understanding of lecturers’ performance. Administrators will push their 
employees to work longer and harder to meet the needs of the student-consumer. 
It is baffling that teaching reforms could be based on such a misleading, 
biased, andpotentially sexist metric 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/womens-blog/2015/feb/13/female-academics-huge-sexist-bias-students>
.

Lecturers will find themselves in a delicate position. They must keep students 
happy, for fear that negative evaluations could be a threat to future career 
prospects.


Anecdotal evidence gleaned from colleagues suggests these considerations are 
already starting to warp the student-lecturer relationship. The sensitivities 
of this sort of casual interaction in the current work climate, however, make 
it incredibly difficult to collect any meaningful data.

The customer is always right

By placing student views at the core of a metric for teaching excellence, 
lecturers’ authority will be eroded. They may be forced to to field 
unreasonable requests from students who, as consumers, are being given carte 
blanche to determine how university administrators rate their front-line 
employees. And, let’s not forget, any increased laxity in marking, deadlines 
and attendance will not help students prepare for the reality of a career after 
university.


The white paper also links student retention rates to teaching quality, 
seemingly ignoring the myriad other factors at play in the decision to drop 
out. Unmanageable student debt, anyone? Of course not! According to the 
government, low student retention equals poor-quality teaching, full stop.

Related: My students have paid £9,000 and now they think they own me 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/dec/18/my-students-have-paid-9000-and-now-they-think-they-own-me>

These top-down changes are not the way forward. Reforms must begin from the 
grassroots, taking account of students’ needs as well as those of teaching 
staff.


My analysis could be wrong; my predictions could be misguided. There are 
notional indications that raised tuition fees would allow universities to 
reinvest in their teaching staff, encouraging training and innovative methods. 
Let’s hope that the increased revenue from tuition fees doesn’t just feed the 
exorbitant salaries of vice-chancellors.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
