
Two of Ireland’s leading media outlets are to challenge the court order that 
has prevented them from reporting a statement made in the country’s parliament, 
the Dáil.

The Irish Times newspaper and the broadcaster RTÉ will tomorrow ask the Dublin 
high courtto clarify the scope of the injunction obtained by businessman Denis 
O’Brien 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/news/politics/o-brien-controversy-courts-to-decide-on-right-to-report-1.2231555>
, whose companies own several newspapers and radio stations.

The injunction has stopped most of Ireland’s mainstream media from reporting a 
short speech in the Dáil by an independent MP, Catherine Murphy, which referred 
to O’Brien’s loan arrangements with the Irish Bank Resolution Corporation 
(IBRC).

Journalists, in company with several senior politicians from both government 
and opposition parties, believe her statement was covered by parliamentary 
privilege and was therefore reportable.

Lawyers point out, however, that no-one is above the law. O’Brien’s spokesman, 
James Morrissey, said on Friday that the businessman was entitled to privacy 
over his banking affairs.

But the editor of the Irish Times 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/irish-times>, Kevin O’Sullivan, said his 
paper “believes it is vitally important that we publish a matter of public 
interest raised in our national parliament”.

He explained that his paper’s legal advice, following Murphy’s Dáil statement, 
was that reporting it in full would involve a breach of the injunction.He wrote:
 
<https://www.irishtimes.com/news/ireland/irish-news/kevin-o-sullivan-editor-s-statement-on-right-to-report-1.2232640>

“It was not clear that the absolute privilege referred to in article 15.12 of 
the constitution would afford us privilege in such a way as to allow us 
disregard the court order.

In those circumstances we amended our initial online report and reported the 
issue in the fullest possible way, having regard to the court order”.

However, Murphy’s statement could be read on the Irish parliament’s website 
<http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/takes/dail2015052800027>
 and featuredhere on YouTube 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cT3KLVWc5tk&feature=youtu.be&noredirect=1>. At 
least one Irish online outlet, broadsheet.ie, published the statement 
<http://www.broadsheet.ie/2015/05/28/redacteds-1-25-interest-rate/>, and the 
Guardian alsocarried a key portion of the speech 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2015/may/29/irelands-media-silenced-over-mps-speech-about-denis-obrien>
, attracting unprecedented traffic from Ireland.

The Irish edition of yesterday’s Sunday Times defied the injunction by 
covering Murphy’s statementin a front page article. 
<http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/news/ireland/News/article1562998.ece>*

The clash over the matter between the executive and the judiciary has turned 
the affair into a constitutional crisis, making it a major story inIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>.

It is front page news in this morning’s (bank holiday) Irish national 
newspapers,including the Irish Independent 
<http://www.independent.ie/irish-news/courts/dispute-over-dil-privilege-takes-new-twist-31268677.html>
, the daily owned by Independent News & Media (INM), which is controlled by 
O’Brien.


INM also publishes the Irish Daily Star 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/dailystar>, the Sunday Independent, the 
Sunday World, Dublin’s Evening Herald plus 14 regional titles and, north of the 
border, the Belfast Telegraph.

O’Brien’s Communicorp group owns two major national stations, Newstalk and 
Today FM, plus three regional stations.

Regarded as Ireland’s richest man, O’Brien has widespread business interests, 
including mobile phones, oil and aircraft leasing. He lives inMalta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malta>, which reduces his tax burden.

The current dispute centres on the aquisition by an O’Brien company of 
Siteserv, which provides installation services for builders, broadband 
providers and utilities such as Irish Water. It has been installing water 
meters across Ireland, itself a matter of considerable and continuing 
controversy.

O’Brien’s company paid €45.4m (£32.5m) in 2012 for Siteserv. According to the 
Irish Times’s timeline on the affair 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/business/financial-services/timeline-the-siteserv-controversy-1.2230748>
, the deal involved IRBC writing off €110m (£78.7m) of Siteserv’s €150m 
(£107.4m) debt, to O’Brien’s advantage.

It has since been claimed by other bidders and many opposition politicians 
that the bidding process was flawed. The accusations have been firmly rejected 
by O’Brien.

*This article was amended at 5.30pm to include the paragraph about the Sunday 
Times’s Irish edition publishing Murphy’s statement.
