
A high court judgment last week against the largest civil service employer, 
the Department for Work and Pensions, has exposed just how political and 
short-sighted the government’s increasingly vicious and vindictive approach to 
trade unions has become.

The case 
<http://www.pcs.org.uk/en/news_and_events/pcs_comment/pcs_comment.cfm/major-win-as-vindictive-check-off-ban-ruled-unlawful>
 concerns the previously unremarkable and little noticed issue of how union 
members send their monthly subscriptions to unions like ours, the 200,000 
member Public and Commercial Services (PCS) union. For decades, like many other 
public and private sector workers, civil servants had been able to pay their 
subs to PCS through their salaries, in the same way they can give to charity or 
pay for sports and social club membership.

That began to change under the coalition when former Cabinet Office minster, 
Francis Maude, wrote to departments 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/interactive/2014/oct/03/liberal-conservative-coalition-francismaude>
 to demand they consider scrapping this arrangement, known as check-off, 
because the Tories no longer deemed it “desirable”. Never mind that it was 
cheap and easy to administer, and some of the UK’s largest and most successful 
private sector companies, including British Airways and Jaguar, continue to use 
it, because they recognise it has benefits for employees and employers alike.

Related: Five reasons why public servants should join a union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/sep/09/trade-union-why-join-public-servants>

So, despite a failed attempt by the Department for Communities and Local 
Government 
<http://www.pcs.org.uk/en/news_and_events/pcs_comment/pcs_comment_archive.cfm/pickles-lands-taxpayers-with-90000-bill>
 (DCLG), after which the government was ordered to pay £90,000 in costs, at 
expense to the taxpayer, other departments started ending check-off at the end 
of 2014. This was despite thewarning from then chief secretary to the Treasury, 
Danny Alexander 
<http://www.pcs.org.uk/en/news_and_events/news_centre/recent-news.cfm/removing-means-of-collecting-union-subs-is-blinkered-political-attack>
 that there was “no fiscal case” for doing so and it would be “at their own 
legal risk”.

Like DCLG, theDWPnow has a clearer understanding of that risk after judge 
Elisabeth Laing ruled in our favour 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/dwps-crackdown-on-trade-unions-ruled-unlawful-by-high-court-a7032021.html>
that denying staff access to check-off was a breach of contract. We are now 
preparing papers for a substantial claim for damages from DWP and our legal 
advice is we have very strong grounds to also pursue other government 
departments.

Over the past 18 months we have been forced to spend a significant amount of 
time and money effectively re-recruiting tens of thousands of members to pay by 
direct debit. The arbitrarily short timescales imposed on us before switchovers 
have meant we have inevitably lost members and subscription income.

The implications should not be under-estimated. Let’s call it what it is, this 
is a highly political attempt to undermine our finances and break our 
organisation. But it has succeeded only in public money being squandered on 
legal fees and, in all probability, compensation. What a legacy for Maude to 
ponder.

Banning check-off across the public sector formed part of the Tory’s trade 
union bill, but this clause was dropped before that horrible piece of 
legislation received royal assent. We believe this judgement should kill the 
issue off for good and that this is very much a victory for all unions.

It is proof again, if proof were needed, of the importance of independent 
trade unions. But also it shows two things: that the Tories will try anything 
to shackle us, and that ultimately they will fail.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
