
Discovery is still interested in buying a stake in Channel 4 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4>, despite the government backing off 
on plans to fully privatise the channel.

The pay-TV giant’s chief executive has said it is in the market to buy a major 
broadcast channel – but he added that ITV is unlikely to be a target due to its 
high price.

Last month, the government made a U-turn by dropping plans to potentially sell 
off Channel 4 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/10/government-channel-4-privatisation-stake-nao>
 – while keeping alive the prospect of a minority stake sale – which left 
potential suitors such as BT and Discovery mulling strategic options.


Related: Government drops full Channel 4 privatisation – but may sell off stake
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/10/government-channel-4-privatisation-stake-nao>

David Zaslav, the chief executive of Discovery, said the company was still 
interested in a potential deal if it could be given freedom to run less public 
service broadcasting content.


“Having [another] broadcast channel in Europe would be attractive,” said 
Zaslav, who in the past haslooked at Channel 5 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/apr/17/discovery-withdraws-channel-5-bid>
 and a50% stake in Gold owner UKTV 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/apr/18/virgin-uktv-discovery-networks> 
when the businesses have been up for sale.


“It would really depend on what the pricing would be, but also we’d need 
enough flexibility to commercially programme it. So the question for anybody 
with Channel 4 – we’ve looked at it over the last year or two – has been, will 
there be an opportunity to programme it in a way [that appeals to Discovery]?”


Zaslav said the company is always looking for potential media acquisitions in 
Europe, having acquired thepan-European rights to the Olympics for £920m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/02/olympics-bbc-discovery-deal>, 
taking over Eurosport 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/nov/12/eurosport-rebrand-discovery-olympics>
 and this week striking a deal with the BBC and the All England Lawn Tennis 
Club toair Wimbledon 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/02/eurosport-wimbledon-live-bbc-ofcom>
.


 “We’re looking at all intellectual property, because that’s also a direct 
investment, and then we’re also looking at additional platforms and some of 
those might be traditional. They could be broadcast, could be more cable, could 
be more compelling sports intellectual property.”

While Zaslav did not rule out a bid for ITV, he indicated that with a market 
capitalisation of £8.5bn, and requiring well over £10bn to acquire, it was an 
unlikely target.


The biggest acquisition the company has made so far was the $1.7bn (£1.2bn) 
deal for Nordic broadcasting business SBS in 2012.


“Nothing’s impossible,” Zaslav said. “ITV has done a great job. It’s been a 
huge grower of scale in the UK. We’ve talked to Adam [Crozier] about doing some 
things together, we’re in a lot of discussions with the BBC about doing things, 
we’re already in business with Sky. I think nothing’s impossible. But we’re 
looking at smaller assets generally that we can get synergy with and that will 
help us grow faster.”


There is, of course, always the possibility of a joint bid involving Virgin 
Media ownerLiberty Global <http://www.theguardian.com/media/liberty-global>.

The two companies tied up to buy super-indie All3Media, maker of shows 
including Gogglebox, Call the Midwife and Midsomer Murders, withLiberty Global 
for £500m in 2014 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/may/08/all3media-sold-discovery-liberty-global-deal>
.

Liberty Global controls a 10% stake in ITV, putting it in pole position if the 
broadcaster was put in play for a sale.

John Malone, the chairman of Liberty Global, is one of the largest 
shareholders inDiscovery Communications 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/discovery-communications>.

Malone, chief executive of Discovery from 2005 until 2008 when the company was 
taken public in the US, holds a stake which gives him almost 30% of the voting 
power.

Zaslav also said that wading into the increasingly costly Premier League 
rights battle,once considered a strategic option 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jan/24/eurosport-owner-discovery-premier-league-tv-rights>
, was pretty much off the table now.


“We don’t want to tip over and we’re competing with players in some cases who 
feel they need the football rights in order to keep their distribution 
platforms alive,” he said, referring to incumbent rights holders Sky and BT.


“I think we would be selective about big-time soccer because Eurosport’s quite 
profitable and when you put Eurosport together with the Olympics, we now know 
that based on our deals we’ve done already that the Olympics will be profitable 
for us.”


Despite this, he said Discovery looks at all quality sports when they come up 
for auction, such as the current Bundesliga rights which Sky controls in 
Germany.


Zaslav was also asked about future plans for All3Media.

“I think our focus will be more primarily in the scripted area,” he said. 
“Intellectual property that we can have sway over. We see All3 as a way to 
diversify. We’re a sports, kids and lifestyle, non-fiction company. We do a 
little bit of scripted. But what was really attractive to us was this would be 
a way to work with Liberty Global to aggregate more scripted and we’ve been 
doing that and I think you’ll see more of that.”

