
I have heard that “street style” is now the ultimate fashion trend. But what 
does that actually mean?

Tamsin, by email

Excellent question, Tamsin! Yes, it has been a mighty changing of the guard at 
Chateau Fashion, with chic now officially out and dressing like you just fled 
from a burning-down JD Sports in. I’ll return to that fire issue in a tick.

But first can we talk about Kanye West 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/kanyewest>? Yes, he’s a ridiculous egomaniac 
with throbbing, desperate neuroses that radiate out of his every utterance. But 
he’s also a genius among mortals – in the music world. OR SO I THOUGHT.

I admit, I worried when Kanye announced he was branching out into fashion 
<http://www.gq.com/gallery/the-unabridged-history-of-kanye-west-as-fashion-designerand-the-11-year-road-to-todays-adidas-show>
. “Pourquoi, Kanye, pourquoi?” I cried. The path is littered with the corpses 
of music people who thought they could do fashion because they, like, really 
love clothes, yeah? For everyVictoria Beckham 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/victoria-beckham>, Gwen Stefani 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2007/aug/05/fashion.popandrock> and 
Puff Daddy/Diddy/Whatever <http://seanjohn.com/>, there are a million Chris 
Kirkpatricks,Lily Allens 
<http://www.vogue.co.uk/news/2013/11/19/lily-allens-label-enters-liquidation---lucy-in-disguise>
 andPete Wentzes <http://clandestineindustries.tumblr.com/>.

Moreover, the timing somewhat concerned me. As happy as I am for West’s 
marital contentment, I’ll be honest: I wasn’t entirely certain whether marrying 
into a family so narcissistic theytake selfies while driving one another to 
prison 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/lyapalater/these-are-the-pictures-that-kim-kardashian-took-of-herself-w#.gxJJRqGVam>
 would be so good for West’s already fragile sense of reality. And, frankly, 
judgingfrom his recent Twitter output 
<https://twitter.com/kanyewest?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 I don’t think I was so wrong in my concerns. But about his fashion, it seems I 
was about as off the mark as the rest of West’s boring critics.

Related: Kanye West’s Yeezy Boost launch - live! 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/live/2015/feb/12/kanye-wests-yeezy-boost-sneaker-launch-live>

Oh, make no mistake, the Yeezy line 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/live/2015/feb/12/kanye-wests-yeezy-boost-sneaker-launch-live>
 is utterly absurd. West is, for some reason, very taken with flesh-coloured 
Lycra and camel toe (those two things are not unrelated), which I don’t 
understand and you don’t understand and we don’t need to. What is worth 
examining, though, has been his endorsement of what I can only describe as 
“dystopian sportswear”: baggy tracksuit trousers, jumpers with holes in them, 
sweatshirts with frayed hems. In short, sports clothes that look as if they’ve 
been in a fire. How I groaned when I first saw this hot mess – only for that 
hot mess now to be the only look that matters in fashion.

Designers such as Alexander Wang 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/mar/05/alexander-wang-interview-the-fashion>
 andRiccardo Tisci 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2013/sep/30/riccardo-tisci-elegance-givenchy-paris-fashion-week>
 have been dabbling in “dystopian sportswear” for a while. But the real force 
behind this trend isVetements 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/mar/03/vetements-show-is-cathedral-of-raw-energy>
, whose designer, Demna Gvasalia, is both a friend of West and now the creative 
director of Balenciaga. I’m not going to lie to you, I think Vetements is 
absurd. With its £880 jeans, £185 T-shirts and £415 hooded sweatshirts, it 
looks pretty much exactly how I imagine Derek Zoolander’s fashion line would 
look.

Related: All good in the hood – the fall and rise of the hoodie 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/mar/22/good-in-the-hood-fall-and-rise-hoodie-us-society-prince-harry-rihanna-haute>

And actually, I think this is right. I shouldn’t get every fashion trend – I’m 
a 37-year-old woman, whose idea of good night involves my sofa and re-runs of
Parks and Recreation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/parks-and-recreation>. Frankly, I’d 
be worried about fashion if I was on its bleeding cutting edge.

So, no, I don’t get it and I’m not even going to try to explain it. But my 
main takeaway is how pleased I am that my man West has, once again, proven 
himself to be on the money. And even if I actually preferredhow Kim Kardashian 
used to dress 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/elliewoodward/extremely-questionable-mid-00s-kim-kardashian-outfits#.hozGmd0rxY>
 before her husband started putting her in horrible, weird clothes, the real 
point here is that West was right and everyone else, including me, was wrong. 
In your FACE, me!

Post your questions to Hadley Freeman, Ask Hadley, the Guardian, Kings Place, 
90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Emailask.hadley@theguardian.com <mailto: 
ask.hadley@theguardian.com>.
