
The UN secretary general Ban Ki-moon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ban-ki-moon> has convened an emergency panel 
of heads of state to prompt a political response to the world’s increasing 
scarcity of water.

Related: Drought is a global problem - we need a global solution 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/oct/09/why-isnt-there-a-global-body-to-monitor-drought>

The high level panel on water will find ways to coordinate the often piecemeal 
political decisions made by the plethora of regulators, governments, companies 
and individuals who draw from dwindling water reserves. It will also raise a 
widely-neglected problem to the highest level of political discourse.

“Water is a precious resource, crucial to realising the sustainable 
development goals, which at their heart aim to eradicate poverty,” said Ban, 
who announced the formation of the panel alongside the president of the World 
Bank,Jim Yong Kim <https://www.theguardian.com/business/jim-yong-kim>, at a 
special session of the World Economic Forum’s annual meeting in Davos this 
morning.

“The new panel can help motivate the action we need to turn ideas into 
reality,” he said, adding that countries needed to take the lead on tackling 
the problem.

The panel will meet regularly between now and 2018 and will be chaired by the 
presidents of Mexico and Mauritius, Enrique Peña Nieto and Ameenah Gurib-Fakim. 
The two presidents were chosen for their countries’ diverse and representative 
water challenges. Mexicofaces large scale water shortages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/nov/12/water-crisis-mexico-city-government-top-priority>
 associated with its booming developing economy, and as a small island state, 
Mauritius is especially vulnerable to climate change and the many water issues 
that come with a warming world and rising sea levels.

Related: Water scarcity: your photos and stories 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/dec/02/water-scarcity-your-photos-and-stories>

A further eight heads of state from the developed and developing world will be 
invited by Ban to join the panel. It is intended they will develop an agenda 
focused on tangible changes. One example given was the sway the heads of state 
will have over the operations of theWorld Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/worldbank>. As shareholders and clients, 
heads of state are in a unique position to advise the bank on problems with the 
way water projects are funded.


“Achieving the water global goal would have multiple benefits, including 
laying the foundations for food and energy security, sustainable urbanisation, 
and ultimately climate security,” said Kim. “My hope is that this panel 
accelerates action in many countries so that we can make water more accessible 
to all.”

The politics of water can be divisive, and competition for the resource has 
become a serious threat to stability 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2014/oct/06/water-wars-business-governments-scarcity-pollution-access>
 in water-scarce regions in parts of Africa, the Middle East and south Asia.

“We are already seeing elements of water scarcity coming through - not just 
because of climate change, but [because of] over-abstraction. We are seeing 
stress points - social tensions or conflicts over a lack of access to water,” 
said Dominic Waughray, head of public-private partnerships at the World 
Economic Forum.

According to the UN, 90% of all disasters are water related and by 2050 the 
world will have just 60% of the water it needs. At last year’s announcement of 
the SDGs, the UNset its sights on <https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdg6> 
delivering “water and sanitation for all” by 2030, but the issue is rarely 
discussed by those with the power to address it, said Waughray.

Related: Lack of engineers delaying vital water projects in developing 
countries 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jan/15/lack-of-engineers-delaying-vital-water-projects-in-developing-countries>

“There has never been a coordinated political momentum. Even when it gets to 
water ministers, they are sometimes not the most influential ministers in a 
cabinet. The water community might have done a very good job of analysing the 
problem and coming up with solutions, but it has never broken through 
politically at the highest level, at scale, in developed and developing 
countries,” he said.

The session in Davos was chaired by the former prime minister of Australia, 
Kevin Rudd. Rudd told the Guardian that water had not reached the top level of 
political discourse because there were “too many other pressing challenges”.

“But time is now right,” he said. “Climate change has now focused on the 
unfolding water crisis. As well as its impact on national security arising from 
water scarcity. We are now seeking to translate the sustainable development 
goals on water into reality.”

Rudd said the heads of state could build partnerships with the private sector 
and ensure investment in infrastructure could be found.

Attending the session, Peter Brabeck-Letmathe, chairman of Nestlé and chair of 
the 2030Water <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/water> Resources Group, 
said: “The mark of success for the panel will be practical action and tangible 
impact. Let this be an opportunity to break down silos at the highest level and 
collaborate with private sector and others.”

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter, and have your say on issues 
around water in development using#H2Oideas 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23H2Oideas&src=typd>.
