
Stop 1: Isle of Wight Festival, UK

The Isle of Wight Festival is a big deal. Bob Dylan, David Bowie and the 
Rolling Stones have all performed there since its 1969 inception. The wide 
range of acts offers the perfect entry into the festival season.

Venue: Newport, Isle of Wight

Date: 9 June to 12 June

Genres: Rock, dance, pop, electronic

58,000 visitors

Lineup includes: the Who, Queen, Stereophonics, Faithless, Turin Brakes, Iggy 
Pop, Jess Glynne and Everything Everything.

Stop 2: Solidays, France

Feel good and do good: this annual music festival and charity event is held at 
Longchamp racecourse in Paris and is organised by French youth AIDS awareness 
group,Solidarité Sida 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwjKie-Ph-vLAhUIExoKHauoBtQQFggdMAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.solidarite-sida.org%2F&usg=AFQjCNHZDGJdr_q_8a-b4fFGjysxd3scyQ&sig2=ys-fSIZoGhAI3geAVwkvKw>
. Come to enjoy over 80 acts on seven stages.

Venue: Longchamp, Paris 

Date: 24 June to 26 June

Genres: Electronic, rock, alternative

175,000 visitors

Lineup includes: Flume, Cyprus Hill, Selah Sue, the Shoes, Broken Back, M83, 
Louise Attaque and Rover.

Stop 3: Nos Alive, Portugal

Hosted on the banks of the Tagus river, Nos Alive is one of Portugal’s most 
popular festival. You can expect great prices, good weather, clean toilets and 
a friendly crowd.

Venue: Passeio Maritimo de Algés, Lisbon

Dates: 7 July to 9 July

Genres: Rock, indie, alternative, dance, electronic

60,000 visitors

Lineup includes: Radiohead, Arcade Fire, the Chemical Brothers, Pixies, Tame 
Impala and the 1975.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tx7c%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tx7c%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35288fa49dcba5e527b9544fa1c89dedc88de640%2F99_132_1701_1021%2F1701.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20ultimate%20European%20festival%20tour&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tx7c%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+ultimate+European+festival+tour&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tx7c%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35288fa49dcba5e527b9544fa1c89dedc88de640%2F99_132_1701_1021%2F1701.jpg>
 American band Bleachers perform at Nos Alive in 2015. Photograph: Ana 
Viotti/Flickr 
Stop 4: Festival Internacional de Benicàssim, Spain

Sun, sand and sangria: situated directly on the Mediterranean you can sunbathe 
by day and dance the night away. A favourite among Brits, Benicàssim is a home 
away from home – with added sunshine.

Venue: Benicàssim, a seaside resort between Barcelona and Valencia

Dates: 14 July to 17 July

Genres: Indie, pop, rock, hip-hop

115,000 visitors

Lineup includes: Major Lazer, Skepta, Muse, Disclosure, Kendrick Lamar, the 
Maccabees, Biffy Clyro and Jamie XX.

Stop 5: Melt! Festival, Germany

Melt! is industrial chic at its finest, set in Ferropolis, the “city of iron” 
<http://www.ferropolis.de/in-english/info.html>, on a peninsular between 
Wittenberg and Dessau. The event is held in a disused mine that is now an open 
air museum. Party into the night at one of the stages in the former mine pits, 
surrounded by huge cranes and machinery.


Dates: 15 July to 17 July

Venue: Ferropolis, Gräfenhainchen

Genres: Indie, electronic, dance, rock, pop

20,000 visitors

Lineup includes: Andy C, Deckmantel Soundsystem, Josh Wink, Jean-Michel Jarre, 
Modeselektor, Sleaford Modes, Two Door Cinema Club and Woman.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tx7c%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tx7c%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b91cc51aede1b088bf73830e513d7fe06a2b377%2F0_330_5150_3089%2F5150.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20ultimate%20European%20festival%20tour&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tx7c%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+ultimate+European+festival+tour&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tx7c%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b91cc51aede1b088bf73830e513d7fe06a2b377%2F0_330_5150_3089%2F5150.jpg>
 Swedish singer Tove Lo performs at Melt! Festival 2015. Photograph: Alamy 
Stop 6: Tomorrowland, Belgium

Tomorrowland is huge. Set in the Belgian countryside, it’s one of the biggest 
electronic music festivals and plays host to the world’s finest DJs. The 
colossal venue includes lakes, forests and fields. Check out the rave caves, 
visit the Church of Love and watch the main stage from a jacuzzi with a truly 
international, high-energy crowd.

Venue: Boom, Belgium

Dates: 22 July to 24 July

Genres: Dance, techno 

360,000 visitors

Lineup includes: Alesso, Tiesto, Deadmau5, Eric Prydz and DVBBS.

Stop 7: Off Festival, Poland

Time to rock out. Off Festival brings the best alternative bands and acts from 
a range of genres together. If you’re getting festival fatigue you can also 
take part in a wide range of workshops, exhibitions and movie screenings.

Venue: Katowice

Dates: 5 August to 7 August

Genres: Alternative, rock, folk, jazz, electronic, indie and metal

20,000 visitors

Lineup includes: Minor Victories, Mutoid Man, Mass Gothic, Show me the Body, 
Mudhoney, Napalm Death, Sleaford Mods and Flatbush Zombies.

Stop 8: Sziget, Hungary

This week-long multicultural festival has been called the European Burning Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/17/sziget-festival-hungary-gap-year-spirit-than-glastonbury-hedonism>
. Held on an island on the Danube in the middle of Budapest, it offers 
something for everyone. You can also enjoy theatre performances, circus acts 
and exhibitions alongside an exciting list of musical acts.

Venue: Budapest

Dates: 10 August to 17 August

Genres: Rock and pop

410,000 visitors 

Lineup includes: Bastille, David Guetta, Muse, Noel Gallagher, Rihanna, SIA, 
Unkle and Bloc Party.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tx7c%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tx7c%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4cd50d48c7f597a6dc3d0b7c21e08ff4bd4374ee%2F0_103_3628_2177%2F3628.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20ultimate%20European%20festival%20tour&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tx7c%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The+ultimate+European+festival+tour&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tx7c%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4cd50d48c7f597a6dc3d0b7c21e08ff4bd4374ee%2F0_103_3628_2177%2F3628.jpg>
 Sziget festival visitors soaking up the sun in 2014. Photograph: Alamy 
Stop 9: Dimension Festival, Croatia

The journey is nearly over. Head back to the beach for this underground 
electronic music festival in an abandoned fort on the Adriatic. From boats to 
amphitheatres, extraordinary venues and parties await.

Venue: Fort Punta Christo, Pula 

Dates: 25 August to 28 August

Genres: House, techno, electronic, drum’n’bass

10,000 visitors

Lineup includes: Massive Attack, Kamasi Washington, Nightmares on Wax, 
Moodymann Mood II Swing, Ben Klock, Octave One and Richie Hawtin.

Stop 10: Bestival, UK

Time to dress up. Get into the carnival spirit at Bestival, where the world 
record was set for most people in fancy dress in 2010. The perfect end to an 
epic summer of festivals.

Venue: Isle of Wight

Dates: 8 September to 11 September

Genres: Rock, pop, electronic, techno and hip-hop

55,000 visitors

Lineup includes: the Cure, Major Lazer, Hot Chip, Diplo, Fatboy Slim, Animal 
Collective and Bastille.

 * Which festivals would make your list? Check out Zalando’s 2016 European 
Festival Guide <https://www.zalando.co.uk/festival-guide/>. 