
Personal budgets are a simple but powerful innovation that over the past 
decade have quietly revolutionised the way the social care system in England is 
organised. According toDisability Rights UK <http://www.disabilityrightsuk.org/>
, a national organisation of disabled people, they are “the route to achieving 
independent living based on the social model of disability”.


Disabled and older people and others with support needs may therefore have 
been confused to read academic and activist Peter Beresford’s recent piece on
personal budgets 
<http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/may/05/personal-budgets-health-care-nao-report?CMP=share_btn_tw>
. His piece was sparked by the recent National Audit Office (NAO) report into
personalised commissioning 
<https://www.nao.org.uk/report/personalised-commissioning-in-adult-social-care/>
 of social care and a subsequenthearing 
<https://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/public-accounts-committee/inquiries/parliament-2015/personal-budgets-social-care-15-16/>
 of the Commons public accounts committee (PAC).


While Beresford is convinced of the policy’s failure, that view is evidently 
not universal. In a direct response to his article, disability rights 
campaigner and peer Jane Campbelltweeted 
<https://twitter.com/BnsJaneCampbell/status/728183519592251392>: “PBs are a 
force for good – it’s lack of funding and peer support systems that don’t work.”
— Baroness J Campbell (@BnsJaneCampbell) May 5, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/BnsJaneCampbell/status/728183519592251392> 
Personal budgets don't work? https://t.co/C3zvzQv9Jq <https://t.co/C3zvzQv9Jq> 
PBs are a force for good- its lack of funding and peer support systems that 
don't work
 <https://twitter.com/BnsJaneCampbell/status/728183519592251392> 
What is a personal budget? Disabilty Rights UK offers this definition: “A 
personal budget is an agreed amount of money that is allocated to you 
personally by your local council following an assessment of your care and 
support needs. This is support that you decide and control, in other words you 
control the money for your care and support …”

Related: Personal budgets don't work. So why are we ignoring the evidence? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/may/05/personal-budgets-health-care-nao-report>

This provides us with a view of what personal budgets are supposed to achieve. 
At their heart, they are intended to bring about a very different kind of 
relationship between people who look to the state for help and support and the 
state itself. They should create a new partnership based on transparency and 
empower people.

 
<https://www.gov.uk/guidance/care-and-support-statutory-guidance/person-centred-care-and-support-planning>
The statutory guidance 
<https://www.gov.uk/guidance/care-and-support-statutory-guidance/person-centred-care-and-support-planning>
 provided to local authorities is categoric on this point:

It is vital that the process used to establish the personal budget is 
transparent so that people are clear how their budget was calculated, and the 
method used is robust so that people have confidence that the personal budget 
allocation is correct and therefore sufficient to meet their care and support 
needs.

However the person chooses to have their needs met, whether by direct payment, 
by the provision of local authority-arranged or directly provided care and 
support, or third-party provision, or a mix of these, there should be no 
constraint on how the needs are met.

The novelty here is not the allocation of resources to individuals, as all 
non-universal public services (and even some we think of as universal, such as 
the NHS) already have mechanisms in place for allocating resources to 
individuals. The real game-changer is that for the first time, government is 
openly saying that sufficient money should be allocated to each person, and 
that this should be done using a simple set of publicly understood rules. This 
is so people themselves can understand, use and ultimately, if they need to, 
challenge the amount they have been awarded. Seen in this way, personal budgets 
and austerity make very uncomfortable bedfellows.

Beresford dismisses the innovation, insisting there is no need for such 
bureaucracy and jumps from the reasonable conclusion of the NAO that “the 
Department of Health needs to gain a better understanding of the different ways 
to commission personalised services” to an assertion that we have known what 
works for 20 years: more direct payments and more money. And he cites work by 
my organisation,In Control <http://www.in-control.org.uk/>, to support his view.

This work is the Poet (personal outcomes evaluation tool) survey 
<http://www.in-control.org.uk/media/168205/third%20national%20personal%20budget%20survey%20oct2014.pdf>
. Its third edition, data from which featured heavily in the NAO study, 
describes the experiences of 2,679 personal budget holders. It explores which 
groups report better outcomes across a range of 15 different areas of life, 
including dignity in support, quality of life and independence. Significantly, 
those most likely to report positive impacts in all 15 areas were people who 
felt their views were fully listened to when the amount of the budget was set 
and who felt their views were fully included when their support plan was 
written.

The implementation of personal budgets has coincided with unprecedented cuts 
to local authority budgets, which has led to substantially reduced spending on 
care and support. It would be hard to conceive of a tougher stress test for any 
new social policy. However, it is unhelpful to attack both as though they were 
one and the same.

Related: Department of Health does not know if personal budgets help service 
users, report finds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/mar/03/department-of-health-does-not-know-if-personal-budgets-help-service-users-report-finds>

What ultimately matters is whether people are getting enough money to live 
good, active lives with the support they themselves have shaped. Implementing 
personal budgets as intended provides just this opportunity. The Poet work is 
providing us with a growing data set that checks whether they are being 
implemented effectively and are achieving their ambitions, or whether they are 
being frustrated by cuts.

Speaking at the PAC hearing, an NAO director said: “We would like to see the 
number of authorities taking part [in the Poet survey] much extended and 
consistency over time. It would be useful to know whether the [health] 
department has plans to try to encourage more to take part.”

So, rather than ask why we are implementing personal budgets, perhaps a better 
question is how are we implementing them. To not implement well, or to get rid 
of personal budgets, would mean not telling people what level of help and 
support they can reasonably expect – and ultimately deny them the right to 
control their own support and their own lives.

John Waters is In Control’s lead for research and evaluation and is co-author 
of Poet

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
