
 Immersive storytelling is a technique that is finding its way into new spaces 
such as theatres, games, documentaries, advertising and journalism. The aim is 
to give people the feeling of really ‘being there’, calling on 3D gaming, 
virtual and augmented reality technologiesin the process. Tech is making our 
media more entertaining, hard-hitting and unique.

 Over the last year, immersive storytelling has erupted. Here are four recent 
examples of how to do it well. Each one demonstrates how the media and tech 
industries can take the principles of immersive storytelling to make better 
communications and entertainment. Some examples give us 15 minutes of fame, 
some use immersive storytelling for good, but all of them are brilliant in 
their own way.

1. Her Story (2015)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2TACPjFfofc&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2TACPjFfofc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2TACPjFfofc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2TACPjFfofc&media=>
 Her Story is a cross between the TV detective series Luther and Jonathan 
Creek, and action game Lara Croft, without all the tomb raiding. It’s 
technically classified as an interactive movie, a genre that’s been around 
since the invention of laserdiscs in the late 1960s, which enabled 
instantaneous jumping between different film chapters and meant that makers 
could develop all kinds of non-linear ways of watching film footage. Thus, a 
gaming mechanic was born.

Her Story is exactly that, minus the laserdisc – it’s available on PC, Mac, 
iPad and iPhone. The premise is simple: there’s a murder case and you are the 
detective. The game itself is a bank of video footage, which it’s up to you to 
sort through. The footage is disjointed parts of one woman’s testimonial in the 
case. The whole game revolves around your decisions to follow up leads in the 
things she says and piece together the narrative. But as with all good 
detective stories, things aren’t all they seem.

For media and tech experts alike, this is an interesting case study – could 
the next big detective series be interactive? Why have a linear TV series when 
you can have an immersive online series? And why invent Luther or Poirot when 
we ourselves can be the stars?

2. UN refugee crisis project (2015) 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvH058XQmR38&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvH058XQmR38&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvH058XQmR38>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvH058XQmR38&media=>
This brilliant idea immediately gives a new role for virtual reality in our 
society – as a force for good. In 2015, the UN partnered with Unicef Jordan, 
Samsung andVrse.works <http://vrse.works/> to create a virtual reality 
experience that would transport the world’s top decision makers to a Syrian 
refugee camp, so that they could experience the situation first hand. Their 
goal, in their own brilliant words, was to “connect donors with Syrians 
affected by the war and inspire world leaders to make bold commitments”. Bingo. 
In the not too distant future can we expect TV and film documentaries to be 
experienced in a similar way? Surely this revolutionises the concept of charity 
advertising?

3. Victoria (2015)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6QzAA4qEGqs&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6QzAA4qEGqs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6QzAA4qEGqs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6QzAA4qEGqs&media=>
 This might be the least technically immersive of all the examples, but it is 
incredibly immersive in its effect. On the face of it, Victoria is a film about 
a girl who meets a group of guys on a night out which ends in a bank robbery 
(no spoilers, it’s all in the trailer). The immersive trick, however, is that 
the film was shot on one night in Berlin and in one take. There are no scene 
cuts, no camera swaps, no going again on lines. You watch the group build up a 
relationship, grow closer, you see natural conversation (it’s broadly scripted 
but mostly ad-libbed) and really powerfully, you see time pass at a real-time 
rate (it’s pitch black in the first half and suddenly in the harsh light of day 
by the end).

You feel like you are there, a member of their gang, experiencing every moment 
with them, and making every decision (the good, the bad and the dangerous) 
right alongside them. There is something here for media and tech experts to 
consider – is an experience made more immersive when it is a real-time 
experience? How can we use time as a device in capturing people’s imaginations?

4. Aardman Special Delivery (2015)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXiDRZfeL_hc&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXiDRZfeL_hc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXiDRZfeL_hc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXiDRZfeL_hc&media=>
 I love this for combining all the charm of Aardman’s signature house style 
with the immersive, 360° mobile tech of Google. It was made as part of Google’s 
Spotlight series and launched for Christmas 2015. The viewer uses their phone 
to explore a 360° environment in which an animated pig (oh, so Aardman) sets 
out to catch Santa delivering presents in his apartment block. As ever with 
immersive experiences like this, it’s the subplots that make it feel like a 
living organism – you could, if you choose to, spend all your time looking at 
the complete opposite side of the apartment block to the pig and Santa and 
still enjoy every minute. This is a great example of the tech industry calling 
on the media industry to showcase a product – could a brilliantly crafted 
immersive story be the ultimate product demo for your new device or platform?

Melanie Arrow is a strategy director at BBH London 
<http://www.bartleboglehegarty.com/london/>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Paid for by” – find out morehere 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
