
Improving Access to Education in Emergencies

When thousands of people from government, civil society, affected communities, 
academia and the private sector gathered in Istanbul, Turkey for the inaugural 
World Humanitarian Summit, a pivotal moment for education in emergencies took 
place.

A new fund to better coordinate and deliver education in emergencies was 
launched, called“Education Cannot Wait” 
<http://www.un.org/youthenvoy/2016/05/education-cannot-wait-fund-to-be-launched-at-un-world-humanitarian-summit/>
.

“Education is typically at the periphery of emergency response efforts,” says 
Gemma Terry a community manager for social innovation at Pearson.

“Normally, education receives around 2% of humanitarian aid,” she says. 
“Shelter, food, and water are always at the top – for good reason.

“Now, more people are starting to see the importance of education in these 
conflict situations.”


A Lasting Impact

Over 450 million children live in a country affected by conflict, according to 
recentfigures from UNICEF 
<http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=53848#.V1BHfpMrI3h>. That’s 
nearly a quarter of the world’s school age children.

From that number, 75 million children (aged between 3 to 18 years old) are in 
desperate need of educational support.

The new education crisis fund Education Cannot Wait has already raised more 
than $80m from the US, the United Kingdom, Norway, the Netherlands, the 
European Commission, and others.

UN education envoy Gordon Brown told reporters when the fund was announced:

“This is a lost generation we must help urgently. We live in a world where 
refugee needs are not temporary, with many spending more than a decade out of 
country … For too long we have neglected the education of young people in 
conflict zones, at the cost of making youth the recruits for terrorist groups 
and their parents the most likely to leave and seek a better future for their 
children in Europe or America.”

“If children who have to leave their homes because of conflict are able to 
receive an education, the hope is that they’re better equipped with the 
knowledge and skills to go back and rebuild their country,” Gemma Terry says.

“Finally, people are seeing how important education is in conflict zones. 
Finally, it’s a priority.”

Pearson is partnering with Save the Children for the ‘Every Child Learning’ 
partnership 
<https://www.pearson.com/social-impact/social-innovation/every-child-learning.html>
 to increase educational opportunities for Syrian refugees and host communities 
in Jordan and innovate new solutions to help improve the delivery of education 
in emergency and conflict-affected settings. As part of this partnership, 
Pearson and Save the Children worked together on advocacy activities at the 
World Humanitarian Summit to raise awareness of the urgency around improving 
education for children affected by conflict.

Content on this page is paid for and provided by Pearson 
<https://www.pearson.com/>, a sponsor of the Guardian Global Development 
Professionals Network
