
Tangier is the most artistic city in Morocco. There is a big creative 
community and people are very open. It’s one of the few places where you can 
still live an artistic life and meet real artists. They come from Europe and 
America to visit and many stay, because there’s such magic here. I have lived 
in New York and visited cities all over the world, but I love Tangier best.

People from Winston Churchill to John Malkovich have stayed at Hotel El Minzah 
<http://el-minzah-hotel-tanger.h-rez.com/index.htm>. One of the city’s oldest 
and most important hotels, it opened in 1930 and its bars have always been a 
great place for parties. The Rolling Stones stayed many times, and I’ve been 
for dinner and parties with writers and musicians from all over the world.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gbpe%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gbpe%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd97f6ba9e126f1b8e147b7e0d3c681712bbb167%2F1054_268_2021_2147%2F2021.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20bought%20hash%20for%20Mick%20Jagger'%3A%20Bachir%20Attar%20on%20why%20he%20loves%20Tangier&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gbpe%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I+bought+hash+for+Mick+Jagger%27%3A+Bachir+Attar+on+why+he+loves+Tangier&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gbpe%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd97f6ba9e126f1b8e147b7e0d3c681712bbb167%2F1054_268_2021_2147%2F2021.jpg>
 Bachir Attar (right) leads the funeral service for jazz legend Ornette Coleman 
– with whom he had toured – in New York in June, 2015 Photograph: Taylor 
Hill/Getty Images 
The best thing to eat in Tangier is fish – whichever kind is fresh that day. 
Chellah Beach Club on Avenue Mohammed VI is a wonderful place to try it. To 
prepare seafood, we use herbs and spices, then grill it, fry it or cook it in a 
tagine. In the north of Morocco, we eat dishes with goat or pigeon too, and 
these are very nice. Couscous should always be made at home; it tastes better 
that way. People in northern Morocco still make bread fresh every day in their 
homes.

My favourite neighbourhood is the Kasbah. The architecture is a mix of 
Andalucian, Moorish, colonial and Moroccan. Many big old houses are owned by 
European expats – writers, musicians, painters – who throw fantastic parties. A 
little jazz cafe calledLes Fils du Détroit 
<https://www.facebook.com/lesfilsdudetroittanger/>, next to the Kasbah Museum, 
is popular with older Arab-Andalucian musicians. There are jamming sessions and 
the tea is not too expensive.

It’s traditional in Tangier to smoke kief [the Arabic word for hash]. You use 
a long wooden pipe called asebsi, which you can buy in the medina. This is the 
way we smoked hashish for centuries, especially in the countryside. You can 
also buy leather pouches for storing kief and all kinds of ashtrays.

The best place to hear traditional Moroccan music is Jajouka 
<http://www.jajouka.com/>. This is the village where I was born, around two 
hours from Tangier by car. Our music dates back over 4,000 years and my family 
has lived there for generations. Some Moroccan music is for dancing or worship, 
but ours is for healing. We use thegimbri (a goatskin-covered bass lute), the 
ghaita(a double-reed horn) and the lira (a bamboo flute), as well as several 
types of small drum.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gbpe%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gbpe%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd2343b2549c1d57feec3be55fab149eb5500518%2F95_0_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20bought%20hash%20for%20Mick%20Jagger'%3A%20Bachir%20Attar%20on%20why%20he%20loves%20Tangier&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gbpe%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I+bought+hash+for+Mick+Jagger%27%3A+Bachir+Attar+on+why+he+loves+Tangier&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gbpe%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd2343b2549c1d57feec3be55fab149eb5500518%2F95_0_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
 Singers and musicians rehearse at Les Fils du Détroit. Photograph: Khattabi 
Hicham 
Our summer music festival is Master Musicians of Jajouka (August 26-28, 
jajouka.com <http://www.jajouka.com/>). The lineup last year included Donovan, 
Lazywall and DJ Logic, as well as Public Overdrive, the band ofJoolz Leitch 
<https://www.facebook.com/joolz.leitch>, grandson of Brian Jones (of the 
Rolling Stones). Locals, visitors from Tangier and tourists all come, and we 
have a big musical party.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gbpe%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gbpe%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F452d5e96baee1d6dbe0fed28a9d9eb703d3dd586%2F0_0_640_425%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20bought%20hash%20for%20Mick%20Jagger'%3A%20Bachir%20Attar%20on%20why%20he%20loves%20Tangier&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gbpe%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I+bought+hash+for+Mick+Jagger%27%3A+Bachir+Attar+on+why+he+loves+Tangier&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gbpe%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F452d5e96baee1d6dbe0fed28a9d9eb703d3dd586%2F0_0_640_425%2F640.jpg>
 The El Minzah hotel, where Bachir had dinner with Mick Jagger. Photograph: 
Alamy 
In the 1980s, the Rolling Stones spent time with us in Tangier and Jajouka. 
They loved to smoke kief. I remember once, after dinner at El Minzah, Mick 
Jagger turned to me and said, “Bachir, I need a pipe and some kief. Will you go 
and find some?” I went out and found a guy who was selling but realised I had 
no money! I had to persuade him to give me the pipe and kief for free because 
it was for the Stones.

Mick used to borrow money and forget to pay it back. Once I lent him 2,000 
dirhams (about £135). Just before he was leaving, I said: “Mick, I’m looking 
for my 2,000 dirhams.” He knelt on the ground and wrote me two traveller’s 
cheques for $100 each. I sold one for $500, and the other one I still have. It 
is a funny symbol of this time in my life, but a good investment too, I think.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gbpe%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gbpe%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea5f221ba47bb24801d00bd853deda43a0b891e1%2F125_0_4059_2436%2F4059.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20bought%20hash%20for%20Mick%20Jagger'%3A%20Bachir%20Attar%20on%20why%20he%20loves%20Tangier&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gbpe%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I+bought+hash+for+Mick+Jagger%27%3A+Bachir+Attar+on+why+he+loves+Tangier&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gbpe%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea5f221ba47bb24801d00bd853deda43a0b891e1%2F125_0_4059_2436%2F4059.jpg>
 Bachir Attar (centre) leads the Master Musicians of Jajouka at a festival. 
Photograph: Cherie Nutting 
I think the development of Tangier today is a good thing. The city is cleaner 
and there are new buildings and new roads. We can’t stay in the past. If you 
want to be part of the city, you have to change with it.

• This article was amended on 10 February 2016 to correct the dates for the 
festival run by Master Musicians of Jajouka led by Bachir Attar. Because of an 
editing error, an earlier version gave the dates for a festival run by a 
different group, theMaster Musicians of Joujouka <http://www.joujouka.org/>.
