
Leslie (Les) David Gibbard 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/oct/20/les-gibbard-obituary> (1945-2010) 
was born in Kaiapoi, New Zealand in 1945. He displayed an early talent for 
drawing, regularly contributing cartoons and caricatures to his school 
magazine. Outside of school he attended local election campaigns and town 
council meetings to practice his drawing skills and spent weekends and summer 
holidays studying the works of Guardian cartoonistSir David Low 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=DAL&>.

At the age of 16 Gibbard went on a tour of his local newspaper, the Auckland 
Star <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Auckland_Star>. During the visit Gibbard so 
impressed the assistant editor that he was appointed as a trainee reporter. 
After a short spell at the Star Gibbard moved to theNew Zealand Herald 
<http://www.nzherald.co.nz/> where he spent two days a week drawing cartoons 
under the supervision of the eminent cartoonistSir Gordon Minhinnick 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gordon_Minhinnick>. After a brief period working 
in Australia, Gibbard moved to the UK in 1967, initially working freelance and 
then for theSunday Telegraph <http://www.telegraph.co.uk/>.

He joined the Guardian in 1969 succeeding Bill Papas 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=WEP&> 
as political cartoonist. At only 23 Gibbard was the youngest cartoonist the 
newspaper had ever appointed. Gibbard's first cartoon for the Guardian was 
published on the 10 April 1969 following the maiden flight of Concorde 002. The 
cartoon portrayed Labour prime ministerHarold Wilson 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/harold-wilson> talking to a journalist 
about the supersonic aircraft, the caption being, "I feel I can state without 
contradiction that very shortly things are going to boom in Britain".

Gibbard described the Guardian he joined as "a dream shop window for any 
political cartoonist". At this time cartoons had a prominent role in the 
Guardian, accompanying major stories and often occupying the front or back 
pages. Unlike many other newspapers, Gibbard's cartoons were usually drawn late 
in the day so that they would be up to date with the latest news coverage. One 
example of this is shown below in a cartoon which was created for the 1970 
general election. Gibbard had originally drawnHarold Wilson 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/harold-wilson> as the victor but as it 
became clear thatEdward Heath <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/edward-heath>
 was to secure an unexpected victory he returned to the Guardian offices to 
replace the head of Wilson with Heath.
 Close up of Les Gibbard's original cartoon for the 1970 general election 
showing the head of Harold Wilson replaced with the head of Edward Heath 
following Heath’s unexpected victory. Photograph: Robin Christian for the 
Guardian 
Gibbard worked fast, sketching many ideas for the editor to choose from before 
creating the final cartoon for the paper. Gibbard's sketchbooks held in theGNM 
Archive <http://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive?INTCMP=SRCH> demonstrate his 
frenetic style and his excellent insight into British politics. The download 
below is taken from one of Gibbard's sketchbooks for the period 14 October 1980 
– 15 April 1981 (GNM Archive reference:LDG/4/2/4 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=LDG%2f4%2f2%2f4&>
). Drawn in typical Gibbard style using pen and ink the page shows his ideas 
for cartoons on 11-13 March 1981, including caricatures of prime minister
Margaret Thatcher <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaretthatcher> and 
the controversial1981 budget 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/1999/mar/03/budget1999.budget18> which came at a 
time of high unemployment and inflation.

Page from Les Gibbard sketchbook, 11-13 March 1981
 <http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1379666048556/Page-from-Les-Gibbard-sketc.pdf>
Gibbard left the Guardian in 1994 but still continued to contribute to the 
paper in a freelance capacity. In his 25 year career at the Guardian Gibbard 
produced cartoons on the major events of the era including the election of
Margaret Thatcher <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaretthatcher>, the 
Watergate scandal <https://www.theguardian.com/world/watergate>, miners strikes 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/miners-strike-1984-85>, and the Vietnam 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/shared/spl/hi/asia_pac/05/vietnam_war/html/introduction.stm>
,Falklands <http://www.theguardian.com/flash/0,5860,659004,00.html> and Gulf 
wars <http://www.theguardian.com/flash/0,5860,423247,00.html>.

As well as the Guardian, Gibbard contributed to a number of other newspapers 
and magazines, including theDaily Sketch 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Daily_Sketch>, Daily Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/>, Evening Standard <http://www.standard.co.uk/>, 
The House Magazine <> and Time Out <http://www.timeout.com/london>. Gibbard 
also worked on both TV and film animation. In 1976 Gibbard produced 'Newshound' 
an animated political cartoon series for Granada TV's Reports Politics 
programme. He later went on to work on children's TV programmes and films 
including the Wind in the Willows, the Animals of Farthing Wood and the Oscar 
nominated animated film, Famous Fred, which was based on a book by fellow 
Guardian cartoonistPosy Simmonds 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=PSI&>.

The GNM Archive <http://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive?INTCMP=SRCH> holds a 
largecollection of Gibbard's work 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=LDG&> 
for the Guardian comprising of over 2500 cartoons, caricatures and 
illustrations and 18 sketchbooks of ideas for his Guardian political cartoons 
dating from 1969-1992. The collection was presented to theGNM Archive 
<http://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive?INTCMP=SRCH> by Gibbard in 2004. A 
catalogue <http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/default.aspx>of the material is 
available to search online and the collection can be consulted in theGNM Archive
 <http://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive?INTCMP=SRCH> reading room by 
appointment.

More information about the life and work of Les Gibbard can be found on the 
pages below:

Catalogue of Les Gibbard's work held at the GNM Archive 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=LDG&> 

Guardian obituary for Les Gibbard  
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/oct/20/les-gibbard-obituary>

British Cartoon Archive biography of Les Gibbard  
<http://www.cartoons.ac.uk/artists/lesliegibbard/biography>
