
In the news this week you will read a lot about how social services failed 
two-year-old Liam Fee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/31/liam-fee-mother-rachel-trelfa-and-partner-convicted-of-murder>
 by not taking the steps needed to save him from the harrowing abuse that cut 
his life so short. You will hear how a senior Fife social worker said in court 
that at one pointLiam “fell off their radar” 
<http://www.heraldscotland.com/news/14527249.Liam_Fee__investigation_launched_after_social_workers_admit_toddler__fell_off_radar_/>
. A member of staff had gone off sick, no-one else was assigned and Liam’s case 
was not reviewed until further concerns were raised.

There will be a drive to hold someone to account, to pin blame on the workers 
who could have saved Liam and a thirst for the justice denied him while he 
still lived.


But all this talk of blame and lessons learned will hide a harsh truth – that 
it was not professionals that killed this little boy, but his mother and her 
partner, Rachel and Nyomi Fee.


Related: Cameron wants big changes to social work but won't tackle the real 
problems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/may/19/cameron-social-work-bill-adoption-regulation>

These are people so devious that they tried to blame other children for what 
they did. Looking to pin this blame on social workers means absolving Rachel 
and Nyomi Fee. It means making others responsible for the horrific abuse they 
went to such great lengths to hide.

Let’s not hide the fact that we’ve been here before. Peter Connelly. Victoria 
Climbié. Daniel Pelka. Ayeeshia Jane Smith. Keegan Downer.

A sorrowful roll call of lives ended by those who should have loved them most. 
United by their young age, vulnerability, the nature of their deaths at the 
hands of their carers – and the fact they were all known to social services.

We’ve been here before and we’ve acted in this way before: shocking headlines, 
public outcries, promises of reviews, commitments to change and a response of 
more robust legislation to ensure this won’t happen again.

But it has happened again. It keeps happening again. The same old responses 
mean it will happen again.

If we do the same thing again in response to Liam’s murder, then we cannot 
hope for a different result. Instead, we must be more ambitious in our thinking 
and make a promise to our children that we will genuinely do things differently 
this time.

The lessons are simple. Social services are overstretched. Social workers 
spend too much time at their desks. Workplace cultures prioritise paperwork 
over people.

Usually I would ask for more money in these situations, but I’m not going to 
demand that – the pot is empty and we’ll accept that for now. Most other 
professions have felt the pinch of austerity, so I’m not going to ask for 
social workers to be given special treatment.

Instead, I’m going to ask for more time. More time to spend with families. 
More time to speak to children. More time to do the hands on work we want to do.

This is my plea: to be given more time with the people that matter, the 
children like Liam who need somebody in their homes and not sat in an office 
ticking boxes.

If we accept that funding is not coming, we need a radical overhaul in how we 
work. In Essex, we have seen social workers being told by their director toget 
out there and spend more time with families 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/11/dave-hill-childrens-services-look-after-fewer-children-families>
. In Leeds, we have seen a commitment to cap caseloads at 18 so workers can 
target their support where it’s needed. Other areas have seen families being 
referred directly to early intervention services and family group conference 
facilitators, removing the need for a lengthy assessment process.

The new children and social work bill 
<http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/may/18/children-social-work-bill-queens-speech>
 will allow local authorities to trial new and innovative ways of working. This 
freedom must be embraced, as should learning from other areas to define what 
works well.


Who will be bold enough to say that some social workers should only hold 
section 47 child protection cases, where children are at risk of serious harm, 
and allocate less serious section 17 children in need cases to early 
intervention services?


Related: Ayeeshia Jane Smith's murder must not be used to score points 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/apr/19/ayeesha-jane-smith-murder-blame-politics>

Which area will trial new, condensed ways of working, where families are not 
seen once every fortnight but every single day for a month? Where are the 
leaders who will try out new ways of recording case notes, reducing the time 
spent on data entry by allowing workers to record data via voice or video. What 
new ways of working will free workers from desks and reduce the burden of 
repetitive data entry?

I can’t promise that freeing social workers up so they can spend more time 
with children will prevent all abuse; if somebody is hell bent on harming a 
child, then it’s impossible to always stop this.


But more time with families will give us a better chance at catching this 
abuse before it is too late. It will allow us to gain the trust of children, 
who will open up if they know someone is there for them. It will show parents 
that we are not going to give up just because we have artificial deadlines to 
meet.

It is too late now for Liam, but let’s not let another child’s death be in 
vain.

Social Work Tutor is a child protection social worker and writes at 
socialworktutor.com <http://socialworktutor.com/>

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
