
Dear “Vicky”,

Like many other social workers, I suspect, I settled down last week with a 
huge degree of trepidation to watch theDispatches 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/dispatches> documentary that you were so 
pivotal in. The ensuing hour made me feel plenty of frustration, disappointment 
and the overwhelming sense that I had been betrayed by somebody who should know 
better than most the pressure faced by frontline social workers.

A quick look on Twitter 
<http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/may/27/dispatches-social-work-birmingham-twitter-reaction>
 confirmed that my feelings were shared by practitioners up and down the 
country. After a few days spent mulling over the implications of the programme, 
I felt compelled to write to you.

Last week I went to bed and cried. It wasn’t the first time this year, nor 
will it be the last

My first, and probably most enduring feeling, is that by choosing to film 
people covertly and without consent you broke a sacred trust. The importance of 
being able to speak to colleagues about your cases, your struggles and your 
successes should never be underestimated. Nor should it be suggested by anybody 
that by admitting you are finding a case or some aspect of your work 
challenging, this means a child is at risk.

Vicky, I feel certain that in your career you have struggled and sought 
support, and offered that support to colleagues in return. But I should imagine 
there are some devastated social workers in Birmingham who may never feel able 
to engage in informal peer supervision again, thanks to your deception.

My second thoughts are about your explanation of why you decided to go 
undercover. Thebrief interview I read  
<http://www.communitycare.co.uk/2016/05/26/dispatches-social-worker-breaks-silence-went-undercover/>
talks about changing the discourse around social work. How did you expect to 
manage that by using such clandestine measures? The only logical way to change 
any discourse is to disprove it, and another quick look at the responses on 
social media demonstrate that, if anything, you have reinforced the existing 
one.

Related: Birmingham children's services are again being churned up and set back
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/may/25/birmingham-childrens-services-dispatches-channel-4>

Finally, I want to say that last week I went to bed and cried. It wasn’t the 
first time this year, nor will it be the last. On this occasion the source of 
my tears was not frustration caused by austerity, or because I felt unable to 
deliver the quality of work a family deserve due to caseloads and conflicting 
demands. It was because a member of our professional community, our family, 
decided to betray us in the worst possible way. If one is to believe your 
interview, you felt you had an opportunity to show the public an insight into 
the difficulties of our profession. Instead you contributed to a piece of 
television which directly contradicts what you set out to do.


Ms Brightside

The Social Life Blog 
<http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog> is written by 
people who work in or use social care services. If you’d like to write an 
article for the series, emailsocialcare@theguardian.com 
<mailto:socialcare@theguardian.com> with your ideas.

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
