
My date, Hannes, had just been swimming in the East River and I could smell 
him over the cafe table. This made sense, as it had been his scent that first 
attracted me several weeks earlier.


I’d chosen him as one of my Smell Dating <https://smell.dating/> matches, an 
online matchmaking project that combines the internet’s ability to judge 
multiple people at once with a physical object (a smelly T-shirt) packed full 
of pheromones.

Billed as “the first mail odor dating service”, Smell Dating 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/dating> hopes to connect people based 
on what body odor they find attractive. For $25, you’re sent a T-shirt to wear 
for three days – no perfume or deodorant allowed. You then send it off and 
receive samples to sniff in exchange. You choose which scent you like the best, 
and if both your nostrils agree the other smells great, you’ll be matched via 
email. No information about age, gender or sexual orientation is known 
beforehand.

“Generally the people who smell better to you are genetically different to 
you,” explained Tega Brain, a 33-year-old artist from Brooklyn who created the 
project with New York University researcher Sam Lavigne.


Research on pheromones is still ongoing, but Brain explains that our interest 
in someone else’s smell is based on the compatibility of your immune systems 
(sexy!).


“We sort of joke, maybe high contemporary divorce rates are due to deodorant 
and not being in tune to smell,” she added.


For three days I wore the same white V-neck T-shirt both day and night in an 
effort to “embrace the musky possibilities”, as Smell Dating encourages. 
Luckily it was a relatively cool weekend and I deliberately avoided exercise, 
but I was working on a big story and anxiously sweated over it (and then 
worried how that would affect my scent).


By the end of the weekend, my T-shirt had a definite pong to it. I wrapped it 
up in its bag and shipped it off. A week later, I received 10 different bits of 
T-shirt to sniff. The samples all come from the armpit region. Brain called it 
the “most data-rich” area.


Some smelled so strongly of rancid body odor that I gagged. Another smelled 
like bubblegum. One had the fragrance of laundry mixed with sweat; another like 
they’d just gone on a hike outdoors.


“One of the things about smell, it was so clear to me who I liked and didn’t … 
it releases you from having to do that [normal internet dating] analysis,” said 
Brain.


After my scent experience, I filled out the online form with my top picks and 
awaited my results.


I got four matches: with a German artist, a sex columnist, an artist who once 
did an exhibit with human breast milk cheese and an origami artist. Two men, 
two women. Interestingly, I found that I matched with those I’d ranked as 
“maybe” rather than a definite “yes”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tk4z%2Fsfb%23img-1&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tk4z%2Fsfb%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78c8a90100869868a9a6944fe2f69cae2abb6c7a%2F0_254_2016_1210%2F2016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Smell%20dating%3A%20sniffing%20out%20potential%20lovers%20(and%20their%20sweaty%20T-shirts)&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tk4z%2Fstw%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Smell+dating%3A+sniffing+out+potential+lovers+%28and+their+sweaty+T-shirts%29&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tk4z%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78c8a90100869868a9a6944fe2f69cae2abb6c7a%2F0_254_2016_1210%2F2016.jpg>
 Amber Jamieson meets her smell date, German artist Hannes. Photograph: Amber 
Jamieson 
The German artist, Hannes, and I met for a Friday afternoon coffee, engaging 
in interesting chats about how he lives on a boat in New York City and goes 
swimming in the East River, which is so notoriously filthy that there’sa skit 
in Seinfeld about it <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0hK3pBcY3k0>. He showed 
me a virtual reality meditation app he’d created. He wasn’t a match for me 
personally – although I did think he was handsome and smelled good, so the 
initial physical reaction was accurate – but I’ve just done an email 
introduction with another friend of mine who I think he’d get along great with.

“Smell dating is fully supportive of secondary matchmaking,” laughed Brain, 
when I told her about my date. They’re planning to run another New York and 
North America round of Smell Dating soon, and another for a museum exhibition 
in Shanghai, China.


Brain herself joined in, going on a date just last week with one of her 
matches. “It was very strange getting an email saying ‘you smell nice’,” she 
admitted. She doesn’t think she’ll see him again.
