
‘What about that nice variegated Solomon’s seal 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/plants/details?plantid=1503>?” I point to a lovely 
patch outside a Greenwich brownstone as we wander about Manhattan. “Surely 
that’s an acceptable variegation.”

“Nope,” my friend says emphatically. “I do not like variegation.” (“I do not 
likegreen eggs and ham 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/green-eggs-and-ham.html>,” I whisper to 
myself out of earshot.)

I point at some truly horrid variegation on a coleus 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/education-learning/gardening-children-schools/family-activities/grow-it/grow/coleus>
. “Is it just bad splashes, here and there – a thin margin of white can’t be 
that bad, surely?” I probe.

She purses her lips and looks horrified. (“I would not like them here or 
there. I do not like them anywhere. I do not like green eggs and ham.”)

I persist: “Some variegation is really very good. Naturally occurring 
variegation can be very subtle; it can make a scheme.”

Related: Perennial Vegetables: Sow, Grow, Repeat Winter 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/audio/2016/jan/23/perennial-vegetables>

Variegation is caused by a number of things: pigmentary is the most common, 
where a lack or masking of chlorophyll causes different leaf colours. White 
variegation is a lack of chlorophyll, and plants with a lot of white will be 
weaker growers. Sometimes the masking of green pigments will cause either the 
whole leaf to look reddish or purple, or zonal markings such as those onoxalis 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/advice/profile?PID=498> or pelargoniums 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/advice/profile?pid=338>. Some variegation is caused by 
the reflection of light on the surface of the leaves, and other times it’s 
because of hairs on parts of the leaf.

In some of my favourite plants, either the leaf margin or the veins are 
variegated. I loveblessed Mary’s thistle or variegated milk thistle, Silybum 
marianum <https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/17359/Milk-thistle/Details>, which has 
fantastic silver leaf venation. It comes from the Mediterranean and is a 
robust, large biennial with very spiky, highly patterned leaves (that are also 
edible). It looks good among other silver-leaved plants such as Salvia argentea 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/16310/i-Salvia-argentea-i/Details> or against a 
bed of shingle. It looks like a big thistle, so it has to be used wisely or it 
can appear weedy, but it has a majestic air and the seeds are much loved by 
winter birds.

Likewise, the Italian arum Arum italicum ‘Marmoratum’ 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/plants/details?plantid=178> has seductive dark, glossy 
green leaves with elegant veining in silver-white. The foliage is by far at its 
best during the winter months, and it loves a dark, damp corner. Another useful 
one for ground cover in shade is the variegated form of ground elder,Aegopodium 
podagraria <https://www.rhs.org.uk/advice/profile?PID=215>. The variegation 
slows its progress, but not completely, so it’s one for space or not at all. It 
looks wonderful mixed with forget-me-nots or as an understorey to large-leaved 
things such asRodgersia aesculifolia 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/15918/Rodgersia-aesculifolia/Details>.

Related: Alys Fowler: hepaticas are the new snowdrops. Yes, really 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/23/hepaticas-gardening-alys-fowler>

I love variegation in the brassica family, too – I enjoy putting a bit of 
variegated land cress (Barbarea vulgaris ‘Variegata’) in a salad, plus there’s 
the wonderful, if almost impossible to get hold of, ornamental cabbageBrassica 
oleraceavar acephala ‘Crème Chantilly’ 
<http://www.cgf.net/plantdetails.aspx?id=13219>. This has large, white, 
variegated margins to the leaves and unusually white flowers. It’s a large 
plant compared with most other ornamental cabbages, and works well with grasses 
or used as you would flowering sea kale,Crambe cordifolia 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/plants/details?plantid=568>, for the back of the border.
