
An ad promoting a breathalyser for mothers to monitor their alcohol 
consumption before breastfeeding has been banned by the UK advertising watchdog.

A product ad on Amazon.co.uk’s Marketplace, which allows customers to sell 
items online, promoted the VicTsing digital alcohol breathalyser , which it 
said provided the same level of “professional accuracy” as those used by the 
police.

The product listing, posted by a Chinese parent company called Shenzhen 
Weirongqun Keji under the VicTech brand, promoted it as a “good companion” for 
breastfeeding mothers who want to know whether it is OK to feed their child 
after drinking.

The Advertising Standards Authority <http://www.theguardian.com/media/asa> 
received a complaint from rival breathalyser company AlcoDigital arguing that 
the ad exaggerated the capability of the product and that it was irresponsible 
to say it could indicate to breastfeeding mothers whether it was safe to feed 
their child.

The ASA said it was concerned at Shenzhen Weirongqun Keji’s lack of response 
to its investigation and “apparent disregard” for the UK advertising code.

Related: Government ad 'ridiculed' for claiming teachers can earn £65,000 is 
cleared 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/09/government-ad-teachers-department-for-educations-asa-pay>

It said the company’s ad did not provide any evidence that its product could 
deliver results as accurate as a police breathalyser, and therefore that 
breastfeeding mothers could rely on it.

The watchdog banned the ad for making misleading and irresponsible claims.

“We told Shenzhen Weirongqun Keji not to make claims which stated or implied 
that the product could accurately measure blood alcohol content levels, 
including those which implied the product could be used as an aid for 
breastfeeding mothers,” ruled the ASA.

“We also told them not to make claims which stated or implied that the product 
had the same level of accuracy at detecting blood alcohol levels as 
breathalysers used by the police.”
