
Q I love to wear a classic blue and white striped jumper with jeans. Last 
season I also bought jodhpur-style trousers to wear with my stripy jumpers. Can 
I wear this for yet another season?
Brigette

A Why not? Classic always looks the most stylish, and if you have found a look 
that works, repeat it. The best-dressed fashion editors find a style that suits 
them and stick to it, wearing it like a uniform. Fear not - the nautical stripy 
look is here for another season. So why not look at the See by Chloe nautical 
sweater dress with patch pockets or Hoss Intropia's multicoloured-stripe top 
with a large bow? My favourite is the Vivienne Westwood Anglomania red and 
white cowl-neck top.

Q I love the shape of the one-shouldered, asymmetric dresses I've seen stars 
wearing at red-carpet events. I need to wear a bra, but I haven't found an 
asymmetrical dress yet that works with underwear.
Denny

A  This style is a key look for summer. It has an ease to it: clean, simple 
lines, with the peekaboo shoulder adding a sexy twist. The good news is that 
there are variations on the design which work on different body shapes. You 
could wear a strapless bra with the one-shoulder designs seen at Yves Saint 
Laurent and Lanvin, but for sturdier support, try a dress with different-sized 
straps. These frocks pair one wide strap or sleeve with a delicate shoe-string 
strap. This ensures better coverage and support for us ladies with boobs. Look 
at Aquascutum's fluid blue dress or Preen's wraparound grey modern toga design 
to get the idea - and add a corsage decoration to give a Forties feel, as seen 
at Dior. My favourite high-street version of this dress is Warehouse's satin 
yellow dress (£60).

·  If you have a wardrobe question for Jo Jones, email her at 
ask.jo@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.jo@observer.co.uk>
