
It wasn’t overly surprising, really, to learn from two recent psychology 
studies that being “on call” is stressful, exhausting and dampens your mood. 
The tribulations of sleep-deprived junior doctors are legendary, while
zero-hours contracts <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/zero-hours-contracts> 
andunpredictable work schedules 
<http://thinkprogress.org/economy/2014/09/11/3565747/retail-scheduling/> are 
subjects of controversy on both sides of the Atlantic. But there are plenty of 
things wrong with those kinds of jobs: the sleep disruption of shift work; the 
family disruption of irregular hours; low pay. These studies –one German 
<http://psycnet.apa.org/?&fa=main.doiLanding&doi=10.1037/a0039602>, one Dutch 
<http://www.hindawi.com/journals/bmri/aa/643413/> – sought to pinpoint the 
specific psychological costs of knowing you could be called upon, so that you 
can’t entirely relax. Compared with genuine time off, on-call days left workers 
tired and unhappy, and withhigher levels of cortisol in their bloodstreams 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cortisol>, regardless of whether they ended up 
working or not. It also didn’t much matter if they had only a few on-call hours 
per week; those hours were tense and miserable all the same.

And these days, whatever it says in your contract, aren’t most of us with jobs 
increasingly on call, all the time? It’s worst at the bottom of the ladder, 
without doubt. But as many a glum cultural critic has noted – even if recently 
it seems as if the critic’s name is usuallyJonathan Franzen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/02/jonathan-franzen-writing-freedom>
 – technology has eroded the boundaries that used to segment our lives. 
Meanwhile, our employers’ expectations ratchet ever higher. (The latter isn’t 
always even deliberate: when your boss replies to your email on Sunday night, 
she might think she’s making a purely personal choice to do so – yet a subtle 
expectation has been established.) What this new research underlines is that 
the mere possibility of interruption is sufficient to cause trouble, even if 
that interruption never comes. Last year,a study 
<http://nymag.com/scienceofus/2014/12/mere-presence-of-your-phone-is-distracting.html>
 suggested that the visible presence of one’s mobile phone on the table was 
enough to disrupt performance at certain brain-taxing tasks. The phone didn’t 
need to ring; it just had to “crouch, getting ready to ring”, to quote Philip 
Larkin (while we’re on the topic of glum cultural critics). The potential was 
enough.

The bigger problem here – work’s incursion into every corner of our inner 
lives – is political, and won’t be fixed with tricks and tips. Nonetheless, 
it’s worth asking if there are ways you’re effectively putting yourself on call 
when you needn’t be. For example, I now habitually switch my mobile phone to 
flight mode for an hour or two each morning; sometimes I do it overnight, too, 
and I’m convinced I sleep better, even though nobody calls at 3am when I don’t. 
Other possibilities suggest themselves: if you don’t need to answer work emails 
at the weekend, don’t check them. (Use a separate address for non-work 
messages, or set upa Gmail filter 
<https://support.google.com/mail/answer/6579?hl=en> so you see only those you 
want to see.) Use a different device if you can, too: using work technology at 
home,it’s been shown 
<http://bps-occupational-digest.blogspot.de/2011/08/using-work-technology-at-home-hinders.html>
, makes it harder to detach. And for God’s sake turn off social media 
notifications on your phone, thus eliminating the nagging anticipation that one 
might arrive. There’s plenty in life you can’t control. Don’t leave your mind 
at the mercy of the things you can.

oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com <mailto:oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com>
