
According to Big Magic 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/323371/>, a new book 
on creativity byElizabeth Gilbert 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2009/jan/10/elizabeth-gilbert-books-interview-family>
, the reason you haven’t written your novel yet – or taken up weaving, or 
bonsai-cultivating, or otherwise given expression to the art inside you – is 
almost certainly fear. This is a staple of self-help culture I’ve always found 
hard to take. Receiving a life-threatening medical diagnosis is scary; not 
having the cash to feed your family is scary. Running out of oxygen while 
exploring the underwater Mexican cave system known asthe Temple of Doom 
<http://webecoist.momtastic.com/2009/01/19/worlds-deepest-and-most-dangerous-dive-sites/>
 is, I imagine, scary, too. But opening your notebook to jot down some ideas 
for a short story? Calling that “scary” feels melodramatic – a parody of the 
Anguished Artist. It calls to mind the (presumably apocryphal) tale of Salvador 
Dalí kicking a blind beggar in the street. “What did you do that for?” came the 
howled reply. Dalí: “Because you don’t have the pain of seeing!”

Yet my scepticism, I’ve reluctantly concluded, was misplaced. For many, the 
thought of expressing themselves creatively reallyis frightening. (Anyway, who 
am I kidding? I’ve often felt panic at the sight of a blank page.) And this 
isn’t especially surprising, since creative work is a collision point for 
numerous deep-rooted fears: of ridicule, of social rejection, of discovering 
you lack talent – not to mention the fear of stirring up emotions you’ve been 
expertly repressing for years.

Hang-ups about creativity reach far back into childhood: parents can all too 
easily squelch a child’s imagination, andresearch indicates that teachers 
generally dislike more creative pupils 
<http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1207/s15326934crj0801_1>, however much 
they claim otherwise. Indeed, some neuroscientists arguewe’ve evolved to 
distrust creative ideas 
<http://io9.com/5837333/our-brains-are-hardwired-to-fear-creativity>: except in 
a crisis, there’s little survival benefit to trying something new.

The real question, then, is not whether creativity provokes fear, but what to 
do when it does. Far too many authorities urge you to conquer it: to “kick 
resistance’s butt”, in the macho words of Steven Pressfield, author of the 
bestsellerThe War Of Art <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/war-of-art.html>. 
But as with any emotion, launching an all-out attack on fear is 
counterproductive. That just puts it centre stage, and risks reinforcing the 
notion that creativity must – and should – be one endless, bare-chested 
struggle.

It may be true, as Pressfield writes, that fear can be a useful sign: “The 
more scared we are of a work or calling, the more sure we can be that we have 
to do it.” But it doesn’t follow that creativity counts only if you hate it. As 
Gilbert puts it, “Too many artists still believe that anguish is the only true 
authentic emotional experience… Heaven forbid anyone should enjoy their chosen 
vocation.”

Cheesy as it sometimes feels, I much prefer Gilbert’s approach, which 
essentially involves treating fear like an annoying younger sibling, or a 
beloved though rather trying family pet. The trick, if you can do it, isn’t to 
ignore fear, or destroy it, and definitely not to obey it, but to make space 
for it. She uses the odd but useful analogy of a road trip. Fear always comes 
along for the ride, and that’s fine – but that doesn’t mean you need to let it 
anywhere near the steering wheel.

oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com <mailto:oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com>
