
I am a 32-year-old man and I have trouble with growing up. I aspire to be a 
“man” but at the same time I don’t know if this is what I really want to be 
just yet. My girlfriend of two years is older and wants kids with a reliable 
partner, but she needs me to grow up before this could conceivably happen. We 
often have arguments, always centered around my selfishness and uncommunicative 
attitude. Sometimes it feels as if she is my mother and I happily play the role 
of the young boy, especially if this means I don’t have to grow up. I worry 
that I don’t have the knowledge or the will to be a man yet, and then 
additionally I worry that I won’t mature at all, or it will be too late before 
I realise that I’ve messed it all up. Can you help me make the leap from 
boyhood to manhood and be happy about it?


• When leaving a message on this page, please be sensitive to the fact that 
you are responding to a real person in the grip of a real-life dilemma, who 
wrote to Private Lives asking for help, and may well view your comments here. 
Please consider especially how your words or the tone of your message could be 
perceived by someone in this situation, and be aware that comments that appear 
to be disruptive or disrespectful to the individual concerned will be removed.

• If you would like fellow readers to respond to a dilemma of yours, send us 
an outline of the situation of about 150 words. For advice from Pamela 
Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your 
concerns.

• All correspondence should reach us by Wednesday morning. Email:
private.lives@theguardian.com <mailto:private.lives@theguardian.com> (please 
don’t send attachments).
