
What does this droid say about me?

“I guess you could say I’m a Star Wars fan. People said my project was 
impossible, but I’m the type of person who shows that something can be done.”

Related: Me and my droid - in pictures 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/gallery/2015/dec/13/me-and-my-droid-in-pictures>

What the droid really says

Here are Richard and R2-J1 hanging out together, as per. Richard is 
strap-hanging, R2 isn’t; naughty R2 is taking up space for buggies and 
wheelchairs, though I’m sure he would move if those spaces were needed. R2-J1 
has been well brought up.

Richard and he have a close relationship; they are at ease with one another. 
Though R2 gets all the attention – it must be like walking around with Justin 
Bieber – Richard is more than a minder. He’s the creator. He remembers when R2 
was just an idea, a thought in Richard’s mind. He recalls bringing him into 
life, what he was like when he was just a bunch of misfiring electrics, before 
he was all grown up and travelling on a suburban train. Creating something 
perfect from scratch, gathering the component parts and assembling them into an 
actual being… Richard is R2’s mum.

Being R2’s mum means Richard is both proud and protective. You can see in his 
other photos <http://gu.com/p/4fx65/stw> how happy Richard is when people 
notice R2, but also his sideways glance when they want to get too close. In one 
picture he’s offering R2 a choice of fizzy drink. I imagine he guided R2 to the 
healthiest option.

It’s interesting that Richard made R2-J1 while living in Japan. Japan loves 
robots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/16/japans-robot-hotel-a-dinosaur-at-reception-a-machine-for-room-service>
, especially cute ones, and Richard could have gained respect with any robotic 
creation. ButStar Wars, for a 48-year-old American man, is about home, about 
being a kid exhilarated by the possibilities of space and the future. And now 
he lives in Japan, the spaciest, most futuristic place on earth. R2-J1 brings 
together a lot of elements for Richard: past, present, youth, middle age, home, 
abroad, robotics, real life, pet, child… He’s perfect. Also, R2-J1 is never 
going to go through those rebellious teenage years.


If you would like Miranda to cast an eye over your favourite possession, email 
a photograph tomagazine@observer.co.uk <mailto:magazine@observer.co.uk>
