
I can accept that you don’t like me, but it’s your hypocrisy that I can’t 
stand – the way you contact me only when you want something. Do you know how 
many unanswered conversations I have on WhatsApp <https://www.whatsapp.com>, 
asking me questions at 10pm the night before a test? Do you assume I’m too 
stupid to understand your attempted exploitation? Or is it that you just don’t 
care?

I never used to feel this way; I used to try so hard to explain theories and 
content to you. Even when you asked me in lessons, I was always willing to 
abandon my own work to help, but after all these years, nothing ever comes 
back. I hate the way your first reaction after getting a bad grade is to hope 
that I have scored just as miserably.

A newcomer to our class might find me arrogant, but that is because I started 
feigning indifference to my good results, because you all started taunting me. 
Well, guess what? I have feelings, too. I remember trying so hard to fit in. 
Lowering my eyes when I was called out multiple times for the school 
certificates; begging teachers not to hand out my essay as an example; spending 
break time crying on the toilet, because my friends told me they couldn’t stand 
my grades any more.

Related: What I’m really thinking: the IT support 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/sep/05/what-really-thinking-it-support>

I have emotions and hopes and dreams, too, you know. Deep down, I yearn for 
friendship, but for all my answers to your constant requests, you rejected me 
whenever I attempted to connect with you. I’m sick of being used. Next time you 
need to know something, try asking Google. I’m sure it doesn’t want anything 
back.

• Tell us what you’re really thinking – email mind@theguardian.com 
<mailto:mind@theguardian.com>
