
Vice Media <http://www.theguardian.com/media/vice-media> is is to launch in 
Russia and half-a-dozen eastern European countries, as the US youth brand 
continues its aggressive rollout across Europe.

Vice has expanded its strategic partnership with the Greek broadcaster Antenna 
Group to roll out acrossRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, the 
Czech Republic, Hungary, Bulgaria, Slovenia, Slovakia and Croatia.

Vice will initially launch digitally, with plans to expand into TV channels, 
either its own or in partnership with local broadcasters, striking deals to run 
blocks of programming.

Related: Vice UK staff move to unionise to 'share in the success' of media 
company 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/08/vice-uk-staff-unionise-share-success-media-company>

Russia is also being targeted by the BBC. In September, the corporation 
unveiled a proposal tolaunch the BBC World Service on satellite TV there 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/sep/05/bbc-plans-tv-and-radio-services-for-russia-and-north-korea>
 to counter state-sponsored rivals and bring “democracy and the free press” to 
countries with repressive media regimes.

As part of the deal, Vice intends to launch new editorial and production 
operations to create and distribute its programming across the seven new 
markets.

“Vice has found an incredible market in eastern Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, said Shane Smith, co-founder 
and chief executive. “Young people there want the kind of content that matters 
to them, whether it’s news or lifestyle or documentary, framed in the way they 
see the world. And very few outlets are offering it to them.”

Related: Vice to launch TV channel on Sky in UK 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/09/vice-tv-channel-sky-uk-viceland> 

The expansion builds on a deal struck between Antenna and Vice in 2014, which 
saw the launch of Vice programming blocks on Antenna-owned channels in Greece, 
followed by Serbia and Romania.

“Our partnership with Vice is a real success,” said Theodore Kyriakou, chief 
executive of Antenna Group. “We bring complementary strengths and have built 
large audiences quickly.”

The move comes a week after Vice announced it was to launch a TV channel on 
Sky in the UK and Ireland 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/09/vice-tv-channel-sky-uk-viceland>, 
its first channel launch in Europe. The deal is non-exclusive and Vice 
continues to negotiate with other partners in the UK, including BT and Virgin 
Media.

Vice plans to launch 12 TV channels across Europe over an 18-month period 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/oct/23/vice-plans-to-launch-12-tv-channels-across-europe>
.
