
Palm oil makes its way 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/ng-interactive/2014/nov/10/palm-oil-rainforest-cupboard-interactive>
 from the rainforests of Indonesia and Malaysia (and increasingly Africa and 
Latin America) into 50% of what we buy, from toothpaste to margarine. Linked to 
deforestation, habitat loss,fires 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/nov/11/indonesia-forest-fires-explained-haze-palm-oil-timber-burning>
 and the displacement of communities, the production of palm oil has raised 
major concerns to date.


The palm oil industry is also a huge user of migrant labour 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/nov/09/palm-oil-migrant-workers-orangutans-malaysia-labour-rights-exploitation-environmental-impacts>
, which bring problems of exploitation and discrimination. Here’s what we 
learned in a recent expertlive chat 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/feb/01/migrant-workers-support-palm-oil-supply-chain-indonesia-malaysia-trafficking>
 on palm oil and migration.

1. Palm oil is a popular industry for migrants 


Related: Palm oil: why do we care more about orangutans than migrant workers? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/nov/09/palm-oil-migrant-workers-orangutans-malaysia-labour-rights-exploitation-environmental-impacts>

Oil palm plantations in south-east Asia have tripled in just a decade, 
employing around 3.5 million workers 
<http://humanityunited.org/pdfs/Modern_Slavery_in_the_Palm_Oil_Industry.pdf> in 
Malaysia and Indonesia alone. Malaysian nationals are generally not willing to 
work in the plantations’ harsh conditions for the low wages offered, meaning 
work is almost always available in the country’s growing industry. This makes 
it an attractive destination for people coming to gthe region seeking a living, 
and for labour intermediaries looking to profit from connecting workers to jobs.


2. Using migrant labour in palm oil is nothing new 


When the Dutch first introduced oil palms to south-east Asia 150 years ago, 
they brought migrants from India and China to cultivate the plantations. Now 
the region employs workers from countries including Nepal, Thailand, the 
Philippines, Burma, Cambodia, Bangladesh, Pakistan and Vietnam.


Oil palm plantations are among the least monitored worksites in the world due 
to their remoteness and size, but the rapid growth of mobile phone technology 
is bringing the industry’s abuses out of the shadows.

3. A desperation to work makes migrant workers vulnerable

“Some come from very dire situations, and migrate for work in order to 
survive,” says Daryll Delgado, the research and stakeholder engagement 
programme manager at labour rights non-profit Verité South East Asia. 
<http://www.verite.org/> “Many of them leave their families, sell their lands 
or borrow money to finance the cost of migration for work.”

An eagerness to earn a living, plus a lack of knowledge of the job and the 
country they are being recruited into, makes migrants vulnerable to deception 
and false promises.

4. Migrant workers have fewer rights than local workers


Many workers lack proper documentation and the conditions of stay are 
dependent on their employers or sponsors, explains Delgado.


“They are not as free to move around or mingle with society, they cannot 
easily change jobs even if the conditions are untenable [...] they cannot 
easily refuse the terms of the job given to them, they cannot advocate for 
better conditions, they usually don’t have access to grievance mechanisms, they 
cannot join unions. [Plus] there are other barriers, such as language, culture, 
and gender which also adds to their vulnerability.”

5. Brands will push suppliers to improve labour standards


NGOs have a history of campaigning against workers’ rights violations 
<http://www.finnwatch.org/en/news/213-ioi-group-suspected-of-serious-labour-rights-violations>
 but Pablo Pacheco, principal scientist at the Center for International 
Forestry Research, believes consumer goods companies will also increasingly 
pressure palm oil suppliers to demonstrate they don’t violate labour standards.

We’ve already seen this happen for environmental sustainability. For example, 
companies including Dunkin’ Donuts, McDonald’s, Nestlé and Unilever pledged not 
to source from palm oil giant IOI after the Roundtable on Sustainable Palm Oil 
(RSPO) – a body set up to address environmental and social issues in palm oil –
suspended 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/apr/09/ioi-malaysian-palm-oil-company-unilever-mars-kellogg-rspo-deforestation>
 IOI’s sustainability certification in April over allegations of deforestation.

Related: Palm oil giant's impact in Indonesia worse than reported, says 
Greenpeace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/jun/09/palm-oil-giant-ioi-impact-indonesia-worse-than-reported-says-greenpeace>

6. Businesses must take control of recruitment


To demonstrate real commitment to preventing the exploitation of migrant 
labour, Delgado says suppliers must invest time and resources in the ethical 
recruitment and fair hiring of migrant workers.

 First, they must get to the root of the problem, going as far back as the 
source country, district or village where workers come from and look into the 
recruitment practices of usually unauthorised, unregulated labour brokers and 
sub-agents.


“[Then] they should take full control of the whole recruitment and hiring 
process, conduct due diligence of their labour suppliers, provide workers 
decent working and living conditions, give them access to communication and 
grievance mechanisms, protect them from discrimination, and let them enjoy 
their basic rights to freedom of movement and association.”

7. A lack of official recognition damages migrant children 


The lack of official recognition or status of migrants can mean children are 
born “stateless” andcannot access government services 
<http://www.unicef.org/protection/malaysia_61973.html>, including health and 
education.

Torben Venning, project director of Borneo Child Aid 
<http://www.borneochildaid.org/>, says the organisation has managed to get the 
main plantation companies in Malaysia involved in building schools and funding 
education for children.

In his experience, the RSPO has improved the situation and the problem is 
greatest at smaller plantations which aren’t RSPO members.

However, to address the issue fully, Venning wants the provision of education 
for children to be included as a major compliance issue for members in the
RSPO’s general principles and criteria 
<http://www.rspo.org/resources/key-documents/certification/rspo-principles-and-criteria>
.

 * Check out our short animation on how to clean up the murky world of palm oil
 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/video/sustainable-palm-oil-animation>