
A Kilner jar? You filled an entire jar? In one year? As a single person? Not 
saying that’s not great – one jar of waste’s got to be better than one and a 
half or two, hasn’t it? Trust me, it took us a couple of years to get almost 
zero, but now that we’re down to a matchbox between the four of us, I feel so 
guilty about all those years we filled a jar. Look, if it makes you feel 
better, even I didn’t make my own mascara until 2012 – super easy: just 
charcoal, beeswax and argan oil, like our great grandmothers used.

Can I see what’s in it? Straws! And is this a paper napkin? Rule one, never go 
out without your own stainless-steel straw, plate, fork, napkin, cup, metal 
water bottle, cloth bag, homemade soap, Kilner jar and mooncup, just in case. 
And see this chocolate wrapper? If someone offers me a wrapped anything, I just 
refuse. You don’t have to be rude, just say you’ve made a principled decision 
to embrace a waste-free lifestyle, and that you’d love a smile instead. Now, 
this old plaster, that’s exactly why I make all the kids’ out of cotton, like 
our grandmothers did, so they’ll compost. Well, I did until the sepsis. And if 
you shop 100% pre-loved, you won’t be sending these clothes labels to landfill. 
Thanks! Well spotted, Jimmy Choos: rule two, zero waste doesn’t mean zero style 
– well, when I’m done, I’ll just take them to another secondhand shop. You 
think the Romans ever threw out old togas? Bras? Right, I’m not saying it’s 
always easy. Pants you can make.

Rule three on going waste-free: dump your day job. I don’t feel I have a 
choice, ethically, when I look at some of experts –have you seen the size of 
their jars? I can tell one of them is still buying lipstick. You can’t get 
beetroot that colour. So we’re pledging to fill no more than a thimble in 2016. 
It’s all in my book, if you want to pre-order. There are certain things you 
really don’t want to buy secondhand.
