
The National Audit Office has exposed another NHS organisation for system-wide 
failures – poor financial controls, disjointed services, incomplete data and 
staff with the wrong skills. The culprit isNHS England 
<https://www.england.nhs.uk/> and its commissioning of specialised services 
<https://www.nao.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/The-commissioning-of-specialised-services-in-the-NHS.pdf>
 (pdf).


Specialised services are huge business for the NHS, consuming almost £15bn 
last year – about 14% of the totalNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> 
budget – and slated for 7% growth in 2016-17. Around 300 health organisations 
provide at least one specialised service, which cover everything from specific 
mental health problems to chemotherapy.

The ability of NHS England 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/england> to manage this budget 
is crucial – if it cannot control the costs, it will impede the adoption of new 
treatments and technologies while sucking yet more money into the hospital 
sector.

NHS England took control of specialised service commissioning from the 
strategic health authorities in 2013. For trusts struggling to maintain staff 
numbers it may come as a shock to find in the NAO report that the number of NHS 
England full-time equivalent staff involved in commissioning specialised 
services has jumped from 287 to 489 in just two years, taking costs from £20m 
to £38m.

Related: There is little hope that the NHS can avoid a financial crash 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/mar/18/hope-nhs-avoid-financial-crash>

But NHS England’s record on managing the specialised services commissioning 
budget is awful. Its overspend in three years amounts to around £700m. 
Management was undermined from the start by poor data, while it has been faced 
with demand rising even faster than for other NHS services. High-cost drugs and 
devices – often for previously untreatable conditions – keep being added to the 
portfolio.

Last year, for example, around £191m was used to pay for new drugs to treat 
hepatitis C. Crucially, while theNational Institute for Health and Care 
Excellence <https://www.nice.org.uk/> considers cost-effectiveness, it does not 
consider whether the NHS can afford a new treatment. NHS England does have 
discretion over whether to fund a new drug, but the political pressure to 
provide new life-saving treatments is often overwhelming.

NHS England and Monitor have attempted to control these costs by squeezing the 
tariff paid to trusts for them, partly in an attempt to control demand by 
removing the incentive to generate more cash by increasing activity. But demand 
has continued to climb. According to evidence supplied to the NAO, around 89% 
of acute trusts say the money does not cover their costs.

The position of trusts has been undermined further by repeated failures to 
sign contracts on time, and overwhelmingly having deals that only last for a 
year. This is now being addressed.

NHS England has had some success in negotiating better prices with commercial 
suppliers, but it is clear that in general trusts have low regard for the 
skills of the local commissioning teams. More than half of trusts believe they 
did not have the commercial skills to do their job.

The government’s accelerated access review 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/accelerated-access-review-interim-report>
 might eventually bring down the costs of new health technologies. The review 
amounts to a deal with industry: we will help you get developments such as new 
drugs to market quicker, which will boost your national and global sales, but 
in return you give the NHS better prices.


Related: Can new regulator NHS Improvement save the health service? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/apr/01/can-new-regulator-nhs-improvement-save-health-service>

Perhaps the most worrying finding of the NAO study is that NHS England does 
not have a plan for specialised services.

Despite all this national control, there are still huge variations in access, 
quality and prices across the country, while patient outcome data is patchy so 
it is largely unclear whether services are improving. Predictably, patients 
often find their care is disjointed as they move between services commissioned 
locally and nationally.

Overall, NHS England’s commissioning of specialised services has been a long 
way from a masterclass. Costs have massively overrun, the financial position of 
many trusts has been further destabilised, contract management has been weak, 
and it doesn’t have the right data.

At the heart of this, NHS England is committing precisely the same crime for 
which it andNHS Improvement <https://improvement.nhs.uk/> are now bearing down 
on trusts – crashing through financial targets which were always unrealistic.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
