
Syria’s civil war has entered its fifth year, with more than 200,000 people 
killed in the conflict and more than 9 million displaced, either internally or 
abroad. Five countries host 97% of Syria’s refugees – Turkey, Lebanon, Jordan, 
Iraq and Egypt. We marked the anniversary with a look at thewhere Syrians 
fleeing the conflict have gone 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/11/syrian-refugees-asylum-seekers-unhcr>
, and met19-year-old Younis 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/12/syria-refugees-zaatari-camp-caravan-younis>
, who explained what life is like in Jordan’s Za’atari refugee camp. We also 
featured aninteractive 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/mar/12/syria-refugees-new-life-germany-mozart-cosi-interactive>
 with the stories of nine Syrians who fled to Germany. The group spoke movingly 
about adjusting to their new lives, including performing in a reimagined 
version of Mozart’s Così Fan Tutte alongside German opera singers.

World leaders and women’s rights campaigners are gathered in New York for the 
UN’s Commission on the Status of Women. Government ministers opened proceedings 
bydeclaring their commitment 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/10/world-leaders-pledge-womens-rights-equality-csw-2030>
 to achieving gender equality by 2030, but the wording of the declaration was a 
point of contention for many women’s rights activists, who branded itbland and 
unambitious 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/09/un-declaration-step-backwards-for-womens-rights-csw>
. The declaration alsofollowed research 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/09/legal-barriers-women-equal-rights-opportunities>
 that revealed how constitutions in 170 countries prevent women from 
experiencing equal rights and opportunities.

Elsewhere on the site

 * Ambitious goal of universal education needs $22bn annually 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/datablog/2015/mar/11/universal-education-shortfall-22bn-annually-unesco>
 * Cameroonian lawyer urges world to join her in fight against anti-gay 
legislation 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/10/cameroon-lawyer-campaign-against-anti-gay-legislation>
 * Opening up airspace could make sky the limit for African trade and tourism 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/13/opening-up-airspace-sky-aviation-african-trade-tourism>
 * Ebola crisis could force Sierra Leone to diversify away from mining 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/10/ebola-crisis-sierra-leone-diversify-mining-economy>
 * South Sudan’s warring leaders should be barred from caretaker government, 
says African Union 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/06/kiir-machar-caretaker-government-african-union-civil-war>
Opinion

As leaders gather in Sendai, Japan, for the world conference on disaster risk 
reduction, professors Julian Hunt and Joy Pereira outlined theimportance of 
sharing scientific advances 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/13/international-collaboration-reducing-impact-natural-disasters-sendai-japan>
 in disaster prediction. Meanwhile, peace and security expert Sheelagh Stewart 
argued why the UK’s aid watchdog wasright to criticise DfID 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/05/uk-aid-watchdog-right-to-criticise-dfid-over-law-and-justice-operations>
 over its law and justice operations, and Cordaid CEO Simone Filippini called 
for leaders toaddress the “woeful underfunding” 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/09/international-womens-day-fund-womens-role-peace>
 of efforts to promote women in peace-building.

Multimedia

Video: African aviation ready for take off, says Nigeria aviation minister  
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2015/mar/12/african-aviation-osita-chidoka-nigeria-video>


Video: International Women’s Day – “People think I have a husband. But it is 
only me, a woman providing” 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2015/mar/08/international-womens-day-mozambique-business>

Interactive: After Syria horrors, refugees start life a new in Germany  
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/mar/12/syria-refugees-new-life-germany-mozart-cosi-interactive>

Coming up

We’ll take a closer look at the millennium development goal on gender equality 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2011/aug/05/millennium-development-goal-gender-equality>
, which aimed to eliminate gender disparity in primary and secondary education, 
boost the share of women in wage employment and increase the number of women 
holding seats in national parliaments. As the September deadline approaches, 
what progress has been made on these targets, and what remains to be done? Stay 
tuned.

What you said: top reader comment

On the piece Activists blast “bland” UN declaration as step backwards for 
women’s rights 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/09/un-declaration-step-backwards-for-womens-rights-csw>
,Ciara O’Sullivan wrote:

This tough negotiation at Commission on the Status of Women is a reminder of 
how much further the world has to go to really deliver the ambition of a world 
where all men and women, boys and girls are equal.

The struggle to agree on strong, transformative statements that unequivocally 
support gender equality and women’s rights is perhaps a sign of the imbalance 
in decision-making at the UN – where still today only 15 out of 193 member 
states are lead by women. More women in power, at this level of 
decision-making, would lead to better outcomes for women and girls, and as a 
result for the whole of society.

Highlight from the blogosphere

Development Progress: Where will all the jobs come from? 
<http://www.developmentprogress.org/blog/2015/03/04/where-will-all-jobs-come>

And finally …

Poverty matters will return in two weeks with another roundup of the latest 
news and comment. In the meantime, keep up to date on theGlobal Development 
website <http://www.theguardian.com/global-development>. Follow @gdndevelopment 
<https://twitter.com/gdndevelopment> and the team – @swajones 
<https://twitter.com/swajones>, @LizFordGuardian 
<https://twitter.com/lizfordguardian>, @MarkC_Anderson 
<https://twitter.com/MarkC_Anderson> and @CarlaOkai 
<https://twitter.com/CarlaOkai> – on Twitter, and join Guardian Global 
Development on Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardianglobaldevelopment>.
