
A Sunday afternoon of pottering round the garden – a bit of weeding here, 
mulching a bed there – doesn’t exactly seem like an arduous workout. Yet a 2006 
study by Pennsylvania’sUniversity of Scranton <http://www.scranton.edu/> 
suggests otherwise. The team found that prolonged light exercise, such as 
gardening, can burn more calories than a gym session, despite feeling much 
easier to do. How does this work? The key is the duration of the session. 
Gardening tends to be much lower intensity, but last twice or even three times 
as long as a trip to the gym, meaning the cumulative effect of this more modest 
rate of calorie-burning starts to add up.

When gardening, you are also exposed to more stimuli than the flashing monitor 
of the treadmill. The sights, the sounds, the decision-making can all serve to 
distract you from the intensity of physical work you are doing. Images and 
recordings of natural environments have been shown to reduce feelings of pain 
and anxiety, help to lessen the need for anaesthesia and even improve healing 
times in hospital wards.

But it is when these are used in tandem with exercise that even more 
intriguing results are uncovered.One trial 
<http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/09603120500155963> in the 
International Journal of Environmental Health Research reported that while 
exercise alone helped lower blood pressure, improve mood and self-esteem, 
exercising with a view of the natural world could have a synergistic effect, 
with subjects reporting significantly greater positive effects on their mental 
wellbeing after such sessions than after exercise alone.

Perhaps the most unexpected potential benefit of getting your hands dirty, 
however, comes from researchers at the University of Bristol, whoreported 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/health/6509781.stm> that bacteria commonly found 
living in soil may have a positive effect on our mood. Mice exposed to
Mycobacterium vaccae performed better in tests designed to assess the 
performance of antidepressant drugs, and were shown to have higher levels of 
serotonin – the brain’s “happy” chemical.

Of course people aren’t mice, and the finding has only been partially 
replicated in human tests. In one trial in theAnnals of Oncology 
<http://annonc.oxfordjournals.org/>, cancer patients were treated with the same 
bacteria (along with conventional chemotherapy) to see if this could help 
improve survival rates. It didn’t. But subjects did report side-effects of an 
increased sense of vitality, appetite, sleep quality, cognitive function and 
decreased pain – a significant overall improvement in the quality of life.

In the words of the lead researcher of the Bristol study: “They also leave us 
wondering if we shouldn’t all spend more time playing in the dirt.” And that is 
exactly what I, for one, will be doing this weekend.

Email James at james.wong@observer.co.uk <mailto:james.wong@observer.co.uk> or 
follow him on Twitter@Botanygeek 
<https://twitter.com/Botanygeek?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
