
Two facts of academic life: the students get younger each year, and the 
criteria of university promotion panels grow more fantastic. I’m in the midst 
of writing references for colleagues applying for professorships at several 
British universities, every one of which requires its chairs to be “global 
leaders”. My references won’t just make a difference to these colleagues’ 
applications but also to their pay – for most universities negotiate 
professorial salaries individually.

As I began writing this year’s round of references, the gender pay gap among 
UK professors hit the headlines. I’m not surprised. Women are less likely to be 
recognised as “global leaders” by our male colleagues, so less likely to get 
promotion – and likely to be paid less than men if we are promoted. Employers’ 
scant regard for women’schildcare responsibilities 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/may/03/while-quantity-of-research-is-the-name-of-the-game-women-are-left-on-the-sidelines>
 doesn’t help, but the sexism is more widespread.

I recently sat on a panel responsible for allocating a prestigious academic 
award – a scholastic honour that would boost any appointee’s CV and help any 
application for promotion or a new job. As the only woman in the room, I was 
struck that the male members of the committee had come up with about 20 names, 
of whom a handful were women – despite this being a field in which at least 60% 
of academics are female.

All the women nominated had been professors for a considerable length of time, 
but some of the men had yet to attain that rank and had a sparser research 
record. When I asked what the formal selection criteria were, I was told there 
weren’t any – though those ambiguous terms “brilliance” and “potential” were 
bandied around a lot.

We’re told that women need to be bolder about self-promotion, but that depends 
on having support from our colleagues, which isn’t often forthcoming. Women are 
less likely to apply for external research funding – another criterion for 
promotion and job hire – than men. But as astudy of research councils 
<https://wellcome.ac.uk/sites/default/files/wtd003209_0.pdf> in 2000 showed, 
that’s because of their “status in their institution and the support they 
receive”.

Related: UK university lecturers strike over pay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/25/uk-university-lecturers-strike-over-pay>

But the bigger story is behind these headlines. We women professors are the 
privileged few – just 20% of UK professors are female – and the gender pay gap 
is larger in theprofession as a whole 
<https://www.timeshighereducation.com/news/international-womens-day-universities-pay-gaps-highlighted>
 than among the professoriat. For the reasons why, let’s consider the 
University of Essex – recently applauded in the media when its vice-chancellor, 
Anthony Forster, announced a one-off pay hike for female professors to bring 
them into line with male colleagues.

But Marina Warner <http://www.lrb.co.uk/v36/n17/marina-warner/diary> recently 
resigned from her Essex professorship in protest at the neoliberal management 
style peddled by Forster and others. She pointed to an intensified workload and 
a denigration of the humanities, whose scholars have a nasty habit of teaching 
students to question the neoliberal orthodoxy of their university managers.

The people this hits hardest are women. As this week’s university strikes 
highlight, the “typical” university worker is not a highly paid professor, nor 
a lecturer on his way to getting a chair. She is a low paid woman on a 
temporary contract. We need to recognise this if we are to narrow the gender 
pay gap and to be realistic about the bigger transformation higher education 
requires if it is to be a healthy workplace, provide a rich education to 
students and benefit society.

Universities do not depend on “global leaders” in self-promotion. They rely on 
low-paid women working collaboratively with other tutors and students, and 
reading widely, in order to deliver imaginative teaching and mop up 
administrative tasks as well. Ironically, the qualities in which they excel, so 
very different from the competitiveness demanded of the aspirant professor, are 
essential if research is to thrive – but these women cannot be active 
researchers without working intolerable hours.

As a recent collaboration between feminist geographers 
<http://ojs.unbc.ca/index.php/acme/article/view/1058/1141> argued, “good 
scholarship requires time to think, write, read, research … and resist the 
growing administrative and professional demands that disrupt these crucial 
processes of intellectual growth and personal freedom” – and such resistance 
can only come from collective action that busts the myth that academic 
workloads are manageable, calls for well-paid admin staff, and demands secure 
academic contracts. Now that’s the kind of global leadership I want.
