
I work in a university that still has sabbaticals. It’s the largest investment 
we make in research. We ask staff for a short proposal about how their time is 
to be spent, and what they hope to gain from the experience. A number of staff 
have labelled this process a form of neo-liberalised surveillance. And this 
sums up the problem many of them have with management.


I have just stepped down as an academic manager after nine years to return to 
my previous professorial career, teaching and researching. I have grown used to 
being seen as “the other side” by a minority of colleagues who seem to believe 
they are self-employed and not part of a large, complex organisation.

I understand some of their concerns but have become frustrated by an 
anti-management stance among a vocal minority.

Related: University managers are not malicious, we are misunderstood 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2013/apr/30/university-management-misunderstood-by-academics>

Like all large organisations, universities need some management to ensure 
things get done, and to reduce tensions between competing priorities or 
demands. This can be done well, it can be done indifferently, and it can be 
done badly – but academic managers are mostly just trying to ensure we all 
still have a university to work in.

We know from well-publicised surveys 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2014/dec/16/research-excellence-framework-bullying-university-staff>
 that many academics feel under pressure to publish work that will be 
admissible to theResearch Excellence Framework 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2014/dec/18/research-excellence-framework-results-university-subject-science>
.

Sometimes they describe this pressure as bullying from management. But is 
being asked to publish work necessarily bullying? Certainly, there may be a 
genuine concern about being “forced” to publish work earlier than researchers 
might wish. But in my experience, any pressure has largely come from colleagues 
rather than from heavy-duty performance management.

There are some colleagues who seem to interpret any interest in their 
publishing schedule as undue attention, as in the case of sabbaticals. They 
believe they are being battered by harsh management when asked to demonstrate 
what has resulted from the time they spend on research (a significant 
proportion of our working year).

Yet in truth, we enjoy working conditions that are the envy of other sectors.



Related: Overworked and isolated - work pressure fuels mental illness in 
academia 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2014/may/08/work-pressure-fuels-academic-mental-illness-guardian-study-health>

It is difficult to get staff to cooperate with broader initiatives. For 
instance, it is hard to get colleagues to contribute to “survey courses” – 
taster programmes that briefly cover the main topics of a discipline. Being 
asked to do so is is seen as undue pressure on their academic freedom.

Likewise, the closing of courses that are unable to attract sufficient 
students is seen as an attack on particular subjects or even individuals, not 
as a reflection of the need to cover costs (including staff pay).

Let’s be clear, many of the academics who circulate in and out of managerial 
roles, as I have done, have had insufficient support to develop their 
interpersonal skills. This lack of finesse has led to calls to pass this work 
over to professional managers – exactly what my academic colleagues would not 
want. The professional manager is not the answer.

It is clear is that universities are knowledge-based organisations. Management 
techniques brought in from commercial organisations would be counter-productive 
– there are few parallels between our institutions and those in the commercial 
world. Rather, academics need to involve themselves in managerial roles. These 
include departmental roles linked to teaching, or faculty roles that focus on 
the strategic direction and resource allocations. The academic community needs 
to appreciate both sides of what is required to maintain a successful 
university.

Related: Academics Anonymous: an open letter to university 'leaders'  
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2014/aug/08/academics-anonymous-open-letter-university-leaders>

Resources are stretched. Students, funders and the government all make 
demands, and the university must weigh these up against other interests and 
requirements. I’ve often found myself conflicted: on one hand I see the need to 
manage and on the other I also see the value of academic autonomy. The trick 
universities have to pull off is balancing these different forces.

However, until colleagues accept that they are not self-employed, the 
corrosive and unhelpful attitude to colleagues who are prepared to step up and 
try to meet the challenges of management will persist and undermine our ability 
to sustain universities as beacons of intellectual endeavour.

So now I find myself back in my department, subject to the same pressures 
other academics are facing. But, drawing on my experience, I am better able to 
understand the strain the entire university is under, and better able to 
appreciate my role in our collective endeavour.

We need to allow intelligent people to have the freedom to think, while also 
recognising that education’s social role requires organisation and management.

• This week’s anonymous academic is a professor and former associate dean.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>.
