
The Birmingham multi-academy trust once celebrated by David Cameron 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> as among the best in Britain 
has collapsed, leaving the five schools it runs with mounting debts and an 
uncertain future.

Parents and staff at the Perry Beeches academy chain in Birmingham 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/birmingham> will be told on Wednesday that Liam 
Nolan, the trust’s guiding force, has resigned from the organisation as 
executive head, having earlier stepped down as the trust’s chief executive 
after an investigation uncovered financial mismanagement.

An “exit statement” from the trust obtained by the Guardian reads: “Liam Nolan 
has presented his resignation from the post of CEO/executive headteacher at the 
Perry Beeches academy trust. He has made this decision to allow the necessary 
changes required to move the trust forward.”

Nolan had been absent on sick leave since Easter.

The trust’s governing board is also to step down, leaving the management of 
the trust’s five schools in the hands of the Department for Education (DfE) 
until new academy sponsors can be found.

The Perry Beeches trust’s financial difficulties, including debts estimated by 
one member of staff as reaching £1.8m and rising by tens of thousands of pounds 
each month, have deterred potential sponsors, meaning that the trust will 
probably be divided up and individual schools taken over by different sponsors.

A DfE source said: “Our priority is ensuring the education of the pupils at 
the trust isn’t disrupted and we are taking swift action to make sure that the 
schools in the trust are matched with other high-performing schools so that 
they can deliver the excellent education its pupils deserve.”

Related: GCSE results day: hard work pays off for pupils at Birmingham academy 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/aug/20/gcse-results-day-pupils-birmingham-academy-perry-beeches>

Two new free schools – Perry Beeches VI and Perry Beeches primary school, 
which the trust had been granted approval to open by the DfE – will not now go 
ahead.

The implosion of Perry Beeches is the most significant since the government’s 
massive expansion of academies and the rise of self-governing multi-academy 
trusts.

Nolan was celebrated as a “superhead” for his work in turning around the first 
Perry Beeches school after joining as headteacher in 2007, and was held up by 
the government as a success story in opening a series of free schools in 
inner-city Birmingham.

He was a high-profile supporter of the government’s education shakeup, and 
appeared on stage at the Conservative party conference in Birmingham in 2012 
alongside the then education secretary,Michael Gove 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove>.

In 2013, Cameron lauded Nolan and Perry Beeches as “a brilliant team”, while 
calling the trust’s academy “one of the most successful comprehensive schools 
ever in Britain”. In recent months, however, the politicians who once flocked 
to the school have given it a wide berth.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j3n8%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j3n8%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1fc46d235c0659a83b37ac82f8532ae2679413b9%2F11_338_5168_3102%2F5168.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Academy%20trust%20lauded%20by%20Cameron%20falls%20apart%20as%20executive%20head%20quits&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j3n8%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Academy+trust+lauded+by+Cameron+falls+apart+as+executive+head+quits&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4j3n8%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1fc46d235c0659a83b37ac82f8532ae2679413b9%2F11_338_5168_3102%2F5168.jpg>
 Aerial view of Perry Beeches. Photograph: David Bagnall/Rex/Shutterstock 
A DfE source said: “While he has a great record of school improvement, as soon 
as the extent of the breakdown of governance at Perry Beeches was identified it 
was clear that Liam would have to resign.”

Nolan resigned as the trust’s chief executive at Easter after a damning report 
onfinancial mismanagement by auditors from the Education Funding Agency 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/financial-management-and-governance-review-perry-beeches-the-academy-trust>
 (EFA), the DfE’s accounting watchdog, was published in March.

Following publication of the first report, EFA investigators have returned to 
the schools for a second inquiry. The investigators are said to be looking into 
the school’s hiring practices as well as issues over admissions and exclusions, 
and allegations of inappropriate use of funds including political donations.

Jon Hunt, a Liberal Democrat on Birmingham city council, said he had made a 
formal complaint to the Electoral Commission over the school’s involvement in 
sponsoring Labour party events.

One event was a fundraising dinner in 2014 for Gisela Stuart, the MP for 
Edgbaston, with Perry Beeches academy listed as a supporter on the invitations.


Related: Academy trust lauded by Cameron in 'serious breaches' of guidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/24/perry-beeches-academy-lauded-cameron-serious-breaches-of-guidelines>

The EFA’s first report found that Nolan was paid an additional salary via a 
company named Nexus, which then made payments to another company, Liam Nolan 
Ltd, run by Nolan, in contravention of academies’ financial rules and Treasury 
guidelines.

Nolan’s company received £160,000 between 2013 and 2015 for Nolan’s services 
as Perry Beeches’s chief executive, the EFA reported. The payments were in 
addition to his salary as executive head.

The EFA investigation of Perry Beeches uncovered irregularities including 
nearly £1.3m in payments without contracts to Nexus as a third-party supplier. 
“No evidence of a formal procurement exercise, including quotations and 
tendering, was available for expenditure with Nexus,” the EFA report said.

A separate report by the EFA also found that more than £2.5m in free school 
meal (FSM) funding could not be confirmed because records had been erased. “The 
trust has breached the academies financial handbook by failing to retain any 
form of FSM eligibility evidence for a period of six years,” the EFA concluded.
