
“It’s pretty,” one of them says, “and feminine.” “Yes,” says another, “soft, 
slightly sweet, a real ladies’ drink.”

We are in the tasting room at Ca’ dei Zago, a prosecco producer just outside 
Valdobbiadene, north of Venice and Treviso, and one of the two major towns in 
the prosecco-making region, an area of the Veneto that covers around 20,000 
hectares.

Prosecco is now the UK’s most popular fizz, having outsold champagne for the 
first time last year 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/aug/20/prosecco-bursts-champagnes-bubble-as-britains-sparkling-wine-of-choice>
. The market is thought to be worth £339m, compared with £250m for champagne. 
You can’t move for it at Christmas parties – or any celebration – these days. I 
must confess to not being a particular fan (one friend tends to turn up on my 
doorstep brandishing a bottle of cava and crying “it’s not prosecco!” before 
even saying hello), so I’ve come to the land of prosecco to see if tasting the 
wine in its homeland will win me over.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fxtf%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fxtf%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3de135d5bdefaeff2af7ac1f52fc9b96435adc82%2F0_0_5484_3712%2F5484.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Italy's%20Fizz%20whizzes%3A%20prosecco%20tasting%20in%20Veneto&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fxtf%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Italy%27s+Fizz+whizzes%3A+prosecco+tasting+in+Veneto&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fxtf%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3de135d5bdefaeff2af7ac1f52fc9b96435adc82%2F0_0_5484_3712%2F5484.jpg>
 Harvesting grapes for prosecco in the Treviso district. Photograph: Sopa/Corbis
Stretching to the foothills of the Dolomites, this picturesque land of 
terraced vineyards and medieval villages remains largely undiscovered. The 
regional capital, Treviso, with its waterways and rambling streets, has plenty 
of charm and none of the excess tourist tack of Venice.

Ca’ dei Zago’s tasting room has terracotta tiles on the floor and a wipe-clean 
chequered tablecloth; views are of gently rolling vineyards and three portly 
men out on the terrace – their work done – drinking a bottle of the sparkling 
nectar as the scene turns gold in the sunset. I take a sip. Though I may not 
agree that it’s inherently “girly”, it is unexpectedly delicious, with a 
peachiness you might expect, but also a saline quality and – this you really 
can’t miss – it’s cloudy.

For this is prosecco col fondo: unfiltered, maverick prosecco, made with 
minimal intervention. After a first fermentation in a concrete tank (vast 
stainless steel vats are now more usual, to produce the volumes its thirsty 
market demands), the wine is fermented a second time in the bottle, during 
which time the sediment is left to work its murky magic. It’s not the 
cloudiness, however, that defines this wine so much as the soil the grapes grow 
on and how it is made. Some would call it a natural wine.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fxtf%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fxtf%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F360b46840b327aaf19fa99334fa827702ab05355%2F0_0_4928_3264%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Italy's%20Fizz%20whizzes%3A%20prosecco%20tasting%20in%20Veneto&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fxtf%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Italy%27s+Fizz+whizzes%3A+prosecco+tasting+in+Veneto&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fxtf%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F360b46840b327aaf19fa99334fa827702ab05355%2F0_0_4928_3264%2F4928.jpg>
 Photograph: Perry van Munster/Alamy 
The vineyard owner, Christian Zago – a young man with extraordinary zeal for 
his craft, which has run in his family for three generations – talks us through 
his methods. He avoids cutting the vines’ canopy so as to ensure that all the 
plants’ energy is channelled into the grapes themselves – for superior fruit – 
rather than into canopy regrowing. The effect is brilliant but 
dishevelled-looking vines, the Einstein of vineyards, maybe. We also hear about 
Christian’s biodynamic composting, and how he cuts the grass in the vineyards 
just once a year so as not to interrupt the work of valuable microorganisms in 
the soil. To minimise disruption, he uses a machine that recreates the motion 
of an old-fashioned double scythe.

But col fondo is very different from the more sherberty fizz we’re used to, so 
I head half an hour east to another producer, Il Colle, to try the more 
conventional prosecco. Couched in some of region’s most desirable verdant 
hillsides, the winery is reached via a tightly winding road. This company 
produces around a million bottles a year (including the best-selling prosecco 
at The Ivy in London) in towering stainless steel tanks. It is relatively small 
– the biggest prosecco producers make around 30 million bottles a year – but 
still dwarfs Ca dei Zago. The two share a region and a grape varietal (glera), 
but little else. The contrast between the two is stark.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fxtf%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fxtf%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F10%2F1449772838916%2F7af9db49-21a3-446e-b508-9537a274b1c0-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Italy's%20Fizz%20whizzes%3A%20prosecco%20tasting%20in%20Veneto&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fxtf%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Italy%27s+Fizz+whizzes%3A+prosecco+tasting+in+Veneto&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4fxtf%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F10%2F1449772838916%2F7af9db49-21a3-446e-b508-9537a274b1c0-1020x612.jpeg>
 One of the vineyards of Il Colle 
Il Colle’s prosecco has a sweetness that makes it an altogether easier drink 
than champagne, which is famously complex, with notes sometimes described as 
“toast”, “biscuit” or “brioche”. There’s up to 32g of residual sugar per litre 
in prosecco, it has much more pronounced fruit flavours (peach, pear), and is 
designed to be drunk younger. Modern palates are hungrier for sugar. Richard 
Rotti, The Ivy’s wine buyer remembers his father, who was maitre d’ at 
Claridges, often being asked to serve champagne with a sugar cube in the 1970s 
– is prosecco the affordable evolution of that? Sweeter and cheaper than a 
Champagne, and a good cocktail mixer to boot, it’s understandably now many 
people’s go-to fizz.

So, will I be raising a toast with prosecco this Yuletide? While I’m still not 
convinced by the traditional drink, col fondo is a different story. Regular 
fizzy pop drinkers may not like it... but I’ll tell my friend she can keep her 
cava. If it’s “pretty” col fondo, I’m a convert.

• The trip was provided by Caprice Holdings. Ryanair <http://ryanair.com> 
flies to Venice Treviso from Bristol, East Midlands, Leeds Bradford and 
Stansted. BothCa’ Dei Zago <http://www.cadeizago.it/> and Il Colle 
<http://www.proseccoilcolle.it/> welcome visitors for (free) tours and 
tastings, but call ahead.Hotel Ca’ del Poggio <http://www.cadelpoggio.it/en/>, 
about a mile from Il Colle winery and with a majestic view over Treviso’s 
vineyards, has doubles from €115 a night

Where to find it at home

Col fondo prosecco
Bone dry Ca’ dei Zago and great all-rounder Casa Coste Piane, both £14.99, are 
available from Raeburn Fine Wines (they don’t appear on the website but call 
0131-343 1159).Malibran Sottoriva is delicious in brunch cocktails, £14.95, 
buonvino.co.uk <http://www.buonvino.co.uk/prosecco-sottoriva-malibran-nv>

Conventional prosecco
La Marca Extra Dry is a softly honeyed fizz and a steal at £9.99, as part of a 
mixed case of six,majestic.co.uk 
<https://www.majestic.co.uk/Prosecco-di-Conegliano-Valdobbiadene-Extra-Dry-zid23253?tracking=|searchterm:>
