
Being completely disconnected on holiday isn’t as romantic as some purist 
travellers may suggest. It might be fine if you plan to stay on a beach or 
spend your days snorkelling with dolphins, but if you have to navigate your way 
around a country, travelling without access to GPS-assisted maps, currency 
converters and email seems a silly restriction. Especially when travelling in a 
country likeIran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran>. Here, the private 
and public spheres are two completely different worlds and access to social 
media can make the difference between merely learning about heritage through 
visits to historical sites and experiencing the everyday lives of modern 
Iranians.

It was how I came to be at a party in Tehran among a crowd of good-looking, 
fashionable millennials: men, women, gay, straight. The obligatory hijabs were 
left at the door. On the kitchen table, there were unmarked bottles ofaragh 
saghi – literally, dog alcohol – a moonshine made from raisins. People were 
dancing, drinking, and discussing whether it was time to call a drug dealer.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbqe%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbqe%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd25093998221964c3b3729acfe7bd8cec981a27f%2F0_3415_4912_2947%2F4912.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Exploring%20the%20real%20Iran%2C%20with%20social%20media%20as%20your%20guide&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbqe%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Exploring+the+real+Iran%2C+with+social+media+as+your+guide&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbqe%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd25093998221964c3b3729acfe7bd8cec981a27f%2F0_3415_4912_2947%2F4912.jpg>
 Coffee bar in Tehran 
Before I embarked on my month-long trip to Iran, Iranian friends suggested I 
use social media to guide my travels through the Islamic Republic. Even during 
the first two weeks, which I spent on an organised tour, writing a feature for 
another publication, I was able to fill a few holes in the standard group 
itinerary with meaningful interactions outside the comfortable but limiting 
tourist bubble. It started in theancient Silk Road 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/feb/26/david-baddiel-on-the-silk-road> 
city of Isfahan when I accepted an offer from Alireza, a 24-year-old auto parts 
dealer who had contacted me through couchsurfing.org, a social media platform 
for hospitality exchange. He invited me to dinner with his family.

When I arrived at his home, I was welcomed with a generous meal and curious 
questions from family and friends gathered around a fire in the leafy 
courtyard. In particular, they wanted to know about the image of Iran abroad. 
This had been the recurring theme from people who had approached us in the 
street, often stopping simply to express their gratitude to us for visiting 
Iran.


I had grown used to Iranians going out of their way to point out that any 
anti-western propaganda we encountered was an embarrassment to them. On a walk 
around downtown Tehran on the day of my arrival, I had paused to photograph a 
large sign on the side of a 10-storey building. It depicted Barack Obama on par 
with Shemr, the seventh-century villain who killed the beloved Imam Husayn, 
grandson of the prophet Muhammad. “Please, nobody takes these things 
seriously,” said two passersby. This apologetic attitude continued on Instagram 
after I posted the photo, and applied the hashtags #seeyouiniran and 
#tehranlive. In the comments, Iranians ridiculed the sign and assured me that 
“only a tiny minority of idiots” thought this way. Along with their messages 
came invitations to show me around in Tehran.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbqe%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbqe%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2bc430fde96b0f8c3397dd71ddcad5b94a201b22%2F0_0_2000_1334%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Exploring%20the%20real%20Iran%2C%20with%20social%20media%20as%20your%20guide&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbqe%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Exploring+the+real+Iran%2C+with+social+media+as+your+guide&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbqe%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2bc430fde96b0f8c3397dd71ddcad5b94a201b22%2F0_0_2000_1334%2F2000.jpg>
 Cafe Kooche in the Gheytarieh neighbourhood, Tehran. 
After we finally cleared our plates, Afshin called friends who arrived in a 
car to drive us all to a mountain park, where we watched the shimmering city 
lights, talked politics and religion, and smoked weed. It was my first glimpse 
of a different side of Iran: the everyday reality hidden behind news reports 
and history pages. It was generous, warm, fun and defiant.

In the following weeks, I travelled independently, relying on the advice and 
generosity of ordinary Iranians throughFacebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook>, Instagram, and the hugely 
popular instant messaging app Telegram Messenger, which many believe is better 
secured against government monitoring than WhatsApp. Of course, not all 
encounters were limited to instant messages and emails. Through Couchsurfing, 
people invited me to stay at their homes and show me around.

In Shiraz, I stayed with a poet and human rights activist who demonstrated how 
he, as with many others in the city that was once renowned for its wineries, 
secretly produced his own wine at home. “You crush grapes, leave them to 
ferment, stir every three days, and after 40 days, you’ve got wine,” he 
explained, pointing at a large glass container in the corner of his kitchen.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbqe%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbqe%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48055bf9b28e872cd1e7f3116faa0d664f6a764a%2F0_0_7360_4912%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Exploring%20the%20real%20Iran%2C%20with%20social%20media%20as%20your%20guide&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbqe%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Exploring+the+real+Iran%2C+with+social+media+as+your+guide&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbqe%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48055bf9b28e872cd1e7f3116faa0d664f6a764a%2F0_0_7360_4912%2F7360.jpg>
 Tajrish bazaar, Tehran 
While he was at work, his friends took me to their favourite sites in Shiraz: 
the Nasir ol Molk mosque (also known as the pink mosque), where stained-glass 
windows cast kaleidoscopic patterns on the Persian-carpeted floors in the early 
morning; and the palatial Narenjestan-e Qavam, a 19th-century merchant’s house 
overlooking a lush garden with fountains and towering date palms. But they also 
showed me their favourite shopping malls, design boutiques, and Brentin, a busy 
restaurant inside an old, atmospheric villa. Before the mountainouschelow kebab 
arrived, I had already helped myself to a salad of pomegranate and lentils, a 
bowl of yoghurt with little rolls of fried courgette, vegetable samosas and 
bread with a dip of fried aubergine, onion, walnut and mint.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbqe%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbqe%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa838350229ac81062e70d3b37b79d2693d7676e3%2F0_0_1500_1001%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Exploring%20the%20real%20Iran%2C%20with%20social%20media%20as%20your%20guide&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbqe%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Exploring+the+real+Iran%2C+with+social+media+as+your+guide&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbqe%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa838350229ac81062e70d3b37b79d2693d7676e3%2F0_0_1500_1001%2F1500.jpg>
 Stained-glass windows cast kaleidoscopic patterns on the floor of Nasir ol 
Molk mosque, or the Pink Mosque, in Shiraz 
In Tehran, I was shown around the city’s cinema museum 
<http://www.tishineh.com/touritem/778-236/Iran-Cinema-Museum> by a local 
photographer. Afterwards, we enjoyed a lunch of tagliatelle at the posh museum 
cafe, where a famous actress was interviewed under the cool gaze of a crowd 
with fashionable hairdos, who sipped expensive teas flavoured with saffroned 
rock sugar. This was followed by a quick walk though past the stalls of the old 
Tajrish bazaar, selling everything from framed carpets to Kalashnikov-shaped 
hookahs, after which we moved to the intimateCafe Kooche 
<https://www.facebook.com/Cafe.Kooche> in the Gheytarieh neighbourhood. Here, I 
was introduced to a blogger who would later take me on a tour toEtemad 
<http://www.galleryetemad.com/>, one of the leading art galleries in Tehran.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbqe%2Fsfb%23img-6&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbqe%2Fsfb%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F504835337d403c02b1c845a1050a0c982216f081%2F0_0_7360_4912%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Exploring%20the%20real%20Iran%2C%20with%20social%20media%20as%20your%20guide&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbqe%2Fstw%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Exploring+the+real+Iran%2C+with+social+media+as+your+guide&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbqe%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F504835337d403c02b1c845a1050a0c982216f081%2F0_0_7360_4912%2F7360.jpg>
 Poetry event in Tehran organised by a local Couchsurfing member 
All this time, I was staying at the home of a pious Zoroastrian, who taught me 
about his religion, which was the state religion of pre-Islamic Persia, and 
took me to a ceremony at Tehran’s main fire temple. An avid foodie and cook, he 
also showed me how to cookmirza ghassemi, a Caspian dish of grilled aubergine, 
boiled tomato, turmeric, coriander and chilli in his kitchen. One morning, he 
took me to a nearby breakfast cafe to introduce me to the (rather intimidating) 
delicacy of boiled sheep’s head. On a Wednesday night, we attended the weekly 
music and poetry event that was organised by an extremely active Couchsurfing 
member who had already hosted more than 600 guests in an ashram-like setup at 
his house. In the cultural gathering space he had created in his basement, 
travellers and Iranians from all walks of life recited poems and sang songs in 
Farsi, Azeri, Turkish, English and German.

While Couchsurfing was an excellent way to meet people who welcomed me into 
their homes and lives, Facebook proved to be the best source of advice and 
inspiration. Whenever I needed a quick answer, I turned to a Facebook group 
namedSee You in Iran <https://www.facebook.com/groups/1483860975268043/>. Here, 
fellow travellers shared experiences and uploaded photos of the dusty desert 
town of Yazd, the adobe citadels of Bam and Rayen, the gardens of Mahan, the 
religious processions of Ashura in the ancient Silk Road city of Isfahan, and 
train rides through the hot void of the Kavir Desert. Meanwhile, Iranian 
members offered practical advice about bus routes, hostels, visas,virtual 
private network (VPN) services 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virtual_private_network>, safety concerns – and 
delighted in the posts of foreign travellers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbqe%2Fsfb%23img-7&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbqe%2Fsfb%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc306d226daf1fc9176cc54aabb083378b90b4d8a%2F0_101_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Exploring%20the%20real%20Iran%2C%20with%20social%20media%20as%20your%20guide&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbqe%2Fstw%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Exploring+the+real+Iran%2C+with+social+media+as+your+guide&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbqe%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc306d226daf1fc9176cc54aabb083378b90b4d8a%2F0_101_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
 The gardens of Mahan 
While I was trying to resolve the practical matter of staying online in a 
country where the internet was throttled and censored, it took less than half 
an hour to receive the necessary information about where to purchase a local 
sim card for data, and which app was used to circumvent the Iranian firewall. 
One of the Facebook group members even gave me her password to a paid VPN 
service.

Initially, this seemed an online extension of Iranian hospitality, which was 
the only form of “extremism” I encountered during my stay. But there is 
another, more political reason: a strong desire to battle cultural 
misunderstandings and what the group’s founder, Navid Yousefian, refers to as 
“Iranophobia”.

Clearly, Iran’s poor image abroad is an endless source of frustration to many 
Iranians. “I was surprised and saddened to hear that some well-travelled people 
think they can’t visit Iran,” wrote Yousefian, a expatriate PhD student living 
in California, in the Facebook group’s introduction. He called for Iranians in 
and outside the country to join the group to help visitors.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbqe%2Fsfb%23img-8&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbqe%2Fsfb%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2fa83f0c052e7d89c8ad966114097622dd8ce55%2F0_0_2000_1334%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Exploring%20the%20real%20Iran%2C%20with%20social%20media%20as%20your%20guide&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbqe%2Fstw%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Exploring+the+real+Iran%2C+with+social+media+as+your+guide&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbqe%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2fa83f0c052e7d89c8ad966114097622dd8ce55%2F0_0_2000_1334%2F2000.jpg>
 Etemad art gallery in Tehran 
Today, See You in Iran has close to 45,000 Facebook members and has branched 
out to Tumblr, Instagram and Telegram Messenger. “What makes it different from 
the usual guidebooks is that all the input is directly from Iranians and former 
travellers,” says Sogand Fotovat, an American-Iranian repatriate studying 
Iranian history in Tehran, who is one of five active administrators of the 
group. “Because of our on-the-ground organising and networking efforts, See You 
in Iran is grassroots. We don’t dictate or control any of the content.”

Following this success, Yousefian is developing a dedicated See You in Iran 
app. “It will have two features,” says Yousefian. “Localiser, which will help 
travellers find locals to show them around and, if they want, stay with them 
for the night. And Travel Mater, which helps people find travel buddies while 
in Iran.”

One surprising aspect of Iranian internet censorship is that it seems oddly 
permissive in unexpected places. Facebook is blocked but Instagram, owned by 
Facebook, isn’t. Here, theRich Kids of Tehran 
<https://www.instagram.com/therichkidsoftehran/?hl=en>, an obnoxious yet 
fascinating band of spoiled brats, emulate the popularRich Kids Of Instagram 
<https://www.instagram.com/richkidsofinstagram/?hl=en> feed. Aside from the 
inane displays of wealth and excessive rhinoplasty, their posts are often 
provocative and pro-western.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbqe%2Fsfb%23img-9&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbqe%2Fsfb%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6967a2dacfa7257ad3915f526014dc816b9948d%2F0_0_5285_3527%2F5285.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Exploring%20the%20real%20Iran%2C%20with%20social%20media%20as%20your%20guide&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbqe%2Fstw%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Exploring+the+real+Iran%2C+with+social+media+as+your+guide&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4tbqe%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6967a2dacfa7257ad3915f526014dc816b9948d%2F0_0_5285_3527%2F5285.jpg>
 Young people are sidestepping censorship to connect with friends and visitors 
online 
While the popular dating app Tinder is, perhaps predictably, blocked, Grindr, 
a similar app for gay men, isn’t. Indeed, in a country where sharia law 
prescribes death to sodomites, the app hosts a thriving community whose members 
don’t seem concerned about persecution. Tellingly, even in Mashhad, a deeply 
religious city towards the Afghan border that rose to infamy a decade ago for 
the hanging of two gay teenagers, the men I spoke to were remarkably unafraid 
to show their faces on their profile photos. “As long as you’re not having sex 
in public, they’ll leave you alone,” one of them said. “The police have better 
things to do than to case us.”

Tinder is still used, of course, as people know how to circumvent the Iranian 
firewall. Through both dating apps, I received invites to underground parties 
in private homes and desert valleys.

This is how I ended up being offered dog alcohol at the home of someone who 
named her kitten “Coca”. I had not imagined taking such a risk – and it was a 
risk, considering Iran’s strict laws and customs governing music, dress codes, 
and alcohol consumption – but after a few weeks among young, modern Iranians, 
it was a risk I had grown used to. Even though sharia law prescribes 80 
lashings for those caught drinking, partygoers remain defiant. “The risk of a 
raid makes it more exciting,” the friend who had invited me to the house party 
said. “In 95% of the cases the police just want a bribe. But, yes, there’s 
always that 5%.”
