
Fairtrade Fortnight <http://fortnight.fairtrade.org.uk/> brings us some 
inspirational images of smiling farmers in Africa. Smiling female farmers. But 
although European cocoa consumption contributes €9.8m (£7.6m)to the Fairtrade 
premium received 
<http://www.fairtrade.org.uk/~/media/fairtradeuk/what%20is%20fairtrade/documents/policy%20and%20research%20documents/monitoring%20reports/monitoring%20the%20scope%20and%20benefits%20of%20fairtrade%202014.ashx>
 by farmers, women are yet to reap the rewards.

In recent years, ethical consumption and production initiatives implemented 
under the Fairtrade umbrella have become increasingly significant in the export 
and marketing of agricultural products in sub-SaharanAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>.

Although Fairtrade has been instrumental in empowering many farmers who are 
vulnerable to commodity price fluctuations and the social and environmental 
problems exacerbated by conventional global markets, recent critiques have 
raised important questions about the different impacts of certification 
practices in producer communities.

Although women carry out an estimated 70% of agricultural work in sub-Saharan 
Africa <http://www.fao.org/docrep/013/am307e/am307e00.pdf>, only 24% of the 
farmers in Fairtrade-certified small producer organisations are women. It is 
these very small-scale farming operations that produce cocoa.

Focusing on Ghana, the world’s second largest cocoa producer 
<http://www.worldatlas.com/articles/top-10-cocoa-producing-countries.html>, we 
explored the lives of women engaged in Fairtrade cocoa production. Although 
Fairtrade certification initiatives were not initially designed to address 
gender inequality, or the specific concerns that women face in cocoa 
production, gender equity has now become one of the key principles of Fairtrade.

Yet in Ghana <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ghana>, our research suggests 
that social norms and the gendered division of labour in agriculture are not 
fully acknowledged constraints on women’s ability to participate in Fairtrade. 
Although a co-operative cannot be certified if its membership criteria is 
discriminatory, cultural barriers constrain women’s ability not only to 
participate in such co-operatives, but also to benefit from Fairtrade to the 
same extent as men.

Related: El Niño hits Fairtrade: 'It went from -4C to 25C in a week, ruining 
our crops' | Murithi Mutiga and Sam Jones 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/29/fairtrade-farmers-crisis-temperatures-ruining-crops>

 Land is predominantly owned and inherited by men, and access to farmland can 
often be challenging for women. Co-operatives may require their members to own 
the land they farm. Although this may not be overtly discriminatory, it could 
be so in effect. For the poorest women who are landless and without support, 
Fairtrade certification may be unobtainable.

Perhaps more significantly, women bear a disproportionate work burden that can 
result in “time poverty”. Women in rural areas in particular are caught up in 
what has been referred to as a “triple work burden” across productive, 
reproductive and social spheres. Not only are rural women responsible for time- 
and labour-intensive domestic activities – including collecting and carrying 
firewood and water (often for long distances), food preparation, cleaning and 
washing clothes – but they must also simultaneously look after their children 
and work on their farms. In the poorest households where there is very limited 
access to assets or additional labour, a woman’s time poverty can have a 
considerable impact on the entire family, having implications for nutrition and 
health.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hen9%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hen9%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4181bf08558b296a4cc04429318c9c8217fd7283%2F0_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=On%20Ghana's%20cocoa%20farms%2C%20Fairtrade%20is%20not%20yet%20working%20for%20women%20%7C%20Roy%20Maconachie%20and%20Elizabeth%20Fortin&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hen9%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=On+Ghana%27s+cocoa+farms%2C+Fairtrade+is+not+yet+working+for+women+%7C+Roy+Maconachie+and+Elizabeth+Fortin&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4hen9%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4181bf08558b296a4cc04429318c9c8217fd7283%2F0_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
 A woman in Ghana preparing plantain; women are usually responsible for food 
preparation within a family. Photograph: Roy Maconachie/University of Bath 
 Cocoa production involves many different farming activities, some of which 
are arduous, and many of which involve heavy physical work. Women must 
undertake this workload on top of their other burdens. Fairtrade’s demand that 
there must be no child labour on the farms means that it falls upon the women 
to undertake tasks previously carried out by children.

 While there is now a realisation that gender parity in the governance 
structures of farming associations is important to address the unequal playing 
field that women face, to actively participate in leadership roles requires 
time, which many women do not have. Consequently, decisions on how to use 
Fairtrade premiums, or which projects should be funded withinFairtrade 
development plans 
<http://www.fairtrade.net/fileadmin/user_upload/content/2009/standards/documents/generic-standards/2011-05-10_List_of_Ideas_FDP_SPO_EN_final.pdf>
 (pdf), which all co-operatives are required to come up with, are unlikely to 
be made with the participation of women.

 Cocoa farming in Ghana is undertaken in a context of extreme poverty and 
those farmers who are members of Fairtrade co-operatives are luckier than most. 
But without explicitly recognising the unequal nature of cultural norms, which 
in many cases exclude women from truly benefiting from certified operations, 
Fairtrade is failing to reach out to those who are most disadvantaged.

 * Dr Roy Maconachie <http://www.bath.ac.uk/sps/staff/roy-maconachie/> is 
senior lecturer in international development at the University of Bath andDr 
Elizabeth Fortin 
<http://www.bristol.ac.uk/law/people/elizabeth-r-fortin/index.html> is senior 
research associate at the University of Bristol
