
Finally, some good news for first-time jobseekers: employers' sentiments 
towards hiring young people are becoming more positive, according to a recent
report from the Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development 
<http://www.cipd.co.uk/publicpolicy/learning-to-work/default.aspx> (CIPD). 
Youth unemployment rates may still tower above the UK's average jobless rate, 
butUK employers are also planning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/jul/23/youth-unemployment-fall-attitude-work-experience>
 to take on more work experiencers, apprentices and expand graduate schemes.

But with all these new and exciting opportunities, how are you going to grab 
an employer's attention and secure yourself a lucrative role?

You cover letter isn't just a formality to accompany your CV. It's your chance 
to sell yourself and really stand out from the hundreds of other applicants. 
While perfect spelling and grammar is essential, what else do you need to write 
to make sure you get invited to an interview?

Our panel of experts will be online on Thursday 31 July from 2pm to 4pm to 
answer all of your cover letter questions and share their tips.

We'll be discussing:
• How to start and end your cover letter
• What to include and how to address lack of experience
• How to really stand out

The Q&A takes place in the comments section below this article. Taking part is 
easier than ever: you cancreate a free Guardian account 
<https://id.theguardian.com/register>, or log in using your Twitter or Facebook 
profiles to comment. Alternatively, you can tweet us@GuardianCareers 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianCareers> or email your questions to Hannah Friend 
<mailto:hannah.friend@theguardian.com> who can post them for you.

Our panel

Kylie Rogers is the project co-ordinator at Gradconsult 
<http://www.gradconsult.co.uk/>, a Sheffield based consultancy who have 
recruited for some of the biggest corporations and some of the smallest SMEs 
across the UK. Kylie has spent the last six months assessing graduate 
applications for RISE Sheffield, a city wide internship scheme.

Andrew Shanahan works for the UK's leading apprenticeship and alternative to 
university websiteNot going to uni <http://www.notgoingtouni.co.uk/>. He is 
also the author of the Guide to Not Going to University (Pearson). You can 
follow@notgoingtouni 
<https://twitter.com/notgoingtouni/status/47342514373525504> for all the latest 
opportunities relevant to 16-24-year-olds.

Sonia Hendy-Isaac is a senior lecturer in curriculum design and employer 
engagement at Birmingham City University. Her research interests include: 
employability, reflective practice and professional development.

Cary Curtis is the founder and managing director of London-based graduate 
recruitment agency,Give A Grad A Go <http://www.giveagradago.com/home.htm>. It 
specialises in placing talented graduates into their first or second jobs in 
some of the UK's most exciting businesses, from global brands to thriving 
start-ups. You can follow@giveagradago. <https://twitter.com/giveagradago>

Dan Evans is the marketing manager at the Graduate Recruitment Bureau, 
<http://www.grb.uk.com/> the UK's leading independent recruitment consultancy 
for students, recent graduates and experienced graduates. You can follow
@thegrbteam <https://twitter.com/thegrbteam>

David Press is chief executive of Proceed UK <https://www.proceeduk.com/>, a 
graduate recruitment specialist that assists candidates looking to secure their 
first legal, company secretarial, governance, compliance or risk role. He has 
more than 15 years recruitment experience.

Luke Windeatt-Dickens is client development director at ReThink Recruitment 
<http://www.rethink-recruitment.com/rtm> and has extensive experience in the 
recruitment industry in the UK and abroad.

Jon Gregory is a job search, application and interview coach who has helped 
many students and graduates to increase their chances of selection. He edits 
the websiteWin that job <http://win-that-job.com/>, a site he uses to provide 
free individual help and general advice.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. To get more content 
and advice like this direct to your inbox, sign up for our weekly update and 
careers ebook.
