
It was 1990 and I couldn’t choose which colour frames to have, so I had them 
all. All the colours. A pair of very large, very round, very rainbowed 
spectacles, through which nine-year-old me saw a world that, perhaps 
inevitably, was mainly laughing and pointing. Shame on my mother for giving me 
the power to decide my own fate, but shame on me for letting them stain the way 
I’d feel about glasses for the rest of my life. Until now.

My favourite bit of fashion is when something you’ve overlooked for years 
suddenly sidles into view, all fresh and gleaming and covetable. This season, 
just as I was beginning seriously to contemplate laser eye surgery, it’s 
spectacles. The Gucci catwalks were particularly fabulous – androgynous, 
eccentric, romantic – and almost half of the looks were accessorised with 
glasses. Big round ones, sassy cat’s eye ones, clunky fat ones. MaxMara’s 
models were similarly bespectacled, while Prada and Chanel’s new eyewear 
campaigns (Kristen Stewart as an androgynous photographer 
<http://stylenews.peoplestylewatch.com/2015/04/07/kristen-stewart-in-ads-for-chanel-eyewear/>
, her hair like a fallen Elvis) make glasses look impossibly sexy.

I’m clearly not the only one who’s been seduced. People are buying more 
glasses than ever – in 2014, the world’s largest eyewear company,Luxottica 
<http://www.luxottica.com/en>, registered an 18% increase in profits, 
generating more than £5.51bn in revenue.

As celebrities such as Anne Hathaway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/anne-hathaway>, Jared Leto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jared-leto> and Meryl Streep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/merylstreep> begin to wear theirs on the red 
carpet, the glasses are becoming stars themselves.Lupita Nyong’o 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/lupita-nyong-o>’s even have their own Twitter 
account <https://twitter.com/lupitaglasses>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4aht3%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4aht3%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F3%2F1441288775272%2Fec5faf15-5231-481f-9897-c0f3d23649ef-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20the%20frame%3A%20how%20I%20learned%20to%20love%20glasses&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4aht3%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In+the+frame%3A+how+I+learned+to+love+glasses&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4aht3%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F3%2F1441288775272%2Fec5faf15-5231-481f-9897-c0f3d23649ef-1020x612.jpeg>
 Spectacles on the Gucci Autumn Winter 2015 catwalk Photograph: SGP/REX 
Shutterstock 
But they’re glasses. Mate, they’re glasses, the other bit of my brain says, 
quickly rifling through relevant images from my childhood and teens, and 
flashing them up on the inside of my contact lenses lest I forget.

The time they snapped in half during PE. The sweaty weight of them in August. 
The sore patches behind my ears. The photos where the flash reflected off the 
lenses, making it look as if there were just white holes where my eyes should 
have been. The way you had to take them off for safety reasons whenever you did 
anything fun. So I never knew what the swimming pools or rollercoasters of my 
childhood really looked like. The steaming up, the scratches, seeing the world 
through a patina of dirty fingerprints. The knowledge that nobody would ever 
fancy me in my whole entire life.

Those of you who grew up, like me, with the eyesight of a poorly dalmatian, 
who suffered through a cruel adolescence of nicknames and celibacy, who worked 
hard – really, really hard – to master contact lenses, will understand why it’s 
difficult to think of glasses as anything more than metal-rimmed curses, let 
alone a desirable fashion accessory.

To us it’s no surprise that glasses rendered Clark Kent unrecognisable as 
Superman, that no one ever thought bespectacled Diana Prince could be Wonder 
Woman. We understood that part all too well, but we never got the chance to 
take the glasses off and fly.

But here we are. I want them. Glasses by choice – that’s the thing. Rather 
than being forced into choosing a pair of unwieldy or unsuitable specs, I will 
take my time, I will invest, I will take pride in this flimsy medical apparatus 
and treat it with care.

Will I enjoy seeing the world through screens again, like my own personal 
Netflix? Will glasses hamper my spontaneity, as I fold them up and pad my way 
to bed? Do I take them off for photographs? Will I still look like me? Now’s 
the time to find out – prescription glasses are suddenly cheaper than ever. 
Companies such asGlasses Direct 
<http://www.glassesdirect.co.uk/?gclid=CNrLo-TO0MYCFbDJtAodTKAELg&gclsrc=aw.ds> 
(who sell Marc by Marc Jacobs and Ray-Ban, along with their own “retro” designs 
– two for £55) will send four pairs over for you to try at home. It’s 
embarrassingly easy to become a glasses wearer, and a fashionable one, too.

Today, very little about glasses is about seeing. The focus is how you want to 
be seen.They are no longer corrective eyewear but a style statement. 
Stereotypes abound. In 2012, a historian analysed thechanging social norms 
towards glasses 
<http://www.gresham.ac.uk/lectures-and-events/to-wear-or-not-to-wear-changing-social-norms-with-regard-to-eyewear>
, finding examples of the way they’ve been perceived across history. While 
Hitler, he wrote, wore reading glasses, images of him doing so were censored by 
the Nazi party for fear of his authority being compromised. People who wore 
glasses, the thinking was, were weak.

Things appear to have changed. This season’s glasses are worn with powerful 
walks and thigh-cut dresses. This season, glasses are cool. In the same way 
that the sight of a new pair of boots inspires fantasies of the glamorous 
places you could go in them, today’s glasses let me imagine the glamorous 
things I’d see. The streets would look cleaner through that polished plastic. 
The commuters more beautiful. And me – instead of a deficient school-leaver, 
I’ll look like a well-read sophisticate. I’ll look like I’m in control.
