
Eighteen hundred Zambian villagers claiming to have had their water supplies 
polluted and their health affected 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/01/zambia-vedanta-pollution-village-copper-mine>
 by a giant mining company’s subsidiary have won the right to have their case 
heard in the British courts rather than in Zambia.

Vedanta <https://www.theguardian.com/business/vedantaresources>, which is 
headquartered in London, hadargued strongly in the high court 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/12/mining-giant-vedanta-resources-uk-court-zambia-villagers-case-alleging-pollution>
 that the villagers’ case against them and their subsidiary, KCM, should be 
heard in Zambia, where the alleged pollution took place near the town of 
Chingola and the giant Nchanga copper mine.

But high court judge Sir Peter Coulson dismissed the multinational’s claims, 
saying he feared that villagers would not get justice in their own country 
because they would not be able to afford lawyers, and because the Zambian legal 
system would not be able to cope with such a large and long trial.

“I am conscious that [this] could be seen as a criticism of the Zambian legal 
system,” he said. “I might even be accused of colonial condescension. But I am 
not being asked to review the Zambian legal system. I am bound to conclude 
[from the evidence] that the claimants would almost certainly not get access to 
justice if these claims were pursued inZambia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/zambia>.”


People from the four villages of Shimulala, Hippo Pool, Hellen and Kakosa are 
seeking compensation for loss anddamage they say they suffered to their land 
and their health 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/01/zambia-vedanta-pollution-village-copper-mine>
. Their primary sources of water for drinking, washing, bathing and irrigating 
farms are surface water and shallow wells next to the giant Nchanga copper 
mine, which is operated by KCM.

Multinational companies based in rich countries mostly prefer to have 
environmental and human rights cases against them heard in developing 
countries. But in recent months several have challenged a trend by British 
lawyers to bring cases against them in London.

“For the last 15 years there have been no jurisdictional challenges from 
multinational companies against claims which we have successfully brought here 
on behalf of some of the poorest people from around the world,” said Martyn 
Day, of the law firm Leigh Day, which is representing the villagers.


“This year we’ve had three. The judgment today is the first of the three to be 
considered by the high court. Hopefully it will encourage UK-based 
multinationals to recognise that London is the appropriate place for these 
claims to be heard and for justice to be done.”


A full trial is unlikely before late 2017. 
