
Labour <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> members who own property 
worth more than £1m should be charged a membership fee of £1,000, according to 
party MP John Mann.

The MP for Bassetlaw, who has been an outspoken critic of Labour leader Jeremy 
Corbyn <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>, said he would 
formally put forward a proposal to introduce “a Labour mansion tax” at the 
party’s annual conference.

Writing on his website, Mann said: “Hidden from the discussion of Labour’s big 
increase in membership is any analysis of who has joined as fee-paying 
individual members, but a deeper examination will show that it is 
overwhelmingly the middle classes who are joining.”

The MP claimed that on one street in the Labour leader’s constituency of 
Islington North, populated by owner-occupiers in multimillion-pound houses, 40 
people had joined the party over a 12-week period.


Mann suggested that the new members could help avert a funding crisis that 
would come if the government’s trade union bill passes. A confidential Labour 
document released to the Guardian last week revealed that the party facesan 
expected £6m drop 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/10/labour-expecting-6m-loss-in-funding-through-trade-union-bill>
 in its annual income as a result of the changes to the political levy being 
introduced in the bill.
— John Mann (@JohnMannMP) January 14, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/JohnMannMP/status/687618872355209216> 
Labour can avoid financial catastrophe by introducing a wealth tax on members 
who own £1 million+ properties:https://t.co/jtVAKe4Cuz <https://t.co/jtVAKe4Cuz>
 <https://twitter.com/JohnMannMP/status/687618872355209216> 
“When Labour’s membership was last this high in 1997, there was a very 
different picture with a good mix of members coming from all backgrounds and 
classes. Of those who left the party over the years, it is mainly the middle 
class members who have recently rejoined,” wrote Mann, arguing that this was a 
big political problem for the party.

“The party has lost most of its bigger private donors and depleted trade union 
political funds will not be capable of again bridging this gap. This is why it 
is time for a Labour wealth tax. Those members with properties valued at over a 
million pounds should be expected to pay a Labour wealth tax of £1,000 a year 
to be a Labour party member. It will raise significant money and it is entirely 
socialist in its approach.”

Mann’s proposal comes amid criticism from some of the party’s MPs that the 
Labour leadership is too London-centric and is losing touch with the party’s 
traditional working class support base.

Giving his maiden speech in the House of Lords this week, former Labour MP and 
chair of the parliamentary Labour party David Watts said: “My advice to my own 
party leadership is that they should take less notice of the London-centric 
hard left political class who sit around in their £1m mansions eating their 
croissants at breakfast and seeking to lay the foundations for a socialist 
revolution.”

The price of Labour party membership is currently £48 a year, and Guardian 
analysis of the party’s membership surge 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/13/revealed-how-jeremy-corbyn-has-reshaped-the-labour-party>
 shows that Labour has seen a particularly sharp rise in membership in London.
