
Let’s start with a couple of data points. According to research from Aimia 
<https://www.aimia.com/content/dam/aimiawebsite/Aimia2015GlobalLoyaltyLensReport/Aimia%202015%20Global%20Loyalty%20Lens%20Report/AIMIA-Loyalty-Lens-Research-Report.pdf>
, some 80% of us are willing to share our name, email address and nationality 
with brands – but only when we receive some sort of “shopping advantage” in 
return. Meanwhile, a one second improvement in page loading times led to a 2% 
increase in conversion forretail giant Walmart 
<https://blog.uptrends.com/internet/why-and-how-increasing-your-website-speed-can-drastically-increase-conversions-and-revenue/>
.

As shopper marketers, it’s our job to change behaviour. As both these points 
show, providing improved experiences (often in quite small ways) is the surest 
route to creating that change – especially when the experiences are directly 
beneficial to shopper missions.

Mission-based experiences

Most of the time, shopping is a struggle to reduce friction: minimising wasted 
time or effort and avoiding unnecessary spend. Friction, of course, is not a 
constant. It is always a function of the specific mission on which the shopper 
is engaged. My mission when shopping for a bottle of wine on the way home from 
work on a Wednesday is likely to be different to my mission when buying for 
Saturday’s party.

When a mission is met with minimum friction and maximum satisfaction, the 
shopper’s response is deeply positive. This response goes beyond the purely 
rational. Instinct draws us to repeat the act.

Creating muscle memory

Amazon’s business model is laser-focused on shaping shoppers’ collective 
muscle memory. Its Recommendation Engine, One Click Payment, Prime Now, Dash 
and Echo are all designed to minimise friction and thus engrain repetition. 
Here’s the commercial magic: precisely because Amazon does such a superb job in 
resolving our missions, we become willing accomplices in providing the data 
that feeds the machine. It’s a virtuous circle that leads towards ever more 
powerful, and profitable, personalisation.

Starbucks provides another excellent example. In the USA, the company now 
generates20% of its revenues from mobile 
<http://fortune.com/2015/07/24/starbucks-mobile-investments/> (about 7m 
transactions a week). By bundling payment functionality into the app used by 
its 13m loyalty members, it delivers true speed and convenience.

Mobile pre-ordering adds another strong link to the chain: over one million 
American Starbucks customers now useMobile Order & Pay 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/tech/tech-news/more-people-ordering-ahead-starbucks-n502061>
, averaging five orders a month each. As CEO Kevin Johnson pointed out 
recently, the short-term results are great, but the long-term potential of this 
one-to-one capability is phenomenal.

Crack the mission, crack personalisation

Research study after research study shows how attuned modern shoppers are to 
the value exchange. They’re prepared to share their scarcest resources – their 
money, attention, data, and recommendation - but only when they’re confident 
they’ll get enough in return.

One of the most fundamental ways in which brands can deliver value is to 
remove friction from the shopping mission. By doing so, we can turn unknown 
shoppers into known buyers and unlock the door to true personalisation.

Phil Gault is director of strategy at M&C Saatchi Shop 
<http://mcsaatchi.com/london/>

This advertisement feature is brought to you by the Marketing Agencies 
Association <http://www.marketingagencies.org.uk/maa>, sponsors of the Guardian 
Media & Tech Network’sAgencies hub 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media-network/series/agencies>.
