
In a chic Los Feliz dinner club in old East Hollywood, Jeff Goldblum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/jeff-goldblum> is where he is every 
Wednesday night: onstage, at a piano, with his face covered in lipstick marks 
from female punters. Like Woody Allen, the actor enjoys the regular 
irregularity of headlining his own freestyle jazz night, which is held together 
by his colleagues the Mildred Snitzer Orchestra, while Goldblum flies by the 
seat of his very tall pants, ad-libbing and scatting.

He dances between tables, doing bad impressions of political figures and 
cinematic icons, then tries to keep up with his band’s improvised takes on 
Thelonius Monk and Miles Davis. “I’m always surprised by what they’re playing!” 
he shouts at the audience, genuinely stunned, his face widening like a cartoon 
character.

Goldblum is very personable for an actor of such omnipresence. “Let’s talk 
about every little thing,” he says when we first meet. He probes on details: 
where you’re from, how many kids you have, what your relationship with your 
mother is like. But according to his former colleague in the jazz club, a 
writer for CBS television, it’s a one-sided kind of intimacy. Goldblum himself 
is “Unknowable, bizarre,” he says. “Isn’t he?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kja8%2Fsfb%23img-1&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kja8%2Fsfb%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6647439f979b3940a4de8e518e5df6f02ee9ad5%2F0_18_3456_2074%2F3456.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jeff%20Goldblum%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20like%20one%20of%20those%20yogis%20who%20wanders%20the%20Earth%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kja8%2Fstw%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jeff+Goldblum%3A+%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m+like+one+of+those+yogis+who+wanders+the+Earth%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kja8%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6647439f979b3940a4de8e518e5df6f02ee9ad5%2F0_18_3456_2074%2F3456.jpg>
 Play it agan, Jeff: Goldblum with his jazz group, the Mildred Snitzer 
Orchestra, at the Cafe Carlyle in New York. Photograph: Michelle V Agins/New 
York Times/Redux/eyevine 
I had formally interviewed Goldblum some weeks before, at a hotel where he was 
promoting his latest film,Independence Day: Resurgence 
<http://www.foxmovies.com/movies/independence-day-resurgence>. The sequel sees 
Goldblum reprise his role as David Levinson, the geek who saves the planet from 
alien interlopers, a whole hair-greying 20 years on from the original. When I 
ask why there was a call for a sequel now, he refers me to its creators, 
directorRoland Emmerich <https://www.theguardian.com/film/roland-emmerich> and 
writerDean Devlin <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0002041/>: “Have you met them? 
They’re very nice fellows.” He sounds like he’s just glad to have been brought 
along for the ride; changes the subject to how two decades have flown by: “When 
you get older, a summer is bomb-ding bomb-dang. Then it’s September, and 
bam-dat sca-dat, you know?”

At 63, Goldblum seems to be ageing backwards. He has an almost childlike 
energy; you hear him before you see him, his voice wafting through walls. He’s 
a man of vocal flourishes and copious hand gestures, all “Dah-dah-de” and 
“Do-de-dums”. Despite being best known for his roles in 90s blockbusters
Jurassic Park and Independence Day, he remains one of Hollywood’s most offbeat 
performers. One critic wrote that inThe Fly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-fly> he spoke his lines “as if queries 
were piling up in his head”. On set he was rumoured to have carried around a 
real fly in his pocket. “No!” he corrects me now. “I put it in a plastic bag 
and stuck it to a wall in the trailer. I’ve always been highly conscientious.”

In his self-described “ecstasy-making” YSL leather jacket, doused in cologne, 
Goldblum still bears the trademarks of his unique style: the brainiac posing as 
a rock star with medallions and a thick mane of curls. For years he played the 
approachable nerd in theads <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z816bVafG_Q> for 
Apple’s original iMacs – “What’s email?” he’d shrug, “It’s as easy as lickin’ a 
stamp” – but recoils at the thought of being mistaken for a nerdish character 
in real life. “Do you know what the original definition of geek was?” he says 
now. “A geek was a circus freak who would bite the heads off chickens. I am not 
a geek.” In fact, he struggles at times to operate his iPhone. The enthusiasm 
is all there, though. ForIndependence Day he was excited about finally being 
filmed in 3D: “I sawAvatar <https://www.theguardian.com/film/avatar>, didn’t I? 
I felt like a child on LSD. Wow-oh-wow-oh-wow… I could touch it! I liked that.” 
His own creative suggestions were not, however, taken up by his director. “I 
kept asking Roland, ‘Shouldn’t I throw something at the audience?’” He jumps up 
to demonstrate then shakes his head. “He said, ‘No Jeff, not how it works.’”

As a boy Goldblum wrote ‘Please God make me an actor’ on the shower door every 
day

Goldblum is – or perhaps cultivates the idea of being – a “normal guy”, the 
type of actor you see out and about doing ordinary things. (Before we first met 
I’d seen him more than once at my local Rite Aid in LA.) Born to a 
doctor-father and a mother in broadcasting, he grew up in Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania with a sister and two brothers, one of whom died tragically of 
kidney failure at 23. Goldblum refuses to talk about this time (“I won’t bore 
you with the details”) but at 19, he already had a career mapped out. He 
remembers his parents taking him to the theatre for the first time when he was 
nine. “There was something in me that was just intrigued. I remember thinking, 
‘Who are they?’” he says of the actors. “‘Where do they come from? What are 
they doing? What goes on backstage?’” From there, Goldblum began to toy with 
the idea of a life in the arts. He’d write the words “please God make me an 
actor” on the shower door every day, then erase them before his parents could 
notice. “I was nothing if not hygienic,” he jokes now.

Goldblum’s first child, Charlie, was born, coincidentally enough, on 4 July, 
Independence Day, last year. Charlie’s middle name is Ocean (“We like the 
water,” he shrugs). It was Goldblum’s therapist who convinced him to have a 
child at 62. “My wife and I said, ‘Let’s have a baby’ about a year before, and 
I thought, ‘That’s a serious thing,’ so we went to the therapist together and 
she said, ‘I’m not telling you what to do, but…’ and she helped me process it,” 
he laughs. “Then my therapist, delightful woman, officiated at our wedding, 
too.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kja8%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kja8%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F152225398a5d3430752631012105d83b01160706%2F0_80_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jeff%20Goldblum%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20like%20one%20of%20those%20yogis%20who%20wanders%20the%20Earth%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kja8%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jeff+Goldblum%3A+%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m+like+one+of+those+yogis+who+wanders+the+Earth%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kja8%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F152225398a5d3430752631012105d83b01160706%2F0_80_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
 Arguing the point: Kevin Spacey as Charlie Fox and Jeff Goldblum as Bobby 
Gould in Speed-The-Plow at London’s Old Vic in 2008. Photograph: Tristram 
Kenton for the Guardian 
Charlie’s mother, his third wife, whom he refers to as Emilie Livingston as 
though he’s in a Jane Austen novel, is half his age (33) and a former Olympic 
gymnast. He summarises his relationships with women (he was previously married 
to co-starsPatricia Gaul <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0310060/> and Geena Davis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/geena-davis>) as “a mysterious course of 
study”.

His house in LA has been a home for 28 years, but it’s only recently that he’s 
found full use for it. “I used to have a recurring dream where there’s an 
aspect of a house that I’ve left undiscovered, with a witches’ coven on the 
other side of the door. The thing I like about nesting and Charlie is that more 
of the house, my life and my person is getting used,” he says, before switching 
back to carefree bachelor mode. “But if the house burned down, I wouldn’t miss 
anything. I’m like one of these yogis who wanders the Earth with a diaper and a 
loin cloth, a bowl and a spoon. I like not to be attached to anything.” He 
takes his wedding ring off, he puts it on again. The ring is engraved.

“Should I tell you?” he teases. “Oh, it says, ‘Peaches + Patches = Eternal 
Love’. I call her Peaches, she calls me Patches. See, I have this asymmetrical 
patch here on my torso and Emilie says, ‘Don’t trim that – I love it.’” He 
whips out his phone and shows me his Instagram feed. “Here she is! That’s my 
wife planting our dried-up umbilical cord underneath a tree a couple of days 
ago. It’s a little New Agey but the idea is that this is a place where Charlie 
will always feel grounded.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kja8%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kja8%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5cada530baeaeb3e952f99c57db66c69577f0cac%2F321_187_1619_970%2F1619.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jeff%20Goldblum%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20like%20one%20of%20those%20yogis%20who%20wanders%20the%20Earth%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kja8%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jeff+Goldblum%3A+%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m+like+one+of+those+yogis+who+wanders+the+Earth%E2%80%99&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4kja8%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5cada530baeaeb3e952f99c57db66c69577f0cac%2F321_187_1619_970%2F1619.jpg>
 Married life: Goldblum and wife Emilie Livingston. Photograph: Alberto E 
Rodriguez/Getty Images 
He continues with another photo. “And there’s us!” he says. “There’s our dog 
Woody Allen – we’re interested in a parenting approach to dogs instead of 
ownership… I guess that’s quite yogic of us.” Although he denounces religion, 
he admits he has something of acarpe diem philosophy. YOLO, I offer, if he were 
hashtagging. At this suggestion Goldblum looks taken aback; he’s never heard 
the phrase before. “You Only Live Once? That’s great. I have no faith in an 
afterlife and you never know when it’s gonna end,” he says. “There’s so much 
that’s delicious, precious, magnificent, mysterious and infinitely enjoyable 
that it would be foolish not to make every day an adventure.”

The day we meet he has just heard of his friend Garry Shandling’s death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/mar/25/garry-shandling-obituary>
. “I’d been meaning to get together with him,” he says sadly. “He was a sweet 
guy. I found my therapist through him. And I’d go to his house. He built it. 
And he’d say, ‘But I don’t like it. I prefer yours.’” Goldblum has more 
celebrity stories to share. He mentions a boat trip he’s just taken with Stevie 
Wonder, Quentin Tarantino and Tom Stoppard, among others (“We were singing 
songs at night with Julian Lennon, how fun.”) He reminisces on his date last 
week at the White House, where he took pictures with the Obamas. President 
Obama revealed himself anIndependence Day fan, although Goldblum takes that 
with a pinch of salt. More importantly: “I hugged Michelle,” he says. “Didn’t 
Stanislavsky say: love the art in yourself, not yourself in art? Bit 
highfalutin but the idea is to be interested in the human aspect of all 
stories. Start to love that and then all the chips will fall into place.”

At the end of the interview he invites me to Rockwell, where he’s returning to 
host jazz regularly. “Come!” he says. “Tap me on the shoulder! We’ll be the 
best of friends.” It sounds like the kind of pretence a celebrity establishes 
to seem more like the rest of us. Still, I go to the jazz club, where he’s 
surrounded by fans. I don’t tap him on the shoulder.

The next day he phones and apologises for missing me. “Did you get much sleep 
last night?” he asks. “I’m sorry I never saw you. Were you all jazzed up?” He 
asks about my family again, life in LA, tells me about a recent trip toComic Con
 <http://www.amazinglasvegascomiccon.com/> in Las Vegas, then another private 
holiday with his family. He talks about teaching Charlie piano at home.

He shares so much, in fact, that I wonder out loud about Jeff Goldblum the 
enigma and, at this, he chuckles again. “Oh, there’s nothing intentional I’m 
doing to cause mystery,” he says. “I’m open, I’m accessible and I like to be 
intimate and thoroughly, thoroughly exposed, you know? What’s certainly true is 
that I’m interested in other people.” He tells me to come and tap him on the 
shoulder some other time.

Independence Day: Resurgence is released on 23 June
