
When Michigan-based writer Emily Bingham took to her Facebook page to vent her 
frustration at intrusive baby questions, she probably expected a few of her 
friends to share or “like” her post. Accompanied by an ultrasound photo she had 
found online,her post implored 
<https://www.facebook.com/photo.php?fbid=10107297031532134&set=a.920826968234.2753877.2%20313071&type=3&fref=nf>
:

Before you ask the young married couple that has been together for seemingly 
forever when they are finally gonna start a family ... before you ask the 
parents of an only-child toddler when a Little Brother or Little Sister will be 
in the works ... before you ask a single thirtysomething if/when s/he plans on 
having children because, you know, clock’s ticking ... just stop. Please stop. 
You don’t know who is struggling with infertility or grieving a miscarriage or 
dealing with health issues. You don’t know who is having relationship problems 
or is under a lot of stress or the timing just isn’t right. You don’t know who 
is on the fence about having kids or having more kids. You don’t know who has 
decided it’s not for them right now, or not for them ever. You don’t know how 
your seemingly innocent question might cause someone grief, pain, stress or 
frustration.

But instead of reaching a few dozen of her friends, Bingham’s post went viral, 
shared by more than 77,000 people and liked by more than 42,000. It’s not 
surprising that Bingham’s message struck such a chord. Being a woman of 
childbearing age can feel like being stuck in a glass pressure-cooker; the heat 
is rising, the pressure is on, the timer is ticking (or so we’re constantly 
told) and it seems as if the whole world is watching.

Last week, the British Fertility Society suggested that every 25-year-old 
woman should be offered a “fertility MOT”. The BFS chairman, Professor Adam 
Balen, said: “There is a lack of understanding of the dramatic decline in 
fertility and, of course, there are pressures to develop careers. Every week in 
our clinics I see couples who express surprise because they didn’t realise the 
degree to which fertility goes down in your 30s. These are people accessing 
care now. You walk around and you see young girls smoking and I’m thinking: 
‘They’ll be in my fertility clinic in a few years’ time’”.

Women <http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> are bombarded by bossy 
and contradictory diktats about what we definitely must or absolutely must not 
do with our reproductive organs, while companies such as Facebook offer 
egg-freezing as an employee perk.

Meanwhile, the Daily Mail confidently informs us that the best age to have a 
baby is26 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-2284695/The-perfect-age-baby-26-long-married-bought-home-earn-combined-salary-25-000.html>
,34 <http://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article-346163/Why-34-best-age-baby.html>
, and29 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-2005498/Women-believe-29-ideal-age-baby.html>
 (which perhaps explains another headline: “Half of women are confused by 
pregnancy advice 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article-1051555/Half-women-confused-pregnancy-advice-unsure-safe-eat-drink.html>
”). We obsess over fertility as if women are slot machines who simply need to 
be primed and pumped at the optimal socially acceptable moment for a baby to 
shoot out like a prize.

Ironically though, perhaps the reason Bingham’s message resonated with so many 
women was not only the constant stream of diktats about pregnancy, but also 
what isn’t spoken about. Despite the endless public discussion of baby-making, 
relatively little is said about fertility problems, even common ones. The 
erasure of these issues from the public consciousness, combined with the “don’t 
leave it too late” narrative, directs a heavy and unnecessary sense of blame 
towards those who struggle to conceive.

While the coverage of maternity fashion and post-partum weight loss is 
endless, we rarely discuss miscarriage, which can make it a very lonely 
experience, as Mark Zuckerberg recentlypointed out in a powerful Facebook post 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jul/31/mark-zuckerberg-wife-expecting-baby-girl>
. Silence can lead to stigma and shame, as shown bya study 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/women/womens-life/11599135/Miscarriages-Nearly-half-of-women-wrongly-blame-themselves.html>
 that shows nearly half of women who have had a miscarriage feel guilty or 
wrongly blame themselves for it. Moving away from the idea that women are 
mothers first, and people second, would be a positive step. This insidious 
narrative can make those who don’t have children feelless valued, like 
second-class citizens 
<http://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2014/sep/02/rona-fairhead-bbc-telegraph-headline>
. As Sex in the City actor Kim Cattrall recently pointed out, even the term 
“childless” suggestssomething lacking in those who don’t procreate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/sep/14/kim-cattrall-bbc-womans-hour-takeover-childless-motherhood>
.

But we also need to see more open discussion of issues that are wrongly 
shrouded in silence and stigma. When a close friend of mine was referred to a 
fertility clinic by her GP at the age of 28, she said it felt like a punch in 
the stomach. Despite every logical argument to the contrary, she struggled with 
feelings of embarrassment, failure, guilt and shame. What would have made it 
much easier, she told me, was feeling that this was normal, common even.

Bingham is right – we should think twice before asking nosy questions about 
people’s baby plans, no matter how friendly or well-intentioned. Let’s take the 
pressure off, stop the interrogations and ditch the idea that women are, first 
and foremost, baby machines.
