
Netflix is in talks with the BBC to air the revamped Top Gear in a deal that 
could see the show go head to head globally withJeremy Clarkson’s new Amazon 
Prime show 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jul/30/top-gear-clarkson-hammond-may-amazon-deal-bbc>
.

Driven by Chris Evans, with co-hosts including Matt Le Blanc and Eddie Jordan, 
the BBC show is understood to have gone down well with overseas buyers 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/23/bbc-top-gear-chris-evans-sick-sabine-schmitz>
 when a clip was aired at a showcase in Liverpool last month.

They included executives from Netflix 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix>, which already airs old episodes of 
the hit BBC2 show and has 75 million subscribers around the world. The talks 
are understood to be in early stages.


Related: BBC gives TV bosses a sneak peek of Top Gear – including Chris Evans 
feeling sick 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/23/bbc-top-gear-chris-evans-sick-sabine-schmitz>

Netflix’s interest is likely to cause some concern at rival Amazon, which 
spent a reported £160m 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/mediamonkeyblog/2015/sep/07/jeremy-clarkson-not-worth-the-money-amazon-spent-says-netflix-exec>
 hiring the original Top Gear trio of Clarkson, Richard Hammond and James May 
and their executive producer Andy Wilman to make a new car show.

 Before the quartet signed with Amazon, Netflix ran the rule over a deal but 
concluded it was too expensive 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/mediamonkeyblog/2015/sep/07/jeremy-clarkson-not-worth-the-money-amazon-spent-says-netflix-exec>
.

At the time Netflix’s chief product officer Neil Hunt told Digital Spy  
<http://www.digitalspy.com/tv/top-gear/news/a666922/netflix-top-gear-trio-clarkson-hammond-and-may-werent-worth-all-that-money/>
that his rivals had paid too much: “We have past episodes of Top Gear, so we 
have a pretty good gauge of what audiences like. Our buying decisions tend to 
be somewhat data-driven. We have a lot of data to get the deals we want, so 
there we go.

“Clearly it wasn’t worth the money to make the deal ... I think they sold 
themselves for way more money [than they’re worth].”

Netflix subsequently backtracked 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/mediamonkeyblog/2015/sep/07/jeremy-clarkson-not-worth-the-money-amazon-spent-says-netflix-exec>
 on these comments.

It is not known what kind of deal Netflix might strike with the BBC 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> but last year it struck an innovative 
agreement to air the reboot of hit children’s series Danger Mouse, which is a 
co-production between the corporation and FremantleMedia.


Related: Jeremy Clarkson ‘not worth the money’ Amazon spent, says Netflix 
executive 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/mediamonkeyblog/2015/sep/07/jeremy-clarkson-not-worth-the-money-amazon-spent-says-netflix-exec>

While Danger Mouse <http://www.wired.co.uk/danger-mouse> aired on conventional 
TV in the UK, the rodent secret agent is being streamed in North and Latin 
America, Nordic territories, Benelux and Japan.

The BBC’s rights kept the series off the subscription-based streaming service 
in the UK initially but Netflix said it would launch in all territories “at a 
later date”.

If Netflix bought the new Top Gear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/top-gear> (which is due to begin on 
BBC2 towards the end of May) it could be streamed in the autumn, which is when 
Clarkson, Hammond and May’s new series is due to begin.

According to sources a number of international broadcasters are keen to buy 
the show having seen Evans’s performance in Liverpool, including the key 
markets including Australia and Germany.

The old Top Gear was sold to more than 200 territories. 

The BBC and Netflix declined to comment. 
