
When one of my best and most trusted mates asked if I wanted my nine-year-old 
son to start cricket a few summers ago, I almost said no. As a kid, my first 
response to cricket was an amalgamation of boredom and terror. My father, on 
hearing that we’d be playing cricket at secondary school, had bought me a 
Sondico Clive Lloyd bat and set up a wicket at the end of the garden. The bat 
was rock hard and each nick of the ball sent knuckle-shattering vibrations up 
through my protective gardening gloves. These were the days before protective 
helmets and it only took a few of my six-foot father’s fizzing deliveries 
whumping the garden fence for my, and my twin brother’s, enthusiasm to drain 
away entirely.

That September, I went to the local comp but we didn’t play one game of 
cricket in six years. The Sondico bat, which was far too nice for the beach, 
remained in a cupboard and cricket was done. My dad was too busy with work to 
persist at all this in the way we dads do now (looking on YouTube for the right 
way to do something) and I reverted to the core 1980s suburban pursuits of 
lollygagging and jumping my bike from unstable ramps made from scrap plywood. 
As a dad, I look back on these summers with mixed feelings. I loved killing 
time outside the Spar or riding up and down alleyways but I also remember 
feeling incredibly bored.

I accepted my friend’s offer of joining the local cricket club and at Oscar’s 
first game I dozed off on a large white park bench while fluffy clouds tracked 
through a blue sky over the pavilion. This was my kind of parenting. As I 
watched him cut a ball to the boundary, I hoped that he’d at least give it a 
few more months before jacking it in.

It’s not about me being Oscar’s mate, but him seeing who I am beyond my dad 
role and me seeing him beyond his son role

At this point, I was a bit clueless about fatherhood and didn’t yet realise 
how important cricket would become to us as a way of spending more time 
together. In some ways, I was just like my father. For him, getting my brother 
and me into sport was probably as much about us acquiring social skills as it 
was about fitness or confidence. I suspect with my father there was also a 
class element. I asked for a BMX and I got a racer. I asked to do karate and I 
was signed up to a tennis academy. The final straw was the day he presented me 
with a set of secondhand Sam Snead golf clubs (my brother received a half set 
of Slazengers). Golf, we were informed, was a useful skill we could use in 
business. I think there was probably a big difference between knocking balls 
around PGA golf courses on the corporate days my dad attended and playing whack 
and walk around a thinly grassed gravel pit in outer London.

We played golf with Dad a few times, but mostly he would just drop us off at 
the municipal course and we would get on with it. It was the same when we were 
enlisted in the local tennis academy. In the 1970s and 1980s there was a “them 
and us” thing with adults and kids: why would adults want to hang out with kids 
or vice versa? Didn’t we want to be independent, off on our own? This doesn’t 
feel right to me. Historically, boys would have been deeply connected to their 
fathers as mentors and guides – either as apprentices or, going much further 
back to the days of hunter-gatherers. Through urbanisation and 
industrialisation, this element to our relationships appears to have been lost.

I feel now that all my best (and worst) days as a child were spent with my 
father – and it really didn’t matter what we were doing. Even though he was a 
director of an engineering firm, he was always heading off to someone’s house 
to fix their boiler for free. I loved going with him, holding a torch over his 
shoulder and passing him mugs of tea. On days like this, or on rarer trips to 
museums, I saw another, calmer, happier Dad, different to the exhausted guy I 
saw for a quick half an hour at night when he finally got home from work.

As I got older, the times I liked him best were when we forgot our roles as 
father and son: like at college when he’d drop us off and stay for a few drinks 
in the pub with all the lads. Or even family barbecues where he’d also have a 
couple and the authoritarian mask would slip and I’d get to see how funny he 
was and how much people enjoyed his company. He loved to laugh – this is not 
something I’d see much when he had the proverbial foot on my neck to revise.

As I had my own children, it seemed natural that I would spend more time with 
them than my father had spent with me. I tried to make up for the time that my 
father and I didn’t have by getting him along to see his grandsons play 
cricket, but even so it always seemed like he was always too busy: first with 
wrapping things up at work, then adjusting to retirement and then, finally, his 
illness. He died at just 62, from mesothelioma, related to asbestos he’d 
cleared from a building after his father sent him out to work at 16.

A few months after he died, I realised that he hadn’t seen Oscar play cricket 
once. I was on the receiving end of the oldest lesson known to man: there is 
always something important to do, there is always later, until there is no 
later and it is too late. It’s not like I didn’t understand this or know it to 
be true, but some lessons have to be worn like a bruise to be understood. I 
felt deep down that there was no point me being a father if all my sons ever 
saw of me was this same old facade of stressed disciplinarian. It’s not that I 
wanted to be best mates with them – I just wanted our life on this planet to be 
about more than getting the right grades or getting into the right college.

That summer, I signed up to manage the teams of my two younger sons – both of 
whom had picked up on their older brother’s enthusiasm and all wanted to play 
cricket. I probably help to run or attend about three or four games a week 
during the season. Oddly, one of the best parts is driving to the far-flung 
games. If we’re on our own I get a lot of hard-hitting questions, mostly about 
my life and stuff I’ve done in the past (Q: “Why was the old magazine you 
worked for called Loaded?” A: “Er …”)

Running teams, you get a sense of the kids whose dads never come to games 
because they are working late during the week or going cycling at the weekend. 
I can’t understand this. These are the good times. Sometimes the kids wander up 
and tell you where their dads are, apropos of nothing. These are the times when 
they need a parent’s understanding, an arm round their shoulder to say, “I used 
to get out like that all the time! It’s a family tradition!”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F49p69%2Fsfb%23img-1&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F49p69%2Fsfb%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434466965339%2Fbb585244-1412-48f2-b495-6b399316c7d7-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20son%20and%20I%20make%20a%20great%20team&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F49p69%2Fstw%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My+son+and+I+make+a+great+team&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F49p69%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic-secure.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434466965339%2Fbb585244-1412-48f2-b495-6b399316c7d7-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Phil and Oscar. Photograph: Alicia Canter /Guardian 
Sometimes I think it’s great for them to look up and see Dad as part of their 
life, their group. Life can’t all be about turning up at the big moments – the 
16th, 18th, 21st birthdays, university graduation and his wedding. I’d bet most 
kids would trade all that to have just had you there when they got a golden 
duck and some idiot laughed.

After a couple of years of shuttling the kids around, one of my best friends 
pointed out that our sons were old enough to play in the same teams as we were. 
Being slightly too hopeless to play for a club, I decided to start my own 
village cricket team: the Muswell Maidens. The idea is that my friends and I 
will all be able to play games with our sons (most of whom are better than us 
anyway). We have had so much fun so far that we hope the team will be here 
after we’re gone, hopefully run by our lads to play with their own sons and 
daughters.

I now play on and off with Oscar in a couple of teams and feel that this 
shared pursuit provides us with common ground outside of the competent 
authoritarian/clumsy kid role that I got stuck in with my own father. It’s not 
about me being Oscar’s mate, but about him seeing who I am beyond my dad role 
and me seeing who he is beyond his son role.

The other day, a dad was telling me that he felt his son really didn’t like 
him. He’s a lovely, caring man, but the son simply got on better with 
his mother.

This is what sport can do for men. Sport helps men, in particular, build bonds 
and relationships. This is stuff as a dad you can talk about. It gives me the 
opportunity to say to my son, yes I was terrible today and the world didn’t 
end. I know most of the fathers of my generation are looking for shared 
experiences with their children, beyond the litany of “do your homework” or 
“tidy your room” that we were raised on.

The first time I batted with Oscar was at an indoor match at Lord’s. After my 
father died, I’d had this bug in my head about batting with Oscar – I didn’t 
want to repeat the same pattern. About two balls in to my fantasy moment, 
running a quick single, I fell flat on my face, a clattering heap of bat, 
helmet and pads. As I lie there catching my breath, feeling my knee swell, a 
12-year-old hand hove into view. I look up at this face through the grill of 
this helmet thinking, didn’t I just bring you back from the hospital?

“Get up, Dad,” he says, in a patient but impossibly deep voice. I took his 
hand and we continued on. At some point in our short innings, the best thing 
happened – the thing that has happened each time I have batted with him since: 
for a short time I forgot that he is my son and simply saw him as an equal – 
just another team mate batting down the other end and it’s what I always wanted.
