Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDepakUSDtQE&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDepakUSDtQE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDepakUSDtQE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDepakUSDtQE&media=>
This week we’re going to break the rules a little and name a whole series of 
videos as our number one. TheALS Ice Bucket Challenge 
<http://www.alsa.org/fight-als/ice-bucket-challenge.html> – a viral charity 
campaign which challenges people to film themselves being doused in icy water – 
originated with the friends and family of Pete Frates, a baseball player who 
was diagnosed with motor neurone disease (or ALS as it’s known in the US).
Celebrities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/aug/21/10-more-of-the-best-celebrity-takes-on-the-ice-bucket-challenge-als>
 who have completed the challenge range from former US presidentGeorge Bush 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DepakUSDtQE> and Cheryl Cole 
<http://instagram.com/p/r65VPoQpA-> to editor of US Vogue Anna Wintour 
<http://instagram.com/p/r7TEj9AMTI> and footballer Cristiano Ronaldo 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QGjaG6O8yCY>. The #icebucketchallenge has now 
raised more than £13.8m for charity.

It’s nearly two weeks since police officer Darren Wilson shot and killed 
Michael Brown, an unarmed black 18-year-old, in Ferguson, Missouri, and 
demonstrators are still gathering to demand answers. Comedian John Oliver’s 
searingsatirical skit on his Last Week Tonight 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KUdHIatS36A#t=252> show has had nearly 2.8m 
views since being published on 17 August. “What is absolutely clear is that the 
police have handled everything since then [the shooting] terribly,” he says.


Nicki Minaj gave us a taste of what was to come when she unveiled the 
controversial cover art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/jul/25/nicki-minaj-anaconda-cover-too-sexy-instagram>
 for her new album, Anaconda, and since thevideo for the title track 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LDZX4ooRsWs> was released, it has had over 20m 
views. It has, as expected, raised a few eyebrows, as it essentially features 
Minaj’s famous behind in a range of scenarios – the rainforest, the gym, the 
kitchen. I can’t think why it’s done so well.


Imagine if Michael Bay, director of the Transformers films, had directed the 
feel-good Pixar classic UP. What would that look like? Well, you don’t have to 
imagine. The latest in a long line of mock trailers for film classics,this 
viral hit <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sfout_rgPSA>shows us what our 
favourite kids film would look like with lots of explosions.

The all-singing, all-dancing, all-American Holderness Family 
<https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCl2axinLKd00nMBW6RTASag> have treated their 
YouTube subscribers to a child-friendly version of the Sir Mix A Lot classic 
“Baby Got Back”. “Baby Got Class 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s56-Ta35JRk&list=PL4CwjKOuVQNW7PesaEty3IcjO2smwTxj2>
” is about how happy they are to send their kids back to school after the long 
summer holiday and gives thanks to their teachers. It is, erm, intense.


Meanwhile, an advert for East Hills shopping centre in St Joseph, Missouri, 
has attracted 1.7mviews on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6bnanI9jXps>
, simply because it’s so bad. It could just about be one of the most 
cost-effective advertising campaigns in history.


Other notable events caught on camera this week include – a grouper eating a 
4ft shark <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O37HI_AX9nY> in one gigantic bite 
and acrocodile <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hk-QuAeHrXE> chasing a swimmer 
to shore. To finish, we have two American sports videos: quarterbacks Eli and 
Peyton Manning take part in amusic video parody 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qMor6dL0LfI#t=57> to promote DirecTV’s new 
fantasy football channel and the coach of Rhode Island baseball Little League 
champions Cumberland American gives the boysa rousing pep talk 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L39UEmescNA> when they lose the World Series. 
Not a dry eye in the house.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKUdHIatS36A&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKUdHIatS36A&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKUdHIatS36A>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKUdHIatS36A&media=>
1. George Bush takes the ice bucket challenge 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DepakUSDtQE>

Cold as ice


2. John Oliver on Ferguson, MO and Police Militarization  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KUdHIatS36A#t=252>

Not much more than more than twice
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KUdHIatS36A#t=252>

3. Nicki Minaj - Anaconda 
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LDZX4ooRsWs>

Baby got back


4. What if Michael Bay Directed “UP”? 
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u5KQQWlIgGc>

Up in smoke
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u5KQQWlIgGc>

5. Baby Got Class -- A back to school parody 
 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s56-Ta35JRk&list=PL4CwjKOuVQNW7PesaEty3IcjO2smwTxj2>

“Oh my god, look at that … bus”
 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s56-Ta35JRk&list=PL4CwjKOuVQNW7PesaEty3IcjO2smwTxj2>

6. Terrible Mall Commercial  <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6bnanI9jXps>

Backpacks, backpacks, come get your backpacks
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6bnanI9jXps>

7. Grouper eats 4ft shark in one bite 
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O37HI_AX9nY>

Big fish, little fish
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O37HI_AX9nY>

8. Crocodile Chases Swimming Tourist in Mexico 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hk-QuAeHrXE>

SWIM!
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hk-QuAeHrXE>

9. Fantasy Football Fantasy - A Manning Brothers Music Video 
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qMor6dL0LfI#t=57>

If you like football then you like fantasy
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qMor6dL0LfI#t=57>

10. Kids Receive Speech To Remember For Life 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L39UEmescNA>

“Everybody, heads up high”
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L39UEmescNA>


 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qMor6dL0LfI#t=57>
