
Dreaming of an idyllic island getaway? On the sun-kissed Caribbean island of 
Tobago 
<http://www.theguardian.com/discover-tobago/2016/apr/15/tobago-paradise-island> 
you’ll find a Unesco listed rainforest, coral reefs teeming with life and miles 
of white sandy beaches, not to mention the restful local way of life.

You could win a trip for two to Tobago courtesy of British Airways World 
Traveller, including two weeks’ stay in an ocean view apartment at Castara 
Retreats. Perched on Castara Bay, skimming the edge of the rainforest, this eco 
lodge will help you make the most of everything Tobago has to offer.


The prize includes:

 * A pair of British Airways World Traveller return tickets to Tobago.

 * Two weeks’ accommodation at Castara Retreats.

 * Welcome cocktails for two.

 * A private sunset boat cruise (2 hours) or a private snorkelling boat trip 
(2 hours).

 * Airport transfers.

Simply fill in your details below to enter.


Terms and conditions

 * The BA Tobago prize draw (the “Prize Draw”) is open to residents of the UK 
aged 18 and over. 
 * The Prize Draw is not open to employees or agencies of Guardian News & 
Media Limited (“GNM”), their group companies or family members or anyone else 
connected to the Prize Draw. 
 * Entry into the Prize Draw is acceptance of these Terms and Conditions. 
 * To enter the Prize Draw you must enter your details as above. If you have 
any questions about how to enter or in connection with the Prize Draw, please 
emailcompetitions.glabs@theguardian.com 
<mailto:competitions.glabs@theguardian.com> with “BA Tobago prize draw” in the 
subject line. 
 * Only one entry per person. Entries on behalf of another person will not be 
accepted and joint submissions are not allowed. You are responsible for the 
cost (if any) of sending your Prize Draw entry to us. 
 * No responsibility is taken for entries that are lost, delayed, misdirected 
or incomplete or cannot be delivered or entered for any technical or other 
reason. Proof of delivery of the entry is not proof of receipt. 
 * The Prize Draw closes at 23:59 on 15 July 2016. Entries received after that 
date and time will not be considered. 
 * The winner will be chosen from a random draw of entries. 
 * One winner will receive: A pair of British Airways World Traveller return 
tickets to Tobago; two weeks’ accommodation at Castara Retreats; welcome 
cocktails for two; a private sunset boat cruise (2 hours) or a private 
snorkelling boat trip (2 hours); Airport transfers. GNM accepts no 
responsibility for any costs associated with the prize and not specifically 
included in the prize. 
 * The winner will be notified by phone or email on or before 22 July 2016 and 
given details of how to claim their prize. If a winner does not respond to GNM 
within 28 days of being notified by GNM, then the winner’s prize will be 
forfeited and GNM shall be entitled to select another winner (and that winner 
will have to respond to the phone call or email from GNM within 28 days or else 
they will also forfeit their prize). 
 * Details of the winner can be obtained by sending a stamped addressed 
envelope to the following address: Guardian Creative, Guardian News & Media 
Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. 
 * The prize is non-exchangeable, non-transferable, and is not redeemable for 
cash or other prizes. 
 * GNM retains the right to substitute the prize with another prize of similar 
value in the event the original prize offered is not available. 
 * The winner may be required for promotional activity. 
 * No purchase necessary. 
 * Nothing in these terms and conditions shall exclude the liability of GNM 
for death, personal injury, fraud or fraudulent misrepresentation as a result 
of its negligence. 
 * GNM accepts no responsibility for any damage, loss, liabilities, injury or 
disappointment incurred or suffered by you as a result of entering the Prize 
Draw or accepting the prize. GNM further disclaims liability for any injury or 
damage to your or any other person’s computer relating to or resulting from 
participation in or downloading any materials in connection with the Prize Draw.
 * GNM reserves the right at any time and from time to time to modify or 
discontinue, temporarily or permanently, this Prize Draw with or without prior 
notice due to reasons outside its control (including, without limitation, in 
the case of anticipated, suspected or actual fraud). The decision of GNM in all 
matters under its control is final and binding and no correspondence will be 
entered into. 
 * GNM shall not be liable for any failure to comply with its obligations 
where the failure is caused by something outside its reasonable control. Such 
circumstances shall include, but not be limited to, weather conditions, fire, 
flood, hurricane, strike, industrial dispute, war, hostilities, political 
unrest, riots, civil commotion, inevitable accidents, supervening legislation 
or any other circumstances amounting to force majeure. 
 * The Prize Draw will be governed by English law. 
 * Promoter: Guardian News & Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London, 
N1 9GU. 
British Airways terms and conditions

 * This promotional travel award is only open to Eligible Participants.

 * Promotional travel must be booked by 31 Dec 2016. Reservation changes are 
not permitted after booking has been made. On all e-ticketable routes we will 
email an e-ticket itinerary. 
 * Outbound and return promotional travel must be completed by 31 Mar 2017. 
 * Promotional travel will be a pair of return flights to Tobago in World 
Traveller. 
 * Promotional travel is not guaranteed. We will do our very best to 
accommodate you on the dates you have selected but reserve the right to offer 
alternate dates. 
 * Promotional travel is not guaranteed in World Traveller. If space in the 
cabin is not available at the time of check-in, due to commercial demand, the 
airport will do all possible to accommodate you nearer the departure time. You 
may be asked to standby, downgrade or travel on a later flight. If this is the 
case, we would appreciate your co-operation in complying with the check-in 
agent’s request. 
 * Promotional travel is subject to availability and capacity control and in 
the following periods no promotional travel will be allowed: Peak travel times 
e.g. school holidays, public holidays. No stopovers are allowed. Domestic 
connections, transfers and other add-ons are not included in the promotional 
travel. 
 * Promotional travel is not refundable once booked and cannot be changed or 
transferred to any other passenger. No cash or credit alternatives are 
available. 
 * Lounge access is not permitted with these flights 
 * All travel on BA flights is subject to BA’s general conditions of carriage 
for passengers and baggage (copies available on request) and the notice and 
conditions of contract contained on each ticket or itinerary. 
 * Eligible Participants must be in possession of a valid passport and visa, 
and, where necessary, must have necessary vaccinations and inoculations 
together with documentation proving this. They must arrange comprehensive 
medical insurance cover for themselves for the duration of the promotional 
travel. 
 * Tickets for promotional travel are valid for the Eligible Participant 
accompanied by one travelling companion. These terms and conditions apply to 
both the Eligible Participant and the travelling companion. 
 * BA reserves the right to cancel or amend without notice the terms of this 
promotion and any tickets or vouchers issued free or at promotional prices in 
the event of major catastrophe, war, earthquake or any actual anticipated or 
alleged breach of any applicable law or regulation or any other circumstances 
beyond the reasonable control of BA. 