
The typical time for an NHS chief executive to stay in a job is two and half 
years 
<http://www.kingsfund.org.uk/sites/files/kf/field/field_publication_file/leadership-vacancies-in-the-nhs-kingsfund-dec14.pdf>
 (pdf) and, in order to fill the frequent vacancies left open by senior leaders 
who seek employment elsewhere, the NHS spent£420m on management consultants in 
2014-15 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/431694/Annex_to_letter_to_Chairs_and_CEs_of_FTs_020615.pdf>
 (pdf) alone. The state of NHS leadership is one of serious shortage.

Late last year, NHS Providers <https://www.nhsproviders.org/> chief executive 
Chris Hopson told the Guardian: “Our member chief executives tell us that they 
feel under greater pressure than ever before, particularly because there’s a 
huge, ongoing pressure in managing their financial deficit while continuing to 
provide the right quality of service.”

With budget constraints likely to stay and deficits escalating it’s hard to 
see how staff can be given the support and development opportunities to gain 
the skills they need to fill vacancies.

There are suggestions that it’s not only the workload or challenging budgets 
that are driving people out of careers at the top of the NHS. In fact, as the
Rose review into NHS leadership 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/445738/Lord_Rose_NHS_Report_acc.pdf>
 (pdf) found, it may be that the pathway towards the top jobs is simplytoo 
difficult to navigate 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/dec/04/ailing-nhs-leadership-needs-urgent-treatment>
.

Potential ways to better equip the leaders of tomorrow include facilitating 
senior staff to work across organisational boundaries and creating structures
whereby hospital groups <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-33140209> have a 
senior team that oversees activities.

Join us on Monday 27 June from 12-2pm to discuss how to nurture and develop 
leaders in the health service. Topics will include:


 * How can NHS leadership become more representative of its diverse workforce? 
 * Is enough being done to accommodate flexible working at all levels for 
female employees, enabling them to progress in their careers? 
 * What are the hallmarks of an effective leader in a modern NHS? 
 * What can be done to encourage long service in a senior position?

 * Does training provide leaders with the right skills to deliver 
patient-centred care? 
The discussion will take place on in the comments section below this article. 
To take part you can createa free Guardian account 
<https://id.theguardian.com/register> or log in using your Twitter or Facebook 
profiles to comment. Alternatively, you canemail 
<mailto:healthcare@theguardian.com> us to post your questions for you.

Panellists

To be updated as more panellists confirm

Karen Lynas, deputy managing director, NHS Leadership Academy 
<http://www.leadershipacademy.nhs.uk/>

Ben Gowland, director and founder Ockham Healthcare, former clinical 
commissioning group chief executive

Peter Beresford <http://www.theguardian.com/profile/peterberesford>, academic 
and activist

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
