
The world’s expensive slide into violence and unrest continued last year, with 
conflict, terrorism and political instability costing the global economy 
$13.6tn (£9.3tn), according to the annualglobal peace index 
<http://www.visionofhumanity.org/>.

The 2016 index <http://www.visionofhumanity.org/>, which analysed 163 
countries and territories, rates Syria the least peaceful country, followed by 
South Sudan, Iraq, Afghanistan and Somalia. The world’s most peaceful countries 
are Iceland, Denmark, Austria, New Zealand and Portugal.

While levels of peace improved in 81 countries, the gains were undermined by 
larger deteriorations in another 79, meaning that peace declined at a faster 
rate than inthe previous year 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/16/global-cost-conflict-reaches-14tn-says-report>
. Among the greatest destabilising factors were terrorism, political turmoil, 
and the intensification and persistence of wars in Syria, Ukraine, Central 
African Republic and Libya.

Related: Central African Republic's children dream of education – and peace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/19/central-african-republic-car-children-dream-of-education-and-peace>

The Middle East and North Africa (Mena) is once again the least peaceful 
region. Three of the five biggest declines in peace occurred in the region – 
Yemen, Libya and Bahrain – and violence and conflict in Mena are so fierce 
that, when considered separately, peace in the rest of the world improved.


“The historic 10-year deterioration in peace has largely been driven by the 
intensifying conflicts in the Mena region,” says the report. “Terrorism is also 
at an all-time high, battle deaths from conflict are at a 25-year high, and the 
number of refugees and displaced people are at a level not seen in 60 years.

“Notably, the sources for these three dynamics are intertwined and driven by a 
small number of countries, demonstrating the global repercussions of breakdowns 
in peacefulness.”

Steve Killelea, the founder and executive chairman of the Institute for 
Economics and Peace <http://economicsandpeace.org/> (IEP) thinktank, which 
produces the index, said the consequences of conflicts in Middle Eastern and 
north African countries are being felt well beyond their borders.


“As internal conflicts in Mena become more entrenched, external parties are 
increasingly becoming more involved and the potential for indirect or ‘war by 
proxy’ between nation states is rising,” he said.

The effects of violence have manifested themselves in the numbers of refugees 
and internally displaced people:by the beginning of 2015, a record 59.5 million 
people – one in every 122 humans – were either refugees, internally displaced 
or seeking asylum 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/18/59m-people-displaced-war-violence-persecution-says-un>
.


According to the index, nine countries now have more than 10% of their 
population displaced. In South Sudan and Somalia, 20% have fled their homes. In 
Syria, the proportion is more than 60%.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k8hm%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k8hm%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feafdfb9014cb6aa6f3b18dfc611185e3947552cc%2F0_0_5416_3596%2F5416.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Conflict%20and%20terrorism%20cost%20the%20world%20trillions%2C%20says%20peace%20index&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k8hm%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Conflict+and+terrorism+cost+the+world+trillions%2C+says+peace+index&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4k8hm%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feafdfb9014cb6aa6f3b18dfc611185e3947552cc%2F0_0_5416_3596%2F5416.jpg>
 A man walks through the rubble following airstrikes by government forces on 
the Shaar neighbourhood of the Syrian city of Aleppo in March 2015. Photograph: 
Zein Al-Rifai/AFP/Getty 
The report notes that although most terrorist activity is concentrated in five 
countries – Syria, Iraq, Nigeria, Afghanistan and Pakistan – the global impact 
is increasing.

“Deaths from terrorism increased by 80% from last year’s report, with only 69 
countries not recording a terrorist incident,” says the index. “The intensity 
of terrorism also increased with the number of countries suffering more than 
500 deaths from terrorist acts more than doubling, up from five to 11.”

South Asia remains the second least peaceful region, with deteriorations in 
Afghanistan, Nepal, Bangladesh and India, but modest improvements in Bhutan, 
Sri Lanka and Pakistan.


The picture in sub-Saharan Africa is mixed: although Chad, Mauritania and 
Niger have all improved their relations with neighbouring countries, Islamist 
terrorist groups such asBoko Haram 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/boko-haram> and continuing violence in South 
Sudan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-sudan> have damaged efforts to 
bring peace and stability.

The sums lost through conflict are huge. The IEP said the $13.6tn cost of 
violence last year represented 13.3% of gross world product – or $1,876 per 
person – and was equivalent to 11 times the amount spent on foreign direct 
investment.

The UN expects to spend $8bn (£5.5bn) on peacekeeping this year 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/apr/06/where-does-8bn-un-peacekeeping-budget-go>
 – an increase of 17% on 2015. But Killelea argues that the sums spent on 
building and keeping peace are small in comparison with the economic impact of 
violence, and represent only 2% of worldwide losses from armed conflict.


“Addressing the global disparity in peace and achieving an overall 10% 
decrease in the economic impact of violence would produce a peace dividend of 
$1.36tn,” he said. “This is approximately equivalent to the size of world food 
exports.”

As well as calling on the international community to promote peace, the report 
urges it to monitor peacefulness through thesustainable development goal 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/sustainable-development-goals> 
on promoting just, peaceful and inclusive societies. Its audit of the existing 
data forgoal 16 
<http://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/sdgoverview/post-2015-development-agenda/goal-16.html>
 finds that while there is enough data to measure progress, more work needs to 
be done on data availability, disaggregation, reliability, timeliness and 
objectivity.

“It will take significant time and investment for countries to develop the 
necessary capacities to measure goal 16,” concludes the index.

First published in 2008, the GPI ranks nations by gauging peace according to 
safety and security in society, levels of domestic and international conflict, 
and militarisation.
