
Nicky Morgan appears to have fired the starting gun on six months of 
speculation 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/feb/14/calls-for-homegrown-talent-next-ofsted-chief>
 as to who will be the next chief inspector of schools. Testing the names of 
possible candidates through anonymous briefings to the press is not the best 
way of making one of the most important appointments in education, but given 
that is what seems to be happening, we should seize the chance to join the 
debate.

Whoever gets the job will wield influence well beyond the lifetime of this 
parliament, but it is its independence, unique among senior education posts, 
that makes this such an important position. The chief inspector is answerable 
to parliament, not the government, and has a legal duty to inspect and report 
without fear or favour. He or she works for the public, not the education 
secretary.

So the messages coming from the government should ring alarm bells. Much of 
the publicity has been speculation about anappointment from overseas 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/education/educationnews/12156541/Ministers-looking-abroad-for-new-chief-inspector-of-schools.html>
 – not in itself a bad thing, though it is debatable whether someone with no 
experience of English schools could be its chief inspector. Of more concern are 
rumours thatleaders of the US charter school movement are emerging as favourites
 <http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/news/uk_news/Education/article1668140.ece>
.

Appointing someone because they support charter schools would be just plain 
wrong. It is not the job of the chief inspector to help the government push 
through its policies: I don’t want to know whether or not they support free 
schools or what they think of teacher unions. I just want to be sure they have 
the independence of mind and strength of character to report on excellence 
wherever they find it, and deal with failure where it exists.

Related: Classroom problems cannot be solved entirely by outsiders | Estelle 
Morris 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/aug/25/classroom-problems-outsiders-education-military-ethos-project>

No one should underestimate the contribution of the present chief inspector, 
Sir Michael Wilshaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/feb/02/school-must-improve-my-mission>
, in defending the independence of his post. I don’t agree with everything he 
has done, but his determination to speak his mind has served the education 
system well. He has resisted ministerial pressure to be soft on inspecting free 
schools, challenged the government’s latest plans to extend the English 
baccalaureate, defended vocational education and skilfully circumvented the 
government’s unwillingness to inspect academy chains. At times he must have 
been, at the very least, an irritant to civil servants and ministers – but 
that’s part of his job.

Would someone who is appointed because they are committed to a key government 
policy bring the same independent spirit? I doubt it. It would essentially turn 
the chief inspector post into a political appointment, and that would be a 
disgrace.

The debate we should be having is about the kind of inspectorate we need for 
the next decade. Over the last 30 years, all five holders of the post have 
worked to establish Ofsted as an essential part of our education system and our 
schools are better for it. It is not, however, perfect andOfsted 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> should be courageous enough to 
own up to its weaknesses – just as it would expect from any school it inspected.

Ofsted needs urgently to consider how to stop inspections making schools risk 
averse, how to recognise the contribution of individual schools to their 
federation or cluster, how the inspection process could inject energy into 
schools rather than draining it from them, and how to recognise and celebrate 
those things we value but which can’t be measured, such as citizenship, 
personal development and the ability to work with others.

Most of us believe in a full, rich, rounded education: one that values the 
arts and creativity, as well as maths and science, encourages children to be 
active as well as studious and to develop a love of learning that will stay 
with them for life. I believe that most inspectors want those things as well, 
but that is not the impression they always give to schools. So, another 
challenge I would set Ofsted is to see itself as others sometimes see it.

A change of leadership is a difficult time for Ofsted, no less than any other 
organisation, but if it is to retain the respect of the public it must, at the 
very least, safeguard its independence.
