
Cancer patients, healthy newborns, children losing education because of 
malaria and adults dying of tuberculosis: they’re more than statistics and 
spreadsheets. But to improve community health, collecting good data about these 
and other populations is essential.


“We have seen spectacular changes in developing countries. The numbers show 
unprecedented progress,” says Dr Ties Boerma, director for health statistics 
and information systems at the World Health Organization. He’s also the lead 
author ofHealth in 2015: from MDGs to SDGs 
<http://www.who.int/gho/publications/mdgs-sdgs/en/>, a comprehensive report 
about trends in global health, from the launch of the United Nations’ 
millennium development goals in 2000 to the conclusion of the UN’s sustainable 
development goals, slated for 2030.

According to the report, the number of HIV cases around the world has 
decreased by 45% since 2000. Malaria prevalence decreased 37% between 2000 and 
2015. The study also found a 53% reduction in child mortality rates and 44% 
fewermaternal mortalities 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/feb/02/11-ideas-to-improve-maternal-health-in-areas-of-conflict-and-extreme-poverty>
 – women dying during pregnancy or childbirth, or up to six weeks after giving 
birth – since 1990.

Dr Boerma shed light on these heartening figures, noting: “What we have seen 
in 15 years is more investment in health data collection – especially household 
surveys. There was little progress until 2005, but then resources started 
flowing, programs had more focus, there was much more progress.”

Related: Vaccination reminder band tipped to boost global child inoculation 
rates 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/10/vaccination-ankle-band-improving-inoculation-rates-children>

With good data, resources can be targeted toward the most appropriate 
projects. This will give countries the best chance of meeting the wide-ranging, 
greatly ambitioussustainable development goal 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive>
 No 3: to ensure healthy lives and promote wellbeing for everyone at all ages.

But what constitutes good data, particularly at a regional or local level? Dr 
Tanya Marchant points out that oversight can be a roadblock. “There is a maxim 
that what gets measured gets done,” says the London School of Hygiene and 
Tropical Medicine epidemiologist, whose research focuses on improving key 
measurements to help improve maternal and newborn health in sub-Saharan Africa 
and India.

She adds that there’s a lack of focus on quality recordkeeping. “Data is 
aggregated at [a] facility level without checks and balances or managers 
scrutinizing the data,” Marchant says. That’s important information for 
locations with the highest mortality rates, which may have the largest reliance 
on overseas expertise – there might be systems to gather data, but no staff who 
can analyze it.

Marchant adds: “Policies are not always driven by evidence and data. Sometimes 
they are driven by politics. In the context of scarce resources it is really 
crucial that there is a more targeted use of finances. The only way to have 
this more targeted use is if we can improve data for decisionmaking.”

Knowing the numbers is not enough. Political commitment is also necessary. In 
2000, Zambia’s government pledged to halve the country’s malaria mortality rate 
by 2010. As described inMillions Saved: New Cases of Proven Success in Global 
Health <http://millionssaved.cgdev.org/>, a collection of case studies 
published by the Center for Global Development, Zambia succeeded by 
implementing a formal, coordinated national malaria control program – one of 
the largest such schemes in the world.

The program involved a comprehensive range of strategies, like increased 
funding, community participation and providing bed nets. Zambia was the first 
country to set up a malaria indicator survey, which involved door-to-door 
interviews and testing for and treating the disease. As a result, the country 
could guide resource allocation and discover – and explain and treat – 
increased rates of malaria in several provinces. From 2001 to 2010, these 
interventions saved the lives of an estimated 33,000 children.

Simple SMS or text messages also have improved public health, according to Dr 
Alain Labrique, founder of theGlobal mHealth <http://www.jhumhealth.org/> 
initiative at Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. “These messages 
can optimize the work health workers do, leveraging the fact that so many 
people own their own phones,” he says. “For instance, they can provide 
reminders about antenatal visits or immunization.”

Related: Can smartphone drug trials improve medical care? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/27/smartphone-mobile-drug-trials-fda-pfizer-ctti-depression-us-health>

Health workers’ own phones also can save valuable time and improve efficiency. 
Labrique notes: “If you think about tracking an individual over her pregnancy, 
or a child over the first five years, keeping paper-based records is 
difficult.” With colleagues at Johns Hopkins and the social technology company 
mPower, Labrique developedmCare 
<https://www.changemakers.com/innovations4health/entries/mcare-enhancing-neonatal-survival-rural-south-asia>
, a program that uses mobile phone and database technologies to improve 
antenatal, postnatal and neonatal care in rural Bangladesh.

The Bangladesh Ministry of Health is now scaling up mCare, which helps 
systematize what frontline health workers need to work efficiently. It lets 
them create lists of families and women for whom they are responsible, and 
creates an organized care schedule.

“It introduces a system into an area where there was a vacuum,” Labrique says. 
“People had been falling through the cracks because they lived farther away 
[from a health worker], or it wasn’t clear which health worker was responsible 
for them.”

Appropriate, reliable data can lead to improved use of both human and 
financial resources. “With outbreaks such as Ebola and Zika, everyone is aware 
that people need good data to make the right decisions,” Boerma says. 
“Surveillance and data are where you start. Without that, the rest is 
difficult.”

It is important to know about resources, he adds. Data on where health workers 
are, whether they have medicine, locations of labs and anything about available 
money is often quite poor. Boerma says: “We need to have good planning so that 
no one is left behind.”
