
I was born with congenital abnormalities in both my feet. I wore a splint 
accompanied by a raised shoe on my right foot until it became too painful to 
walk. I opted to have it amputated when I was nine. I’m now 18 and have been an 
amputee for slightly over half my life. Choosing to have my foot “chopped off” 
(the phrase I used as a child: no one understood the word “amputation”) was the 
best decision I’ve made in my life.

I’m used to the staring when I opt for an outfit that shows my legs. As a 
nine-year-old, it felt as if everyone was staring at me, which was horrible and 
not great for self-esteem in my early teens. Now I couldn’t care less. If I 
catch anyone staring at me I stare right back until they notice and sheepishly 
turn away. I’m not one for conflict, just some light passive aggression.

Being a young woman with a prosthetic limb I occasionally find it difficult to 
convince people that I am, in fact, an amputee. With such limited media 
representation, it’s no wonder people think the only way you can be an amputee 
is if you’re a former soldier.

Related: What I’m really thinking: the stepdad of an autistic child 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/23/what-really-thinking-stepdad-autistic-child>

Once I have told people about my amputation (it’s a good conversation 
starter), they usually say something along the lines of, “Wow! I would never 
have known!” They say it in a congratulatory manner, as if they’re actually 
saying, “Well done, you can pass as able-bodied!” Able-bodied people, even some 
disabled people, would see that as a compliment. I probably did once, but not 
any more. Having a disability is a huge part of my identity. I would never want 
to change it.

• Tell us what you’re really thinking at mind@theguardian.com 
<mailto:mind@theguardian.com>
