
A hundred judges and magistrates have received written threats connected to 
cases they presided over during the past five years, the Ministry of Justice 
has revealed.

The admission that those on the bench are subject to such a high level of 
intimidation comes after awhistleblowing legal action launched by a district 
judge 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jan/23/whistleblower-judge-austerity-policies-have-made-courts-dangerous>
highlighting courtroom dangers.

Claire Gilham’s claim before an employment tribunal includes details of a 
death threat she received while hearing family cases at Warrington county court.


The influx of unrepresented litigants in person, who are no longer entitled to 
legal aid to pay for lawyers, has added to the difficulties family judges face 
in controlling emotive child custody hearings.


Earlier this week Labour’s justice spokesman, Andy Slaughter, put down a 
written question 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/publications/written-questions-answers-statements/written-question/Commons/2016-01-26/24330/>
 seeking information on how many judges or magistrates received threatening 
correspondence relating to hearings they have presided over since 2011.

Replying, Shailesh Vara, the justice minister responsible for courts and legal 
aid, pointed out that there are around 20,000 judges and magistrates in England 
and Wales.


The annual figures show how many judges and magistrates in England and Wales 
reported receiving threatening correspondence: in 2011 – 20; in 2012 – 12; in 
2013 – 19; in 2014 – 18; and in 2015 – 31.

Last year’s leap in numbers may be an indication of a growing problem. 
Slaughter, the MP for Hammersmith, said he was “shocked” at the figures he 
uncovered, and insisted the lord chancellor had a duty to “ensure the safety of 
everyone who works in our courts”.

At the end of last year, Slaughter obtained figures through another written 
question showing that nearly 7,000 knives 
<http://www.parliament.uk/written-questions-answers-statements/written-question/commons/2015-12-07/18874>
 had been confiscated at crown courts and magistrates courts in England and 
Wales during 2014/15. “This is breathtaking lawlessness which the government 
must tackle immediately in order to ensure the safety of court staff,” 
Slaughter said.


In his responses, Vara said: “We have a robust security and safety system in 
place to protect all court users. Any threats to judges or magistrates are 
taken extremely seriously, and within Her Majesty’s Courts and Tribunals 
Service there is a security team to co-ordinate effective judicial security and 
incident investigation, working closely with senior judiciary and police 
agencies to provide the necessary support.”
