
Claims by the UK justice secretary, Michael Gove, and the Vote Leave campaign 
thatTurkey could achieve full membership of the EU by 2020 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/20/eu-immigrant-influx-michael-gove-nhs-unsustainable>
 will come as a big surprise to the Turkish government and people.

Turkey’s application has been languishing since 1987, when Ankara first asked 
Brussels to consider its case for joining. It was not officially recognised as 
a candidate until 1999. That was 17 years ago. Since then, things have not gone 
well. Formal negotiations did not begin for a further six years, and when they 
did they rapidly got bogged down – which is how matters broadly stand now.

Aspiring members must adopt existing EU rules and standards. They do so in 
stages, a process that involves agreeing separately to each of 35 chapters. 
After nearly 30 years, only one negotiating chapter has been agreed withTurkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey>. Fifteen are, in theory, open for 
discussion, while talks about the remainder – the most difficult bits, such as 
freedom of movement – have not even begun.

Related: Will staying in EU really lead to an influx equal to Scottish 
population? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/reality-check/2016/may/20/staying-in-eu-migration-influx-scottish-population-reality-check>

The main reason why matters have proceeded so slowly is that the EU’s big 
beasts, France and Germany, do not want Turkey to join. Hardly anything happens 
in the EU without the agreement of these two founding members. Nicolas Sarkozy, 
the former French president and now tipped to return to the Élysée next spring, 
was first to put the boot in, and others followed. Almost the first thing 
Sarkozy did after he was elected in 2007 wasblock talks with Turkey 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2007/06/25/world/europe/25iht-union.5.6325879.html?_r=0>
 on the key area of economic and monetary policy.

Sarkozy argued that Turkey was geographically not part of Europe and had no 
place in the EU. François Hollande, Sarkozy’s successor, is similarly 
unsympathetic. More importantly, perhaps, Angela Merkel, Germany’s long-serving 
chancellor, also opposes Turkish membership. She repeated this view in a
television interview <https://euobserver.com/enlargement/130735> in October 
last year. “Erdoğan knows this,” she said, referring to the Turkish president, 
Recep Tayyip Erdoğan.

Merkel has used the carrot of accelerated negotiations to facilitate a deal 
with Turkey on returning Syrian migrants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/18/refugees-will-be-sent-back-across-aegean-in-eu-turkey-deal>
. But her basic position, backed by large cross-party majorities in Germany, is 
that Turkey should not be granted full membership. So, in short, even if David 
Cameron’s government enthusiastically advocated swift Turkish accession, which 
it does not, it would certainly be blocked, for the foreseeable future, by the 
EU’s two most powerful states, backed by other influential members such as 
Poland.

And even if, despite all this, Turkey were somehow allowed in, the EU’s 
freedom of movement rules would almost certainly not apply in the first 
instance. Like Romania and Bulgaria after they joined in 2007, Turkish workers 
would not be allowed simply to move en masse to the UK or other EU states. 
Britain’s non-membership of the Schengen area creates another specific barrier 
in this respect.

Similar obstacles face other current EU applicants – Serbia, Macedonia, 
Montenegro and Albania. Apart from specific concerns about immigration and 
jobs, the EU is suffering what is known as “enlargement fatigue”.

Many European politicians feel 28 member states is more than enough. New 
members are not welcome from any quarter – and all 28 national parliaments have 
a right of veto. This reluctance, incidentally, would affect any future 
membership bid by an independent Scotland.

Turkey’s leaders know all this only too well, as does the Turkish public – 
even if Gove and the Brexiters do not. Support for EU membership has dropped in 
Turkey in recent years, part of a backlash against perceived discriminatory 
treatment by what Erdoğan calls a “Christian club”.

Turkey under Erdoğan has turned eastwards, away from Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, looking to wield influence in 
the lands of the old Ottoman empire. It has cultivated closer ties with Middle 
Eastern powers such as Saudi Arabia.

Stung by European criticism of human rights abuses and a crackdown on press 
freedom, Erdoğan has sometimes given the impression that he would like to scrap 
the EU talks altogether.

Sunday’s appointment of a party loyalist 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-36352526>, Binali Yıldırım, as prime 
minister, who is expected to follow the president’s line in all main policy 
areas, means Erdoğan’s Europhobia may develop unchecked and become more extreme.

Vote Leave’s argument that millions of Turks would move to the UK if they 
could is borderline fantasy for other reasons. Although Turkey’s economy has 
faltered of late, its record of expansive GDP growth since the 1990s is 
impressive. Living standards have risen for most Turks amid rapid urbanisation.

In other words, Britain is a less attractive destination for Turkish economic 
migrants than it might think. Against this backdrop, Gove’s claim that more 
than 5 million people – exceeding the population of Scotland – could move to 
the UK from the EU by 2030 reveals a surprising ignorance of European 
realities. Truth be told, it’s a load of old kebab.
