
In the kitchen, next to the stove, is a short row of cookery books 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/dec/13/25-best-food-books-2015-observer-food-monthly>
. Their spines are snapped or, in a couple of cases, missing entirely. Each 
appears to be held together by love and the splatters of food that have 
gathered on their pages while I cook – the ghosts of dishes made and meals 
enjoyed.

I love each and every one of these books dearly. The choice is, of course, 
entirely personal. Their purpose is, generally, not to inform or instruct but 
simply to offer suggestions for something good to eat. A dish the author feels 
I might like to make for myself or my loved ones. I value these books more than 
any others, for their inspiration, their warmth and their friendly voices.

There is a good dish, maybe several, in most cookbooks. A book that has one 
recipe you love and make regularly has earned its keep in my collection. My 
local charity shops get the spoils. But this row of books is more than that. 
Each of these are collections I would miss, that have earned a permanent place 
in my kitchen, and have become part of my home.

A good cookery book can, in no small way, change your life for the better. The 
cake you use to celebrate a birthday; the ragu on which you base so many dishes 
of your own; that supper that so neatly uses up all the leftovers from Sunday 
lunch.The Christmas pudding recipe. These may not be blueprints you follow 
slavishly, but words that ignite a spark, that you use as a starting point for 
your own cooking.

Our new feature will shine a light on those classic books. From Robert Carrier 
<http://www.theguardian.com/news/2006/jun/28/guardianobituaries.food> to 
Patience Gray 
<http://www.theguardian.com/news/2005/mar/18/guardianobituaries.food>, Graham 
Kerr toMarguerite Patten 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jun/10/cookery-writer-marguerite-patten-dies-aged-99>
. Yes, there may be some that surprise you; others that you will have 
dismissed; some with which you are familiar; and others you have possibly never 
heard of.

These are collections of stories, hints, suggestions and yes, recipes, with 
which we can make our kitchens a more welcoming place, recipes with which we 
can have a good time.

We start with the book that got me, and no doubt countless others, started. 
The book that kindled my love of the written recipe – Margaret Costa’sFour 
Seasons Cookery Book, first published in 1970 and, I think you will agree, just 
as relevant today.

Brilliant breakfast recipes from 1970 and Margaret Costa’s Four Seasons 
Cookery Book
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gjx9%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gjx9%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc875307d88198bb4e7f0920b17fa08517730e331%2F0_0_1332_1771%2F1332.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=OFM%E2%80%99s%20classic%20cookbooks%3A%20Margaret%20Costa%E2%80%99s%20Four%20Seasons%20Cookery%20Book&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gjx9%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=OFM%E2%80%99s+classic+cookbooks%3A+Margaret+Costa%E2%80%99s+Four+Seasons+Cookery+Book&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gjx9%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc875307d88198bb4e7f0920b17fa08517730e331%2F0_0_1332_1771%2F1332.jpg>
At this time of year there is scant comfort, and cold, to be found in a 
breakfast of orange juice, coffee and perhaps a piece of toast. When the 
mornings are dark, the flesh weak and the spirit weary, nothing comforts as a 
good breakfast can – and the comforting glow lasts throughout the day. There is 
no arguing with the tests that have conclusively shown that people who don’t 
have a “proper” breakfast are appreciably less efficient, less productive, and 
noticeably less good-tempered than those who do. But the strongest reason of 
all for having a good breakfast is that if you don’t you just won’t get your 
fair share of most of the nicest English food, the kind we do best of all.

Eggs and bacon would be my desert island dish if I had to choose. Thin bacon 
cooks crisply and quickly; nick the fat in several places first so that it 
doesn’t curl up under a hot grill. Fry eggs very slowly in butter, or butter 
and bacon fat, spooning the butter over them to film the yolk. Scramble eggs, 
again very slowly, in a very heavy pan over a low heat; snatch it from the heat 
just before they are done and stir in a little cream – two tablespoons for four 
eggs – and a little butter; no milk, no water. Slip eggs for poaching into a 
frying pan of boiling water – no vinegar, no salt – then turn off the heat, 
cover with a lid, and take them out, when set, with a perforated spoon. (If you 
cook the eggs in boiling water for 20 seconds before poaching them, they will 
look tidier.) Coddle eggs – don’t boil them; start the eggs in cold water, 
bring it to boiling point and immediately reduce the heat. Three minutes of 
simmering when the water comes back to the boil soft-boils a large egg.

Fish makes a pleasant change: salmon fish cakes, kippers, smoked haddock. I 
cook kippers exactly as if I were making tea: put them in a tall jug, pour 
boiling water over them and leave them to brew a little. I have heard this 
called the “Lowestoft way”. I don’t know if the Lowestoft fishermen use it, but 
the kippers certainly stay plump and juicy. Serve them well drained, with 
butter melting over them and a good grinding of fresh black pepper.

Haddock is poached in milk and water, half and half, which is never allowed to 
come quite to the boil. Serve them topped off in traditional fashion with one 
or two poached eggs. I always buy more than I need because it is so delicious 
in a kedgeree or an omelette.

Mind you, the best breakfast dishes are yesterday’s fry-ups. Yesterday’s 
mashed potato mixed with grated cheese and/or finely chopped bacon, shaped into 
little flat cakes, rolled in flour mixed with herbs or a little dried packet 
stuffing, and fried in bacon fat, are tremendously popular with children. So 
are sturdy little pancakes made with a thickish batter and mashed potato, and 
fried by spoonfuls in hot bacon fat. Crisp streaky rashers go with these, or 
that lovely breakfast sausage they slice and fry for breakfast in Scotland. So 
do fried apples and bananas. Children love fried bacon and cheese sandwiches: 
soak the bread first in egg beaten up with a little milk.

Dishes like these are not for the calorie conscious, of course. But calories 
are comforting; like cardigans, they don’t do much for your figure but the 
warmth makes you feel so good. If you won’t try them for breakfast what about 
Sunday brunch?

Marmalade popovers
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gjx9%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gjx9%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ae8dce6dc0679dcb9184b0729b20abe2d3223e1%2F0_1053_7530_4515%2F7530.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=OFM%E2%80%99s%20classic%20cookbooks%3A%20Margaret%20Costa%E2%80%99s%20Four%20Seasons%20Cookery%20Book&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gjx9%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=OFM%E2%80%99s+classic+cookbooks%3A+Margaret+Costa%E2%80%99s+Four+Seasons+Cookery+Book&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gjx9%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ae8dce6dc0679dcb9184b0729b20abe2d3223e1%2F0_1053_7530_4515%2F7530.jpg>
115g plain flour; ½ teaspoon salt; 215ml milk; 2 eggs; 1 teaspoon grated 
orange rind; 1 tablespoon melted butter or vegetable oil; oil or lard for 
baking tins; 8 teaspoons orange marmalade

Sift the flour and salt into a bowl. Make a well in the middle and pour in the 
milk and the lightly beaten eggs. Mix to a smooth batter. Stir in the grated 
orange rind and whisk really hard with an egg whisk until the surface is 
covered with bubbles. If possible, leave to stand in a cold place for about an 
hour, then stir in the melted butter and beat again.


Grease 8 castle pudding tins or dariole moulds really well. Put them in the 
oven until they are hot. Pour in the batter, filling each tin half to 
two-thirds full. Stir a small teaspoon of marmalade into each one and put 
straight into a hot oven, 220C/gas mark 7, for about 10 minutes; then reduce 
the heat to 180C/gas mark 4, and bake for about 25 minutes longer, until the 
popovers are well puffed up, crisp and golden brown. Eat straight away with 
plenty of butter and more- marmalade if liked.

This is an easy breakfast dish because the batter can be made the night before 
and the popovers put in the oven to bake while the family are dressing.

Breakfast scramble
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gjx9%2Fsfb%23img-4&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gjx9%2Fsfb%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cb44db6716e842da18920dd9bc78db7ad464c25%2F0_1633_8695_5216%2F8695.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=OFM%E2%80%99s%20classic%20cookbooks%3A%20Margaret%20Costa%E2%80%99s%20Four%20Seasons%20Cookery%20Book&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gjx9%2Fstw%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=OFM%E2%80%99s+classic+cookbooks%3A+Margaret+Costa%E2%80%99s+Four+Seasons+Cookery+Book&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gjx9%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cb44db6716e842da18920dd9bc78db7ad464c25%2F0_1633_8695_5216%2F8695.jpg>
4 slices bacon; 4 eggs; 4 tablespoons grated cheese; 4 slices buttered toast

Cook the bacon until crisp, and crumble it up. Separate the yolks and whites 
of the eggs. Beat the yolks well together, and stir in the crumbled bacon and 
the grated cheese. Whip up the egg whites stiffly and fold in the yolks.

Heap on to the slices of toast, covering them completely. Place under a low 
grill and cook for about 5 minutes. Serve with extra bacon rashers, if you like.

French herrings
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gjx9%2Fsfb%23img-5&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gjx9%2Fsfb%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d089d1e885b747feed603b204655746d50ac2d8%2F0_1947_6595_3959%2F6595.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=OFM%E2%80%99s%20classic%20cookbooks%3A%20Margaret%20Costa%E2%80%99s%20Four%20Seasons%20Cookery%20Book&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gjx9%2Fstw%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=OFM%E2%80%99s+classic+cookbooks%3A+Margaret+Costa%E2%80%99s+Four+Seasons+Cookery+Book&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gjx9%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d089d1e885b747feed603b204655746d50ac2d8%2F0_1947_6595_3959%2F6595.jpg>
4 large herrings; milk; seasoned flour; 85g butter; 2 tablespoons French 
mustard; 2 tablespoons chopped parsley; 1 dessertspoon lemon juice

Score the herrings two or three times on each side. Dip them in milk and coat 
them evenly with well-seasoned flour. Fry in 55g melted butter until golden on 
both sides and arrange them side by side in a fireproof dish. Brush each fish 
with mustard and sprinkle with the chopped parsley.

Put the herrings in the oven to keep warm while you add the rest of the butter 
to the pan in which they were cooked. When the contents of the pan are a fairly 
deep golden brown, pour in the lemon juice, swish it round once or twice, then 
pour it over the fish.

Apple pancakes
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gjx9%2Fsfb%23img-6&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gjx9%2Fsfb%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60013b0cc4fad701f95cb09498c83cc987c8d8f0%2F0_1750_6915_4156%2F6915.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=OFM%E2%80%99s%20classic%20cookbooks%3A%20Margaret%20Costa%E2%80%99s%20Four%20Seasons%20Cookery%20Book&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gjx9%2Fstw%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=OFM%E2%80%99s+classic+cookbooks%3A+Margaret+Costa%E2%80%99s+Four+Seasons+Cookery+Book&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gjx9%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60013b0cc4fad701f95cb09498c83cc987c8d8f0%2F0_1750_6915_4156%2F6915.jpg>
175g plain flour; 1 teaspoon baking powder; ½ teaspoon cinnamon; 1 tablespoon 
butter; 1 tablespoon sugar; 2 eggs; 1 large cooking apple; ½ pint milk; butter 
for cooking

Sift the flour with the baking powder and cinnamon. Cream the butter and sugar 
together, add the beaten eggs, flour and then finely chopped apple. Then add 
the milk gradually to make a batter. Cook in butter in a heavy pan as you would 
ordinary pancakes, and serve hot with grilled or fried chipolata sausages. This 
makes a very substantial breakfast

Kedgeree
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gjx9%2Fsfb%23img-7&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gjx9%2Fsfb%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ab1a87d29a8e48c93868ca5e5b9ecc0f1c29eea%2F0_1360_6872_4121%2F6872.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=OFM%E2%80%99s%20classic%20cookbooks%3A%20Margaret%20Costa%E2%80%99s%20Four%20Seasons%20Cookery%20Book&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gjx9%2Fstw%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=OFM%E2%80%99s+classic+cookbooks%3A+Margaret+Costa%E2%80%99s+Four+Seasons+Cookery+Book&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gjx9%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ab1a87d29a8e48c93868ca5e5b9ecc0f1c29eea%2F0_1360_6872_4121%2F6872.jpg>
225g smoked haddock; 175g long-grain rice ; salt, pepper and cayenne; 1 onion; 
55g butter; 2 hard-boiled eggs; chopped parsley to garnish

Pour boiling water over the haddock and leave to stand for 5 minutes; remove 
any bones and skin, and flake the fish coarsely. Bring 600ml of water to the 
boil in a large saucepan with seasonings to taste; pour in the rice, cover 
closely and cook over a very low heat for about 25 minutes until all the water 
is absorbed and the rice is fluffy. While the rice is cooking, fry the finely 
chopped onion in a little of the butter until soft and transparent.

Chop the whites of the hard-boiled eggs, and press the yolks through a sieve. 
Stir the flaked fish, the onion, egg whites and the rest of the butter into the 
cooked rice, and season rather highly. Heat through gently and pile up on a 
warmed, flat dish. Make a big -yellow cross over the top with the sieved egg 
yolks, then scatter the whole dish with parsley.

Club mushroom breakfast
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gjx9%2Fsfb%23img-8&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gjx9%2Fsfb%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9cf73cb09516eb8db80a863d264ac4046f8470f%2F0_1527_7286_4377%2F7286.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=OFM%E2%80%99s%20classic%20cookbooks%3A%20Margaret%20Costa%E2%80%99s%20Four%20Seasons%20Cookery%20Book&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gjx9%2Fstw%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=OFM%E2%80%99s+classic+cookbooks%3A+Margaret+Costa%E2%80%99s+Four+Seasons+Cookery+Book&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4gjx9%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9cf73cb09516eb8db80a863d264ac4046f8470f%2F0_1527_7286_4377%2F7286.jpg>
 Photograph: Romas Foord for the Observer 
4 bacon rashers; 225g mushrooms; 225g soft roes; about 25g butter; 4 slices 
toast; salt and pepper

Fry the bacon and then the mushrooms in one pan. Fry the roes in butter in 
another pan. When all are cooked, cover the slices of toast with bacon, then 
the roes, and lastly pile on the mushrooms. Season well.

Extracted from Margaret Costa’s Four Seasons Cookery Book (Grub Street, 
£14.99).Click here to buy a copy for £11.99 from the Guardian Bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/four-seasons-cookery-book.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
