
The pursuit of individual and personal style becomes so much more important as 
you get older. When I look at my clothes at home, I don’t think my style has 
changed very much since my early 30s. That was when I settled on something. And 
if I could be 38 again, I don’t think I would dress any differently than I do 
now, at 50.

That said, some elements of the way I dress have been constant since I was a 
teenager, when I became obsessed witha Bruce Weber Vogue shoot 
<http://tmagazine.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/06/14/bruces-bellport/> based on 
Edward Weston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/aug/18/edward-weston-photography>
 and his women. I remember taking the magazine into Exeter to get my hair cut 
like the picture, then buying a fisherman’s jumper in a sailing shop. I bought 
a grey pencil skirt, dug out my school shoes and ankle socks, got my dad’s 
overcoat and got the look. I still dress like those pictures in a way.

There’s an abiding perception that the high street doesn’t serve older women 
very well, but in my view it’s better than it has ever been. The choice is huge 
– whether that’sTopshop <http://www.topshop.com/>, Uniqlo 
<http://www.uniqlo.com/uk/> or Cos <http://www.cosstores.com/gb/>. It’s not one 
stop that gives you everything you want, more that everybody offers something 
very different.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4geef%2Fsfb%23img-2&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4geef%2Fsfb%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2455dd8f1a9f738e06e059ae418e2284bdd5508d%2F130_0_2096_3145%2F2096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20should%20you%20dress%20at%2050%3F%20Topshop's%20Kate%20Phelan%20tells%20you%20how&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4geef%2Fstw%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+should+you+dress+at+50%3F+Topshop%27s+Kate+Phelan+tells+you+how&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4geef%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2455dd8f1a9f738e06e059ae418e2284bdd5508d%2F130_0_2096_3145%2F2096.jpg>
 Topshop Boutique S/S 2016. Photograph: Topshop 
Everyone also used to assume that the high street wasn’t very good quality, 
but that has really changed. It makes a big difference for a grown-up woman 
buying fashion. You’re looking for something that has a little bit of longevity 
– not just in terms of style but also physically lasting a little bit longer.

The key is to be true to yourself and confident about what you like. It’s not 
necessarily about what’s in fashion, it’s what you love for you and your style. 
I have never been comfortable in structured clothes, for example, and I accept 
that. I’m lazy in a way. I can’t wear high heels because I can’t walk fast 
enough in them. I like to feel I can move around and get everything done. I’m 
also not somebody who scrutinises every detail or seam, looking at the 
construction. I like clothes that give you the effect of what you want.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4geef%2Fsfb%23img-3&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4geef%2Fsfb%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d22b79a4217be3b2ad23d5188fe7d8af15bbcfc%2F231_176_3417_5121%2F3417.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20should%20you%20dress%20at%2050%3F%20Topshop's%20Kate%20Phelan%20tells%20you%20how&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4geef%2Fstw%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How+should+you+dress+at+50%3F+Topshop%27s+Kate+Phelan+tells+you+how&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgu.com%2Fp%2F4geef%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d22b79a4217be3b2ad23d5188fe7d8af15bbcfc%2F231_176_3417_5121%2F3417.jpg>
 Jane Birkin in 1985. Photograph: Sipa/Rex/Shutterstock 
Topshop’s Boutique label 
<http://www.topshop.com/en/tsuk/category/clothing-427/boutique-440> is a true 
reflection of what I love now. It’s where I would go for classics: a gorgeous 
khaki shirt, a camel coat. I think if you want to buy a camel coat, you should 
always be able to get one, regardless of season or trends. The same with a 
V-neck jumper and a white cotton shirt. It’s that simple approach to fashion 
that allows you to dress it up as much as you want, or dress it down. It still 
leaves a lot of it up to you.

If you start with a very classic approach to your clothes, you can add 
anything flamboyant to that. If you start the other way round, it’s much harder 
to tone it down afterwards. Start with the boring bit, then add to make it feel 
more relevant to what is going on in fashion.

When I was a 25-year-old fashion assistant, I used to look at a 40-year-old 
fashion editor and think they were ready for retirement, so serious in their 
Chanel suits and pearls and Manolo Blahniks. But women are loving fashion at 
all ages now, it’s cross-generational. Think of how jeans have become the norm. 
My mum wore jeans into her 70s but her mother would never have worn them. Now 
you can wear leopard print when you’re 60 but it doesn’t mean you look likeBet 
Lynch 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=Bet+Lynch&espv=2&biw=2119&bih=1139&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjx_9X8gt7KAhWBcBoKHfIeB3QQ_AUIBigB>
 – unless you want to. And if you want to wear sequins, you can wear sequins.
 Topshop Boutique S/S 2016. Photograph: Topshop 
I love seeing women like Jane Birkin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/jane-birkin> who were so influential when 
they were young in what they wear, and they still are. Of course, there are 
compromises. You do have to be prepared for that thing that fashion does – when 
you fall in love with something and it feels absolutely perfect but they change 
it. It’s a bit like how you can’t get a Levi’s 501 to fit like an old Levi’s 
501 because they’ve adapted the design. And you do have to age into your style, 
likeKate Moss <http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/kate-moss> has – retaining 
your style personality but moving it on so it becomes more relevant to the age 
you are.

I think, in the end, fashion is always about those little things that you 
discover.Margaret Howell did a really beautiful blue scarf for the Barbara 
Hepworth exhibition 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/jun/16/margaret-howell-fashion-tribute-barbara-hepworth-tate-modern>
 and I bought one because I loved it, but I had never really worn a scarf 
before. I was tying it round my neck thinking, “Oh, it feels really different, 
really grown up, to put a scarf on.” I quite liked that. 
