
Comedian and political satirist Armando Iannucci was obliged to defend his 
acceptance of an Order of the British Empire medal on Saturday, after a 
full-blooded attack from one of his alleged sources of creative inspiration â€“
Alastair Campbell <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/alastaircampbell>.

Campbell, the former spokesman for Tony Blair 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> and model for Malcolm Tucker, 
pictured below, in Iannucci's BBC sitcomThe Thick of It, mocked the satirist 
for accepting an honour from the British establishment.

"So @ AIannucci OBE joins the Establishment he claims to deride. Malcolm 
Tucker and I do not approve of honours system," Campbell saidon Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/campbellclaret/status/213901829354946560>, sparking a 
series of testy exchanges with the writer who once penned a spoof column 
purporting to be by the former New Labour spin doctor.

Joking in the foul-mouthed persona of Tucker, Campbell accused Iannucci of 
joining the tribe he had become famous for parodying.

Speaking after the spat, Iannucci denied his OBE would impede his comedy in 
any way. "Does Chris Hoy cycle less well after being honoured? Is there a 
suggestion that he has sold out?" he asked. "My comedy is not about judging 
where people come from, or what they are called or what school they went to. I 
don't care. It is about what they do."

Iannucci said it was a matter of being polite and discreet. "If you accept any 
awards or prizes then why not this one?" he told theObserver. "I have accepted 
honorary degrees too and it seems to me bad manners not to. It is good manners 
to accept and then bad manners to crow about it afterwards."

Online, the comedian responded to Campbell by comparing his alleged offence to 
the Blair government's decision to march into Iraq. "It's probably more 
Establishment to order your army to march into other countries for no reason,"
he tweeted <https://twitter.com/Aiannucci/status/213907725233561602>.

Leading broadcast journalists Andrew Neil 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/andrew-neil> and Samira Ahmed joined the 
Twitter dispute. "Why would somebody who constantly parades their 
anti-establishment credentials accept such a bauble?" asked Neil, adding that 
he believed journalists should also never accept honours "from people we are 
supposed to be holding to account".

Speaking later, Campbell argued that, although he admired Iannucci's work, he 
"could not resist asking the question" because of his own long-held opposition 
to the honours system. "I have always had a bit of a thing about it, partly 
because I know what it is like and how it works. People may ask why we did not 
change it while we had the chance, but the truth is that Tony Blair did not see 
it as a priority and he was the prime minister. He also felt it was something 
that made a lot of people very happy."

Campbell did not believe performers could be forgiven for accepting public 
plaudits. "Satirists like Armando have extraordinary recognition in this 
country. He is definitely popular and rightly so. But if you have made your 
name by making fun of the establishment, which he has done very cleverly, then 
it weakens it if you accept an honour. It seems strange that someone who should 
invent Malcolm Tucker's character should start spinning his own answers to 
these questions."

The former master of spin said although he was now part of the establishment 
he retained "an anti-establishment streak". He argued that while David Frost 
had accepted a knighthood, he suspected the satirist and interviewer would not 
have done so while starring on the hit 1960s satirical showThat Was the Week 
That Was.

Campbell's former political colleague and friend, Tessa Jowell, who becomes a 
dame, was entitled to accept her award, he argued, because she had not set 
herself up in opposition to the established institutions of state.

Campbell said he believed satire was important because it could actually 
damage politicians. "Jack Straw came to me quite worried about the effect of 
the portrayal of the relationship between Tony and me in Rory Bremner's show, 
and in the 1980s David Steel was certainly damaged by the Spitting Image puppet 
of him sitting in David Owen's pocket."

Iannucci made fun of his own new status by suggesting on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/Aiannucci/status/213903401845669888> that he had joined an 
army platoon of celebrities: "I now have to salute Kate Winslet. Gareth Malone 
and I drive a tank."
