
More than two thirds of subscribers to the Daily Telegraph will vote for 
Brexit, according to a studyreported on the newspaper’s front page 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/06/05/eu-referendum-telegraph-subscribers-say-they-back-a-brexit/>
.

A survey of nearly 19,000 Telegraph subscribers found that 69% were intending 
to vote for Britain to leave theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> at the June 23 referendum.

I don’t think these results are at all surprising. Letters to the Telegraph 
editor about theEU referendum 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> have been running very 
heavily in favour of Leave.

And another finding - that most respondents support the newspaper’s columnist, 
Boris Johnson, to succeedDavid Cameron 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> as Conservative party leader 
- is to be expected.

Johnson’s column is popular with readers. The paper has given his campaign 
set-pieces major billing since the referendum campaign began. And he has that 
odd anti-politician politician appeal (somewhat similar to Donald Trump).

So the survey found that 42% of the Telegraph subscribers want him as leader. 
Another Brexiteer, justice secretary Michael Gove, came in second on 16% with 
home secretaryTheresa May in third place on 13% and chancellorGeorge Osborne 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> on just 8%.

One standout figure from the survey is that 94% will “definitely vote” in the 
referendum. Age is a big factor in how they plan to vote; again, not a surprise.

People aged over 65 were the most enthusiastic about Brexit with 75% saying 
they would vote to leave the EU. Of those aged between 45 and 64, some 67% 
favoured Brexit and 32% backed Remain.

The younger cohort, aged between 18 and 44, were more split, with 58% saying 
they would vote for Brexit and 42% planning to vote Remain.

And what issues have most influenced the subscribers’ decisions? Immigration, 
which I anticipated to be the major reason for Leave voters, was placed third 
(at 51%). First was “sovereignty of the British parliament” (71%) and second, 
security (57%)

Trade policy was named as most important by 41% while 40% identified Britain’s 
“ability to influence the EU”.

The Telegraph article does not state who carried out the survey, how it was 
conducted (online or phone?) and the date it was held.

Detailed graphs of the results were carried prominently across two inside 
pages on Monday’s issue. It also contained another Johnson column, “You must 
vote to Leave, or wake up with the worst hangover in history 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/06/05/you-must-vote-to-leave-the-eu-or-wake-up-with-the-worst-hangover/>
”, plus an op-ed article by former P&O chairman Jeffrey Sterling 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/06/05/the-europe-i-backed-in-1975-has-disappeared/>
 urging Brexit.

And, as usual, most of the letters on the subject favoured Leave, which I 
imagine - in the light of the survey - to be a fair reflection of readers’ 
opinions.

In addition, the business section carried a column by Roger Bootle attacking 
economists for their pro-Remain forecasts 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/business/2016/06/05/economic-arguments-about-brexit-have-succumbed-to-group-think/>
 and a large centre spread article by Szu Ping Chan, “Worthwhile leap into a 
future free of the EU”.
