
In September 2015, the heads of 193 United Nations (UN) Member States adopted 
17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) to be achieved by 2030. Theagenda 
<https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/post2015/transformingourworld> provides 
a successor framework to the Millennium Development Goals, which were adopted 
in 2000, with a view to ending poverty in all forms and dimensions, protecting 
the planet, and ensuring prosperity for all.


Given their global scope and ambition, the SDGs will not be met without 
collaboration among all stakeholders – government, private sector, development 
partners, civil society and communities – incorporating the goals into their 
activities and engaging in collaborative partnerships, as emphasised inSDG17 
<http://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/sdgoverview/post-2015-development-agenda/goal-17.html>
.

The mining and metals sector is uniquely placed to support the realisation of 
the SDGs. Large-scale mining is a global industry operating in all corners of 
the world, and often in remote and under-developed areas where it is capable of 
mobilising financial, technological and physical resources on a vast scale. 
According to the International Council on Mining and Metals, mining regularly 
comprises up to 20% of government revenues, and between 60-90% of total foreign 
direct investment, in many low- and middle-income countries.


However, while the mining and metals sectors have the potential to catalyse 
the achievement of a number of the SDGs, mining has historically also caused or 
exacerbated many problems that the SDGs seek to address. Poorly managed mining 
operations can result in large-scale displacement of affected populations 
(including of indigenous and tribal peoples), degradation of the environment 
(including water sources), social and economic inequality, increased levels of 
corruption and conflict, gender-based violence, and grave risks to health.

 Global Safety Day at Mogalakwena Mine in South Africa. Photograph: Geoff Brown
To help stimulate discussion among mining companies and their partners about 
the potential contribution of the sector, the Columbia Center on Sustainable 
Investment , the World Economic Forum, the UN Development Programme, and the UN 
Sustainable Development Solutions Network have joined together to produce
Mapping Mining to the Sustainable Development Goals: A Preliminary Atlas. 
<http://unsdsn.org/news/2016/01/13/mining/>


The Atlas, which is aimed primarily at mining companies (including their 
boards, management, and staff), seeks to:


 * Increase understanding of how the SDGs relate to the mining industry. 
 * Raise awareness of the opportunities and challenges that the SDGs pose for 
the mining industry, and how these issues might be addressed. 
 * Encourage multi-stakeholder dialogue and collaboration to promote 
achievement of the SDGs. In practical terms, the Atlas aims to assist mining 
companies of all sizes in identifying where their activities – from exploration 
through to mine closure – can align with, and promote achievement of the SDGs. 
Other stakeholders, including host country governments and civil society, can 
also make use of the Atlas to identify opportunities for collaborative action 
and global partnership in furtherance of the goals. 
To effectively map the linkages between mining and the SDGs, the Atlas 
contains one chapter for each goal. Each chapter in turn provides:


 * Suggestions for incorporating each SDG into core business activities and 
functions of mining companies. 
 * Proposed ways for mining companies to collaborate with other stakeholders 
and leverage additional resources to achieve each SDG. 
 * Case studies from mining companies on building up their contributions to 
achieving the SDGs. 
Related: Supporting local markets to grow: the power of Promova 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/feb/12/supporting-local-markets-to-grow-the-power-of-promova>

While the relevance of each SDG will vary by company and project there is a 
strong business case to incorporate them into long term investments and 
strategic priorities, working with other partners in-country and 
internationally to learn and leverage resources as well as partnerships. 
Individual companies can use the Atlas to help map the SDGs and corresponding 
actions that are most relevant for their specific projects.


Ultimately, the success of the SDGs rests on the ability of all states, 
sectors, and stakeholders to transform consensus around the goals into 
concerted action. The Atlas provides a strong foundation for essential 
engagement, dialogue, and collaboration in the mining sector –one of the most 
important sectors for the success of the 2030 agenda.


For further information regarding Mapping Mining to the Sustainable 
Development Goals: A Preliminary Atlas, please visitCCSI’s website 
<http://ccsi.columbia.edu/work/projects/mining-and-the-sustainable-development-goals/>
. Public consultation on the draft report will close on 8 April, 2016. Download 
the report and submit commentshere <http://unsdsn.org/news/2016/01/13/mining/>. 


Content on this page is paid for and provided by Anglo American 
<http://www.angloamerican.com/>, sponsor of the social impact hub 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/series/social-impact>
